                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         AGENC   ,   DELAYED COMPENSATION ANT) TI-JR STRUCTURE
                        OF EXECUTIVE REMUNERATION


                             Jonathan   Eaton

                             Harvey S. Rosen


                          Working Paper NO. ITT




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge MA 02138

                              October 1981




This paper was presented at the NBER 1981 Summer Institute in the
Pensions program. We are grateful to F. Black, J.B. Grossman, B.G.
Malkiel, and J. Pesando for useful suggestions, to W. Lewellen for
providing us with data, and to M. Leeds for assistance with the
computations. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Pensions and Labor Studies. Army opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #777
                                                          October 1981




                                 ATRACT


AGENCY, DELAYED CO!ENSATION AND THE STRUCTURE OF EXECUTIVE REMUNERATION



                                       by
                              Jonathan Eaton
                                       and
                              Harvey S.      Rosen




     In this paper we examine the factors affecting the structure

of executives' compensation packages. We focus particularly on the role of

various types of delayed compensation as means of "bonding" executives to

their firms.

     The basic problem is to design a compensation package that rewards

actions that are in the long—run interest of the stockhblders. Firms must

take into account (1) their ability to discern unfortunate circumstances

from mismanagement; (2) the extent to which a compensation package forces

the executive to face risks beyond his control; and (3) the willingness of

a given executive to bear this risk.

     We use our theory to interpret some executive compensation data from

the early 1970's. The results are generally in line with the theoretical

predictions.

               Professor Jonathan Eaton              Professor Harvey Rosen
               Department of Economics               Department of Economics
               Yale University                       Princeton University
               New Haven, Conn. 06520                Princeton, New Jersey 08544
       "A mental midget can tell whether top management deserves a bonus
        based on current profits. It is much harder to figure out whether
        top management has positioned the company well for the long run."
         (Thurow [1981].)




1.     Introduction


       Recently, executive incentive structures have become a matter of public

concern. The comments in a New York Times    article entitled   "Overhauling

America's Business Management" are typical: "American ianagers are too wor-
ried about short term profits ... A lOt of American companies know they have
old   machines ... But the manager figures he'll keep the old machines as long
as they still run, make a big profit one year, and take that record as an ad-
vertisement to get a job elsewhere." (L,ohr [1981, p. 42].) Such inappropriate
incentives are often linked to the 'productivity crisis."
       Clearly, it is in the interest of firms that their managers be concerned

with long run profits. Frequently, however, the long run implications of an

executive's job performance cannot be assessed until after the executive has

terminated his relationship with the company. To relate an executive's reward

more closely to his performance, firms can delay a large component of compen-

sation until   better information is available, so that the amount of remunera—
tion   becomes dependent upon indicators of performance.

       Of course, other factors may also affect the extent to which delayed

compensation is used. Tax considerations, for example, may play an important

role. If the tax rate on unearned income is lower for the firm than for

the individual executive, there may be art advantage to postponing
                                   —2—




compensation.1   The firm may also have better access to capital

markets.

     In this paper we examine the various factors affecting the structure of

executives' compensation packages. We focus on the role of various types of

delayed compensation as means of "bonding" executives to their firms.       The

theoretical framework is established in Part 2. We show how the

preferences of firm owners and executives interact to determine the form of

the equilibrium compensation package. An important aspect of the theory is
                                             2
a generalization of the "theory of agency"       to allow for the possibility of

delayed compensation.   The model leads us to expect certain

empirical regularities in the way that compensation packages are related to

characteristics of firms and executives. In Part 3, these are explored using

data on a sample of top ranking American executives from the early 1970's. A

concluding section contains a summary and suggestions for future research.


i    The extent to which tax considerations, rather than monitoring

problems, determine the firm's decision to delay compensation

has been a subject of debate. Miller and Scholes [19801 argue that tax

considerations dominate, while Lazear 11981) takes the contrary view.



2    See Ross 11974), Jensen and Meckling [19761, and Goldberg [1980) for

useful discussions of agency theory.
                                        -3-

 2.   A Theoretical Framework

      We use a simple two—period odel
                                          to explain the essential features of
 the process that determines the
                                 composition of the executive's compensation
package. In the first period the
                                   executive expends effort in managing the
firm arid receives a
                     salary as compensation. In the second period he is re-
tired, and consumes his savings and
                                        delayed compensation. The stockholders
are assumed to be unable to observe his effort contemporaneously,
                                                                  and hence
cannot make salary contingent on performance. In the second period firm

owners do receive information on
                                        performance, although that information
may be imperfect. The stockholders
                                      may then provide additional compensation
in an amount that depends
                            on their perception of his performance.



2.1 The Executive's Problem


      We f±st examine the problem from the
                                              executive's point of view. As-
sm-te that an executive of type i has a Utility function ui
                                                                   (c1,c2,e)
where C1 represents period 1 consumption, c2 period 2 consumption and

e his effort in managing the firm. We assume that u.
       i                                                     a— >     0 ,   j   =   1,   2,
uei_au
   = — < 0 and u 1      is concave in
     e                                   c1 and c2 , given   e

      Consider an executive i who works f or firm j     .   In   period 1 he
receives before tax wage w1ii    and in period 2 before tax wage       ii ii
                                                                      w2 (x
where xii     is a measure of the executive's perorance. We assuie that

x = x'(e,O)      where 0 is a randonj yariable and x
                                                                 ii
                                                                      >0.
      Let   W and W denote executive i's incoxrje fron other sources in

periods 1 and 2 respectively. The function IL )       denotes after tax incone

as a function of before tax income. Finally, let q(s,w) denote the

after-tax resources available in period 2 from saving an amount

s in period 1 and earning w in period 2.
                                                      —4—



The function           depends both on the interest rate and on tax parameters
and by      definition,

                                        S   =   T('3          + w)— c1
                                                                                                                             (2.1)



The executive, facing a given                             and given functions w (                        )   ,       x
( ) and T(                )    /    chooses               and e in period 1 to maximize
                                                 c1

E[u(c1,c21e)) where


                          c2
                                                      —
                                                              c11w[x1(e,O)]}              .                                  (2.2)


We denote by c (                   ) and e* (             )    values of C1 arid              e        that maximize

expected utility subject to (2.2), where these optimal values depend upon
                                                                                                                     The
 ii       and   functions w2ii                    x2 (           )   ,        C     ) and T(             )



realization       of c2 given           c and e* arid 0 is denoted c(0) .                                            The

maximum value of expected utility that executive i can attain working for

firm j is thus given by                         E E[u(c,c(0),e*)1



2.2 The Firm's Problem
          Like the executive, the firm takes the schedules T(                                  )   ,    (        )     and
                                                                         ii             the             iiCxii
xii   (    )    as given. It determines, however, w1                              and         schedule w2

taking into account their effects on e* through the executive's optimizing

behavior discussed above.

          Assume for a moment that firm j has decided to attract an executive

of type i .          Let f1(e,0)            represent firm j's reyenues, gross of executive

 compensation, when executive                   i is employed. In general, it depends on

 the effort he expends and on a random variable beyond his control. If the

 firm is risk neutral it will choose                                 and w3 (x13) to maximize
                                                                —5—


                              E{f'Jje*( ),6J -                         ii -         ii
                                                                      Wl           w2           (x1)/(l+r)}                            (2.3)


                                                                               —i
subject to                                                      Vii

                                                                                            -                    3
where r denotes the interest rate facing the firm.                                                                         We denote by

          ) and w (            )     the          payments that maximize                                     (2.3),         where both

depend upon e* (              ),     xii      (       )    ,()                 and T(                   )    ,        and where w
depends upon the realized e                                through x1(                  )           as       well.           The maximal

value     of (2.3) is denoted                             i-j



2.3 Equilibrium Compensation Schemes

                                   j employs
                                                                               (
      Given that firm                                       executive i                             an equilibrium is asso-
dated with
                    the fixed point w(                            )    ,                        )   ,        e(              where

and       w(   )   attain                 ,       given         e*(        )   ,   while                    e*(             attains v
given w( )           and w( )                     .       For    the match between                                     i    and j    tobean
equilibrium one                    > 1p1J for               any other executive                                      1'      In general, the

equilibrium compensation structures will depend upon the executive 's

preferences u1(           )    ,    the       firm's technology f13(                                         )             the   functions
r(    )   , ( ) x( ) ,                        ,and        the   parameter r

      The equilibrium payment scheme can be interpreted in terms of Rosen's

[1974] model of hedonic product characteristics and prices: working for

firm      j provides     executive i with a level of expected utility that

depends upon the         level,       timing and                rkiness- of conpensation while the


3         We treat this interest rate as a constant, a reasonable approximation

for the range of variation considered here. Note that r is an after tax

rate of return.
                                    —6-


type of compensation firm    j   offers executive i   depends upon   its
technology and ability to monitor. With many     heterogeneous   firms and   ex-


ecutives, a   whole set of equilibrium compensation packages will appear,

determining a "market locus" of the type discussed by Rosen [l974J.

     Because the optimal package depends upon a complex interaction of

firm and executive characteristics, explicit solutions for the compensa-

tion scheme are difficult to obtain for very general cases. We provide,

instead, a qualitative discussion of how various firm and executive
                                                                 4
characteristics are likely to affect aspects of compensation. Then, in

Section 2.4, we derive an explicit solution for a particular example.

     Other things equal, a firm will prefer to delay a larger share of

comjention when future indicators of executive performance are more

reliable than those presently available. We thus anticipate that delayed

compensation will be used more when monitoring costs are high in the

present relative to the future.

      To minimize expected compensation costs the firm will, ceteris paribus,

tie compensation to indicators that are relatively risk free. This is be-

cause tying compensation to a "noisy" indicator exposes the executive to.

greater income variability.      Given our assumption on the concavity of the

utility function, the expected level of compensation must then be higher

 to attract a given executive. This line of reasoning suggests that future

 firm value is less likely to be used as a performance indicator the more it

 is influenced by factors beyond the executive's control. Future firm value

 will, of course, be used more as a performance indicator when direct measures



                                                      it may be the case that
 4   Although we consider theSe to be likejy effects,
 for certain fuhctio2l forms and/or parameter valu, they do not obtain.
                                     —7—



are   unavailable.
      A compensation package that exposes an executive to risk beyond his

control will be especially undesirable to an executive who is risk averse.

Since younger executives have a longer period over which to pool risk,

they should be more willing to receive compensation in risky forms.          We

 thus anticipate t' younger executives' compensation will come in forms that

depend relatively heavily upon such noisy indicators as the value of the

firm   at   a future date.

      We would also anticipate that executives who are in a high income tax

bracket currently relative to the one they expect to be in upon retirement
will find delayed compensation of any form more attractive. By postponing
corpensation the     firm reduces such executives' lifetime tax obligations,
and   hence can attract them for a smaller number of pre—tax dollars.

       In the next section we present an example that illustrates some of

these relationships mathematically.

2.4 A Simple Illustration

       We consider a firm whose profit, gross of executive compensation, is

given by Z = O1e         ,   where    is a random variable equaling y

with probability 1-ri and 0 with probability ir .        An executive may choose

either to put forth effort, in which case e=l ,     or   else to "shirk,"5



5 The term "shirking" should be interpreted broadly. In our context

it means taking actions that are not in the long-run interest in the firm.

For example, these may take the form of maximizing sales or personnel, possibly

as a means of achieving fame and a job elsewhere, or simply for the

pleasure of exercising power.
                                       —8—




in   which case e=O .          , then, is 0 if e=0 , while,          if e=l ,          it
is  0 with probability n• and y otherwise. The stockholders cannot
observe e or        but only Z1J , which becomes known after w is
paid. Given a decision to hire executive    and given that executive i

expends effort, expected firm      profits, gross of compensation, are                (l—rr)y1

Note that, in this example, the variable          Tr measures simultaneously the riskiness

of the firm (in the sense of a probability of a bad outcome), and the difficulty

of monitoring executive performance.

      We assume that all executives have an indirect utility function of the form

                        u(w1,w2,e) =   log   w1+clog w2 +(l—e)
                                                                                      (2.4)




 (This   function embodies    not only Underlying preferences but tax               parameters   and

 investment   opportunities as well.) An executive of type            i    can       attain an

 expected   utility level U1 elsewhere.
      Since Z1 can assume only two values, a non—random compensation

package     can involve only two possible levels of compensation in period 2,
                    G                                                                       B
which we denote w2 ,          correspnding    to the cutcoine Zij =       yij   ,   and   w2

corresponding to the state             = 0

       Given that the executive expends effort (e=1) , a competitive compen—

ation package must satisfy:


                                          B                 G —i
                                                           w2 > U.                     (2.5)
                        log   w1+cXlrlog w2+cL(l-Tr) log



6     concavity of u guarantees that a random compensation package is strict-

ly inferior to a non-random one. Hence we only consider the second type.
                                           —9—

that is, an executive who joins the firm            and   exerts effort must find the

expected reward to exceed his compensation elsewhere.

     If the executive chooses not to exert effort, Z' = 0 with certainty.

To provide an incentive to exert effort the compensation package must also

satisfy



           log w1+log w +          1 <    log w1+a7rlog w+CZ (1—71) log w , (2.6)


which can only obtain if B     G
                         w2 < w2
     To attract an executive and to         provide him           an incentive to work the firm

must provide a compensation package (w11w,w) satisfying (2.5) and (2.6).

A risk-neutral firm will choose to do so in a way that nünimizes the expected

compensation cost,
                                           B              G
                                   +
                                        i+r
                                        Trw2 +    (l-Tr)w
                                                                                     (2.7)




     Clearly the constraint (2.5) will be binding. Otherwise, w1 coula be

reduced to provide a savings or wage costs without affecting (2.6). Further-

more, concavity of the executive's utility function guarantees that (2.6) will

in. the limit be binding as well. Intuitively, the distance
                                                                             between w
and w must be as small as possible to keep dowi the size of the risk premi

required by the executive, without inducing shirking.

       Incorporating (2.5) and (2.6) into (2.7) and minimizing gives, as Solutions:


                               =       a/l-1-a      U
                          w1       X             exp(1)                                (2.8)



                          B    -14+a    u                     1
                         w2 = X     exp(1- -                  )                         (2.9)



                           G        -l/l+a           U
                                                 exp( + a(l-ir)
                                                                   IT
                         W2 = x                                                       (2.10)
                                              - 10   -




where

                 x   [rrexp(-1/c)+          (l—rr)exp(iT/a(1-Tr)))/a(1+r)            (2.11)


The   total expected cost of the        compensation         package is

                                            ct/1+c       U
                                (l+cL)X          exp()
        The percentage difference between w and w is approximaly


                                                             1
                                        —
                              log   w        log w =     a(1)                        (2.12)




As this difference becomes larger, delayed compensation becomes riskier,

and more dependent upon firm performance. Note that this expression falls

as       rises and rises with 'T .           Executives who value consumption in the
future more heavily, e.g., older executives who discount retirement income

less, will, ceteris paribus, receive delayed compensation that is less tied to the

indicator of firm performance. On the other hand, executives working for firms where

the exogenous probability of a bad outcome is important (in the form of higher

value of ii )   , will   be penalized relatively more if firm performance is

poor, or rewarded relatively more if it is good.                   Note that (2.12) is in-

dependent of y1 .        We   may thus change it and y in a way that keeps

expected profits constant, while only the change in 11 affects.the form of

compensation. A change in r ,           the     interest rate facing the firm, also leaves

the spread unchanged.

      The percentage differences between w and w1 and between w and

are approxirnat-Y
                                        —         —




                           G
                      log w2 -   log   w1 =      log   x
                                                           (l) it
                                                                                    (2.13)


                      logw-logw1=_log+                                              (2.14)


 respectively.   Not surprisingly, both increase in r :                the firm postpones

 more compensation into the future when its interest costs are high.

       The effect of changes in a and it                   are, in general, ambiguous. However,
 if the chance of a bad outn is low (i.e., around the point Tr=O

      and w both rise relative to
                                            w1    with      a (delayed compensation is
used more when it is valued.more) and both rise relative to w1 with it

 (delayed compensation is used more by riskier firms). As the probability

of failure rises, however, these results are reversed.                  Then it
 is   near 1 an increase in a and an increase in it                 reduce delayed compensation.
 Intuitively, when the risk of failure is high, increasing valuation placed

 on future income reduces the extent to which risky, delayed coriensation is

used relative to current compensation. Similarly, when the level of risk

is already very high, an increase in risk makes current compensation relative-

ly attractive. Again, y1J does not enter (2.13) or (2.14), so that these re-

lationships are independent of the expected profitability of the firm.

      This example i simple, arid abstracts from a number of the considerations

we discussed in Section 2.3. In particular, it does not allow us to distinguish

monitoring costs from firm risk. Nevertheless, the example demonstrates the

complexity of the relationships between the firm's characteristics, executive's

preferences, and the optimal compensation package.
                                   — 12 —




3.   npirical Analysis

     In this Section we use our theory to analyze compensation data for a

group of high ranking American executives during 1970-73. To do so, we must

first recognize that actual compensation practices are considerably more

complicated and varied than suggested in the theoretical discussion. As

Lewellen [1968] notes, probably the minimum number of meaningful compen-

sation types is four:    salary and bonus, pensions,

deferred compensation, and stock options. A method must be devised to measure

the values of each of these components in comparable units. The other major

problem in exploring the theory's empirical implications is the selection of

a relevant set of company characteristics. These characteristics are supposed

to measure the extent to which:   (a) the executive's activities can be monitored,

and (b) the firm's performance is subject to risk beyond the executive's control.

In Section 3.1 the variables used are described.        _ln Section 3.2 we

specify an econometric model. The results are presented in Section 3.3.



3.1 Data
     We first discuss the components of executive pay, and then

turn to the characteristics of their companies.



3.1.1 Executive Characteristics and Compensation7

     We use Lewe11en 11975] data on the compensation of the. five highest

executives in 22 large manufacturing companies during the period 1970 to 1973,



 7    These data were kindly provided to us by Professor Wilbur G. Lewellen of Purdue

 University. For further detail on their construction, see Lewellen [1968], [1972],

and [1975].
                                          — 13 —


              8
 inclusive.       The firms are listed by their 1973 corporate names in Appendix

 A. Attention is focused on the top five positions because it is only for

 these that useable annual data on compensation are publicly available from

 corporate   proxy statements. Clearly, this sample of firms      is   not random.
 Thus, although we think that our results are of considerable
                                                                   interest, they
cannot be regarded as a definitive "test" of the theory.

     Lewellen provides data on the executive's age, rank in the company, and

total compensation. In order to compare the pension, deferred compensation,

arid stock option components of the pay packages, he converts them into current

income equivalents —-    ". . .the   amounts of immediate cash income that would be

as valuable, after taxes, to the executive recipients under consideration"

11973, p. 160]. We discuss briefly below each form of compensation.



     Salary and Bonuses

     Salary and bonuses are aggregate direct current remuneration and comprise

on average 64% of the value of total compensation in our sample. All such

payments are taxable to the individual at ordinary personal income tax rates

when received, and are prominently reported on corporate proxy statements. To

compute their after tax value is not straightforward, because information is

needed on deductions, and income from sources other than the corporate employer.

Using Internal Revenue Service data, Lewellen determines the average ratio o

exemptions and deductions to gross income for individuals in each tax bracket

and assumes that each executive takes exemptions and deductions as the average

person in his income bracket. "Outside income" is essentially impossible to

establish with any certainty.         Lewellen assumes that such income equals 15% of

direct current remuneration.


8   Data on two of the executives were incomplete, so our sample was reduced from

110 to 108 observations.
                                    — 14 -



     The estimates of the executives' marginal tax rates are probably not very

sensitive to these assumptions. The average salary plus bonuses in our sample

exceeds $100,000. By virtue of corporate remuneration alone, most of the

executives were probably subject to the maximum   tax   on earned incorne,regardleSS

of assumptions on income from other sources.



     Pensions

     A pension gives an executive the right to receive a series of periodic

payments of a given (nominal) size beginning at the future retirement date

and continuing throughout his lifetime. An important institutional fact is

that pension benefits for executives are made on the same basis as for other

employees (Lewellen [1972, p. 121]).     Indeed, consistency in the benefit

formulas is one of the key conditions for tax qualification of a plan.        Other

types of deferred compensation which are discussed below offer considerably

more flexibility. In our sample, on average pensions account for about 15% of
                                         9
the value of the compensation package.




 9    Leweilen computes the after tax current equivalent of a pension as the

 size of the annual premium the executive would have to pay were he to

 purchase from an insurance company a retirement annuity equal in value and

 similar in form to his pension promise. Each increase or decrease in benefits

 is regarded as a separate pension award whose current equivalent begins at the

 time the award is made, and continues thereafter up to the executive's anticipated

 retirement age. It is assumed that the executive does not anticipate resigning

 from the company. On this possibly controversial assumption, Lewellen notes, "Al-

 though almost everyone can point to an example of a corporate officer who was either

 lured away from or priced out of his job, the conclusion suggested by an examination

 of proxy statements is that such occurences are quite infrequent when viewed in re-

  lation to the entire senior managerial group." [1968, p. 25].
                                        — 15 —



       Because the pension component of compensation is
                                                        typically determined
 by a formula that applies to all
                                       employees covered by the corporation's

pension plan, unless the plan is a defined contribution plan and the contri-

butions are largely invested in stock of the firm      itself,   the executive's
claim on future pension benefits will
                                            not depend importantly upon his own
performance.      A possible exception occurs when pension benefits are highly

influenced by earnings during the last few years of service, so that firms
can   influence   the size of the pension on the basis of past performance.
But  the amount of latitude is limited compared to the other forms of execu=
tive compensation, so it seems unlikely that in this case pensions play a
major role in tying compensation to performance. Furthermore, unlike stock
optior and   deferred compensation, the executive has no legal     guarantee that
higher   compensation will follow an indication of
                                                      good performance; any such
understanding is based on trust.



      Deferred Compensation

      Deferred compensation includes the value of all arrangements ——     other
than pensions —-      that   promise benefits at or after retirement. They

comprise about 13% of the total compensation package, on average. One

type of arrangement that is often used guarantees the executive a defined

benefit sum, the difference between that figure and any payments received

prior to his death being payable to his estate. In return for such promises,

certain restrictions are usually imposed on the executive's activities. The

Internal Revenue Service has ruled that as long as such restrictions are part

of the contract, so that forfeiture is possible in principle, the post—retire-

ment payments are not taxable until received. Thus, to the extent that

marginal   tax   rates differ during the working life and at retirement, there

is an element of tax arbitrage in deferred compensation schemes.
                                     — 16 -


      Deferred   compensation takes a variety of forms, including profit-sharing

and   thrift   plans, as well as individual contractual schemes. Hence, deferred

compensation schemes are likely to be more closely tailored to the circumstances

of particular executives than are pension plans. With respect to the extent to

which they are stock based, deferred compensation packages are quite heterogeneous.

For example, the investment vehicles for thrift plans can vary from a imixed

portfolio of fixed income securities to one consisting solely of the firm's

stock. Unfortunately, in our data we are not able to distinguish between

those components of deferred compensation whose value are stock determined,
                       10
and those that are not.

      When deferred compensation is defined in terms of benefits and is

vested, from the executive's viewpoint it is a close substitute to a

pension and will be desired for similar reasons. Occasionally, payment

is made contingent upon certain well-defined actions on the part of the

executive, such as staying with the firm a certain period or not working

for a competitor. A firm is likely to find deferred compensation

packages of this type attractive when there are a few easily monitored

potential future actions by the executive that it wishes to discourage.

It provides a means of providing a disincentive without subjecting the

executive to vai±ation in his income beyond his control. However, other

types of deferred compensation are tied to the value of the firm's stock.

These are similar, for our purposes, to stock options, which we discuss next.      -—



10     For purposes of computing the after-tax current equivalent of deferred

compensation schemes, Lewellen assumes that the most appropriate practical

 alternative to a deferred pay contract is simply an addition to the executive's

 salary that is equally attractive in terms of its after—tax present value. In

 contrast, for pensions the equivalence criterion was the premium on an annuity.

 This distinction is a consequence of the fact that deferred compensation arrange-

ments tend to be less centered on mortality considerations than are pensions.
                                   - 17   —




     Stock Options

     A stock option granted by a corporation to an executive is an agreement

that he may purchase from the firm, at any time within a stated period, a

given number of shares of its stock at a price specified on the date of grant-

ing. In the early 1970's, the tax rules stuJated that under certain conditions,11

the difference between the purchase price and later resale could be taxed at

capital gains rates.12 The specific elements of option agreements tend to vary

across firms and executives. For example, there may be implicit or explicit

restrictions placed on the resale of the stock acquired under the option. Stock
                                                                                  13
options account for about 8% of the value of total compensation in our sample.

    Stock options relate the executive's income most directly to what the

stockholders care about, the value of the firm, but have the disadvantage of

exposing the executive to risk beyond his control. They are likely to be

favored by firms whose executives have wide latitude in the performance of

their duties and are difficult to monitor closely. Options will be most

attractive to executives who are relatively unaverse to risk, and the stock

value of whose firms is relatively unaffected by random variables beyond

the executive's control.




11 For example, the option must be non-transferable, must be exercised

within a certain number of years after it is granted, etc.


12 During our sample period, the maximum      capital   gains tax rate was 35%.


13 Lewellen values the option as a function of the difference between the

option price to which the executive is entitled and the market price when

the option is exercised. In order to account for the possibility that the

executive may die before the option is granted, standard mortality tables

are used to compute actuarial equivalents of the payments.
                                          —




3.1.2     Company Characteristics

        Information on company characteristics such as size and complexity is

required in order to explain patterns of executive compensation. Specifically,

we need data that indicate the uncertainty and complexity of the environment

in which the executive is operating, because these will determine the import-

ance of bonding considerations in the construction of the pay package. The

following variables (all of which were constructed from data obtained from

Standard and    Poor's    Compustat tape), were selected:


        (i)   A = the cost of advertising media and promotional expenses
                    (millions of dollars);

     (ii)     L = number (thousands) of company employees as reported     to
                  shareholders;

    (iii)     W =   net   assets (millions of dollars);

     (iv)     R =   research   and development expenditures (millions of dollars);

        (v)   V =   variance   of the rate of return of the firm's common stock.


        The varianrP of the stock's rate of return ovpr a T year period is




                                     V          (r)2



where r is the rate of return in year t , defined as



                                         =
                                              dt+4Pt_Pti
                                                  Pt-i


where P = closing common stock price in year t ,             d=   dividends    per share,

.    is   a correction     for changes in the consumer price index, and r      is the
                                                  —    —




sample mean. Vt was calculated for several different values of T to insure
                                                                                                           14
that the substantive results were not sensitive to the particular value chosen.

    Obviously, these are imperfect indicators of the complexity of the environ-

ment in which the executive operates. For example, it would be possible to compute

more sophisticated measures of riskiness, taking advantage of the theory of Eff i-

cient markets. However, given that the reliability and robustness of such measures

are open to question (see, e.g., Cragg and Malkiel [1979]), this tack did not

seem worthwhile.



 3.2 Estimation Issues

       We seek to explain the shares of total compensation of each of four

 categories:    (1) salary plus bonus, (2) pensions, (3) deferred compensation,

 and (4) stock options.           The following simple econometric specification
 is used:




                                       2                                   R +y 72.
                                                                                  V.1
  s.., =    +         AGE. +
                               T29, AGE...+ 13i       A.+y
                                                       1  4L i +y 59W.+'(
                                                                      1  6L I


                 11
            +                         + C                                                          (3.1)
                      1k9.. RKk   7         i2.
                k=8


 where s.      is the share of the th executive's total conipensation in the

 2.th fo of compensation; AGE i                   is his age; A , Li   ,   W   ,   R.    ,   and   V.
                                                                                                    1
                                                              i            i        J.



 are his firm's advertising expenditures, labor force, net assets, research
 and development expenditures, and variance of return, respectively; the RKk's



14 The results presented below use T=4 , the years being 1970 through 1973.
                                    — 20    —




are dummy variables for rank;15 the y's are parameters, and             is a

random error.

       Wriat predictions does theory give concerning the signs of the '"s ? For

the coefficients on the AGE variables, the story is fairly straightforward.

Because older executives are likely to have a lower discount rate, they should

value   post-retirment income more than their younger counterparts. Furthermore,
older executives are expected to be more averse to income variation —— they
have    less time for the "law of averages" to assert itself. Hence, the share

of pensions, which come in the future and are relatively safe, is expected to

increase with age. On the other hand, we expect the share of stock options,

the more risky type of compensation, to decline with age. In the absence of

information on tbe,specific nature of deferred compensation contracts, we can

make   no predictions with respect to how   their share will vary with age.

       Predicting the signs on the firm characteristics is more problematic.

The difficulty is that we do not know a priori which characteristics are

indicative primarily of situations in which monitoring problems are important,

and those which reflect environments in which firms are subject to a lot of

exogenous risk. For example, if it were known that firms with high research

and development expenses tended to have volatile profits for exogenous

reasons, our theory would predict a negative sign for R. in the stock

options equation.'6 However, because we do not have any basis for classifying




15 RK. is the ith_ranking executive in terms of total compensation; the

omitted category is the fifth rank.


16 As noted in Section 2.3, firms with high exogenous risk should not tie

compensation too closely to firm performance.
                                       — 21 —




the   firm characteristics inth "monitoring" or "exogenous risk" categories,

no such predictions can be made. Hence, the signs on the firm characteristics

cannot be used to "test" our theory.     Instead, the theory is employed to

interpret the coefficients and investigate whether
                                                     any interesting patterns
emerge.

       Each of the four share equations is estimated by ordinary least squares.

Because the shares must add up to unity, certain cross equation restrictions

on the coefficients are implied. However, when the same regressors (including

a constant term) are used in each equation, ordinary least squares estimation

guarantees that the constraints are satisfied.

      Before presenting the results, several points need to be made regarding

the basic estimating equation:


      1. Although there are four years of data for each executive, observations

are not entered on an annual basis. Ratbar, we average the values of the

variables over time, arid enter the means. The theory is not intended to ex-

plain year-to—year fluctuations in compensation shares. Rather, it is

supposed to explain "permanent" traits of the compensation package as a

function of characteristics of the executive and of the firm. For the sake

of comparison, we estimated (3.1) with each of the yearly observations

entered separately. There are no important substantive differences. (These

results are available upon request.)


      2. It may be the case that compensation practices differ systematical—

ly across industries. To explore this possibility, the firms were grouped
                                                   — 22   —




                                              17
into six industrial categories,                    and a set of regressions estimated with a

dummy variable for each category. The main qualitative results are not

changed very much by their inclusion. It is interesting to note, however,

some systematic differences that arise in compensation packages in different

industries.


       3. The executive's marginal income tax rate is not included as an ex-

planatory variable. As suggested earlier, the incomes of the individuals

in   the sample are so high that              most of them were paying the maximum   tax rate,
                                                                                        18
and   hence there was insufficient variation to obtain meaningful results.



3.3 Results

      The basic results are reported in Table I. We first consider the signs

on A ,    W   ,   L   ,   and   V ,   the   measures of firm size and complexity. A number of

interesting patterns are present. The shares of salary—bonus and pensions

are smaller for those companies in which advertising, total assets, labor




17 The categories are described in Appendix A.


18 In a set of equations not reported here, we included total comDensation

as a regressor, on the assumption that it might indicate the executive's

ability to benefit from tax arbitrage over time. Given this interpretation,

income has the expected sign: positive for deferred compensation and stock

options, and negative for the other types. However, such results must be in-

terpreted with caution, because total compensation is determined jointly with

its composition, and is therefore endogenous. See Masson 11971] for an empir-

ical study of the determinants of the total level of executive compensation.
                                    — 23 —




force,   and the variance of return are high; but larger for those firms in

which research arid development expenditures are high. Just the opposite is

the case in the share equations for deferred compensation and stock options. In

 the context of our theory, these results suggest that high research and develop-

ment expenditures are associated with environments in which firm managers

face considerable amounts of exogenous uncertainty.    On the other hand,

when total assets, labor force, and advertising expenditures are large, it

appears that monitoring considerations are more important than exogenous

risk. Similarly, a high variance of return appears to be associated with

firms where monitoring executives is difficult.

     With respect to impact of age on the compensation structure., we ex-

pected that stock options should become less attractive as the executive

ages and pensions more attractive. According to the results in column (4),

starting in their mid 50's, executives receive a declining pcoportion of

their incomes in the form of stock options. According to column (2), the

proportion of income in pensions increases throughout the executive's work-

ing life.   (The negative sign on the quadratic term does not dominate until

age 70.)

     The coefficients on the rank dummies reveal a tendency for the higher

ranking executives to receive a greater proportion of their compensation in

stock options. We conjecture that this is because the higher the individual's

rank, the more important his job, and the greater the necessity to bond him to

the firm. In some experiments not reported here, we allowed for a set of

full interactions between rank and the other variables, but no interesting

patterns emerged.
                                        — 24 —




                                        TABLE I

                   Share's   of   the Total Compensation Package*


                                                                  (3)            (4)
                   Salary + Bonus         Pensions       Deferred           Stock
                                                       Compensation        Options
AGE                     .O7C                .0350        —.214              .103
                      (1.31)               (.95)         (3.46)           (2.11)
AGE2                   —.000887           —.000248         .00207
                      (1.71)                                              —.000936
                                           (.76)         (3.75)           (2.15)
A
                      —.000894            —.000691        .00151          7.406x105
                      (2.21)             (2.69)         (3.49)
w                    —4.839x105          -4.895lo        5.5001o          4.234x105
                      (2.81)             (4.48)         (2.99)           (2.93)
L                    —.000109            —1.646X105      2.704x1&5        9.806x1005
                     (1.47)              (0.35)         (6.34)           (1.58)
R
                       .00128              .000960       —.00124          —.00101
                     (3.07)              (3.62)         (2.77)           (2.88)
V
                      —.947              —.412            .596             .763
                     (3.76)              (2.58)         (2.22)           (3.60)
RK1                   —.022              —.017          —.031             .070
                     (0.59)              (0.73)         (.077)          (2.23)
                     —.058               -.013          -.0053            .077
                     (1.69)             (0.61)         (0.14)           (2.65)
RK3                  —.047               —.00049        —.010             .058
                     (1.38)             (0.02)         (0.27)           (2.01)
RK4 -                —.035               -.014          —.0060            .055
                    (1.05)              (0.65)         (0.17)           (1.95)
CONSTANT            —0.612             —0.925          5.406
                    (0.38)                                              —2.869
                                        (0.90)



                       58                 .34           .50              .24
No. Observations      108                108            108              108


* Variables are defined in the text. Numbers in parentheses are absolute
values of t—statjstjcs.
                                        — 25



        We turn now to the effects of   controlling for industrial
 category. These results are reported in Table II, in which

 INDi is a dummy for the th industrial group listed in Appendix A. As

 suggested by comparing the R2's of Table II with those of Table I, in-

 clusion of the industry duniinies contributes
                                                 significantly to the explanatory

 power of the equations. Generally, however, the main qualitative features

 of Table I remain intact. The coefficients on W ,         R   and   V   keep the same
 signs, but in a few cases those on A and L
                                                   change. The "outliers" with
 respect to compensation practices appear to be the electronics industry (IND4),

with.a very high reliance on stock options, and     the   motor vehicles and   parts
industry (IND5) with a commensurately large use of current forms of compensa-

tion.




4.      Conclusion


     Designing an executive compensation package that rewards actions that

are in the long-run interest of the stockholders is a complex problem. Firms

must take into consideration (1) their ability to discern unfortunate circurn-

stances from mismanagement; (2) the extent to which a compensation package

forces the executive to face risks beyond his control; and (3) the willingness

of a particular executive to bear this risk. Our
                                                     theoretical analysis suggest-
ed several criteria that are likely to affect the composition of an executive

compensation scheme: the age of the executive, firm characteristics
                                                                            affecting
the ability of the firm to monitor executive behavior and the extent to which

the firm faces a high degree of exogenous uncertainty. We found that relatively

safe forms of delayed compensation (pensions) were more intensively used for

older executives, who value a high level of delayed compensation more but are less

tolerant of uncertainty about this income.     Younger executives, on the other hand,
                                               TABLE II
                    Shares of the Total Compensation Package: Industry Dummies Included*
                                         (1)                    (2)            (3)          (4)
                                                                         Deferred          Stock
                                  Salary ÷ Bonus          Pensions     Compensation       Options
              AGE                       .167                  .0341     —.235             .0336
                                      (2.82)              (0.96)       (4.37)         (0.85)

              AGE2                    -.00166              -.000236      .00221       -.000312
                                      (4.46)              (0.74)       (4.62)         (0.89)

              A                       4564X1f5             —.000105      .00195       —.000860
                                      (0.11)              (3.02)       (3.74)         (2.24)

              W                      3.87Sxl05            -6.878>10     9.221o        1.5310
                                      (2.53)              (5.27)       (4.68)         (1.06)

              L                         .000111           _7419x10-5    1025x10-5     -2.6740
                                      (1.78)              (1.40)       (0.13)         (0.45'

              R                         .000914               .00151    —.00210       —.000320
                                      (2.46)              (4.78)       (4.42)         (0.91)

              V                      —1.247                —.408         .728           .928
                                      (5.74)              (2.21)       (2.61)         (4.52)

                                      —0.037              —0.029        —.0051            .062
                                      (1.38)              (0.92)       (0.15)         (2.49)

                                      —.065               —0.016         .0085          .072
                                      (2.71)              (0.76)       (0.28)         (3.18)

              RK3                     —.046                —.0025       —.0017            .050
                                      (1.91)              (0.12)       (0.06)         (2.20)

                                     —0.39                0.014          .0008            .052
                                      (1.64)              (0.72)        (.03)         (2.35)

             ID1                      0.0748                  .0214     —.132             .0358
                                      (2.42)                  (.81)    (3.32)         (1.22)

             flD2                    —0.01)8               —.0803        .106         —   .0143
                                      (0.45)              (3.56)       (3.13)         (0.57)

             IND3                     0. 0566             .   .00744    — .0168       — .0472
                                      (2.24)              (0.35)       (0.52)         (1.98)

             ID4         I
                                     —0.151                   .0209     —.0 553           .16
                                      (4.37)                  (.71)    (1.25'         (5.68)

             Ij5                      0.165                —.0290       —.0757        —.0606
                                      (5.85)              (1.21)       (2.09)         (2.27)


       CONSTANT                      —3.31                    —.873     6.103         —   .917
                                      (2.82)              (0.87)       (4.04)         (0.82)

        R2                             .81                    .45        .67              56
N. of Observations                     108                    108        108              108
*   See note to Table I.
                                   — 27   —




 were more likely to receive compensation in the form of stock
                                                               options.

      Salary and bonus and pensions were used more in firms with fewer

 workers, low assets, less advertising expenditure and a low variance of

 rate of return. If our theory is correct, these characteristics are

 indicative of situations in which monitoring costs are relatively low. A

 high level of expenditure on research and development also led to a heavier

 reliance on these forms of compensation. Our explanation is that firms in

 which research and development is significant tend to be subject to large

 exoyenous uncertainties. In such firms, linking executive compensation too

 much to firm performance exposes the executive to substantial risk. The

 risk premium required to offset this risk limits the extent to which

 it makes sense for the firm to bond the executive's interests to its own.

    A maintained hypothesis in our analysis has been that firms establish

 compensation schemes optimally given their own characteristics and those

 of their executives. it would be useful to examine the effects of

 alternative compensation schemes on firm performance.   For example, to

what extent does increased use of stock options improve firm performance?

Other firm characteristics must be held constant, of course.

     We conclude by noting that we have examined the issue of executive

compensation in a particular cultural context, and have considered a

limited array of mechanisms to reward executives. An interesting topic for

research would be a cross—country examination of executive compensation and

performance that takes into account different tenure structures and attitudes

toward executive-firm relations. Perhaps these have allowed a greater bonding

of interests between executive and firm without a conconmitant increase in the

executives   exposure to risk.
                                            — 28




                                        Appendix A



      The empirical work is based upon data from         the following firms.   (They

are grouped by the industrial category specified in the Compustat tape. Category

6 is "miscellaneous.")


                                                     6. American Brands, Inc.
1. Borden Company
                                                        Cities   Service Corporation
      General Foods Corporation
                                                        Eastman Kodak Corporation
      Kraftco, Inc.
                                                         International Telephone and
                                                                  Telegraph Company
2. American Cyanamid Corporation
                                                         Procter and Gamble Company
       Dw Chemical Corporation
       DuPont


3. Firestone Tire and Rubber Company
       General    Tire and Rubber Company

       Goodrich    (B.F.) Company

       Goodyear    Tire and Rubber Company
       Uniroyal, Inc.


 4.     General   Electric Corporation
        Westinghouse    Electric Corporation



 5. Bendix Corporation

        General Motors Corporation

        International     Harvester Company

        TRW, md.
                                        - 29   -




                                      References


Cragg, John G. and Burton G. Malkiel, "Expectations and          the   Evaluation of

      Shares," miineo, Princeton University, December 1979.


Goldberg, Victor P., "Bridge Over Contested Terrain," Journal of Economic

     Behavior and Organization 1, 1980, pp. 249-274.


Jensen, Michael C. and     William   H. Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial

     Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal of Financial

     Economics 3, 1976, pp. 305-360.


Lazear, Edward P., "Severance Pay, Pensions, Mobility and the Efficiency

     of Work Incentives," mimeo, University of Chicago, June 1981.


Lewellen, Wilbur, C., Executive Compensation in Large Industrial Corporations,

     National Bureau of Economic Research, 1968.


__________________        "Managerial Pay and Tax Changes of the 1960's," National
     Tax   Journal,   Vol. XXV, No. 2, June    1972,   pp. 111-132.


____________________, "Recent Evidence on Senior Executive Pay," National Tax

     Journal, Vol. XXVIII, No. 2, June 1975, pp. 159-172.


Lohr, Steve, "Overhauling Axnerica's Business Management," New York Times

     Magazine, January 4, 1981.


Masson, Robert T., "Executive Motivations, Earnings, and Consequent

     Equity Performance," Journal of Political Economy 79, nov. 1971,

    pp. 1278—1292.
                                     — 30 —




Miller,   Merton H. and Myron S..   Scholes, "Executive Compensation, Taxes and

     Incentives," mimeo, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago,

     1980.



Rosen, Sherwin, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets," Journal of Political

     Economy 82, 1974, PP. 34—55.



Ross, Stephen A., "On the Economic Theory of Agency and the Principle of Similar-

     ity," in M. F. Baich, D. L. McFadden, and S. Y. Wu (eds.), Essays on

     Economic Behavior and Uncertainty, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1974, pp.

     215—237.



Thurow, Lester C., "Productivity: Japan has a Better Way," New York Times,

     February 8, 1981.
