                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 REAL INTEREST RATES, HOME GOODS
                 AND OPTIMAL EXTERNAL BORROWING



                        Rudiger Dornbusch



                      Working Paper No. 179




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          October 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #779
                                                       October 1981




     Peal Interest    Pates,   Horre Goods and Optiiial External Borrowing


                                 Abstract


The paper investigates the optimal tine path of consumption and external
borrowing in the dependent economy mxlel. The small country faces given
world prices and a given world real interest rates. The presence of a
hone goods   sector   implies that the relevant real interest rate appropriate
to consumption decisions depends on the rate of change of the real price
of hone goods. The paper shows how transitory disturbances in output or
in the world real interest rate affect the tine profile of consunption.
In particular it is shown that the presence of a hone goods sector dairpens
the consumption effects of changes in interest rates.



                                                      Riñiger Dornbusch
                                                      E52—357
                                                     Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                                      Cambridge ,1'Iass. 02139
                                                      (617) 253—3648
                                  —2—



                                                                     *
       REAL INTEREST RATES, HOME GOODS AND OPTIMAL EXTERNAL BORROWING



                            Rudiger Dornbusch

                     Massachusetts Institute of Technology



     This paper investigates optimal external borrowing in a small open

economy that faces a given world rate of interest and experiences supply

disturbances. The main point of the paper is to study the interaction of

alternative disturbances——present versus future, transitory versus

permanent——and the time path of equilibrium real interest rate in setting

the path of consumption and external indebtedness. This question of optimal

consumption choices in an open economy, intertemporal setting is receiving

considerable attention recently, especially in Razin and Svensson (1980),

Sachs (1981), Obstfeld (1981).

     In choosing a small country setting the present paper focusses on a

simpler model, but it brings in an interesting issue raised in earlier work

by Bruno (1976) and, independently, by Martin and Selowsky (1981). It is

argued that in a small country with a nontraded goods sector the relevant

real interest is not the given world interest rate stated in terms of the

domestic consumption basket. Differences between the world real interest

rate and the home real interest rate arise to the extent that the relative

price of home goods is changing over time. Specifically if the relative

price of home goods is rising the home real interst rate is less than the

world real interest rate. Conversely, if the relative price of home goods


*
 Financial support was provided by a grant from the National Science Foundation.
This paper started as a discussion of Martin and Selowsky (1981) at the Latin
American 1eeting of the Econometric Society, Rio de Janeiro, 1981 and owes much
of its motivation to that contribution.
                                       —3—




is falling the home real interest rate exceeds the world rate. As we will

see, to the extent that the time profile of disturbances affects the relative

price structure over time it affects the home real interest rate and therefore

the optimal path of consumption and borrowing.



1. The Consumer

      We assume a small country producing traded and nontraded goods with a

fixed supply of labor that is mobile between sectors and given, specific

factors in traded and home goods sectors respectively. The world rate of

interest is fixed in terms of traded goods and equals r*. The home country

can borrow and lend at that rate at unlimited rates, respecting of course

the intertemporal budget constraint.

      The representative household solves an intertemporal maximisation

problem, choosing a path of consumption and debt that maximizes discounted

lifetime utility:


(1)          V =                              D
                     DtUt(cT,cN)       5




subject to


(2)          Pb+1 = [cN+pcT        —                        R     l+r*
                                       yt]+   R ptbt    5




and


(3)                [cN+ptcT —   ytiR   +   pb     = 0



Equation (1) is the discounted value of utility of the infinitely lived

household with D the discount factor and U (            ) the   stationary utility

funtlon. Consumption of traded and nontraded goods are the arguments in
                                           —4—




the utility function and are denoted CT and CN respectively. Equation (2)

relates debt, b, in period t+i+1 to consumption expenditure, income

and debt service in period t+i. R=l+r* denotes one plus the world real

rate of interest and thus pR b represents principal and interest on the

debt issue solicited in period t—l with Pt representing the Current

relative price of traded goods in terms of home goods. Equation (3) is the

lifetime budget constraint.

       In what follows we will assume a specific functional form of the

utility function:



                       1     1—0
                                             C =
                                                    al—a
(4)            Ut = 1—0    t           ;
                                                   CTCN



The form of the utility function shows a constant relative risk aversion

function with the parameter 1/0 representing the elasticity of intertemporal

substitution. The term c represents an index of current consumption and has

a Cobb-Douglas form.

       It is shown in the appendix that consumer maximisation leads to an

optimal consumption profile that depends on the ratio of the consumption—based

home real rate of interest relative to the rate of time preference,:



(5)            c/c1 =

The term    in (5) is the ratio of the home real interest rate relative to the

rate of time preference and is defined in (5a):


                                           1—a
                    (1+r*)
                                   i/p t                         1—a
(5a)                                                                   k = DR
                                                      k(p+i/p)
                                    —5—




We note that in (5a) the home relative price structure over time appears

as a component of the real interest rate relevant to consumption choices.

The higher the future compared to the current relative price of traded goods,

the higher the home real interest rate, for any given world interest rate r*

fixed in terms of traded goods.

      The time profile of optimal consumption has two determinants. One is

the relation between the home discount rate and the world rate of interest,

the term k DR. We assume that the discount rate equals the world interest

rate so that k = 1.   The other determinant of the optimal consumption time

profile is the relative price structure over time, t+l't         is

apparent from (5) that when relative prices remain constant that ratio is

unity and hence the consumption profile is flat.

      The coefficient of risk aversion, 0, represents the concavity of the

utility function and measures the ease of intertemporal consumption substitu-

tion. If substitutability is perfect 1/0 tends to zero. Conversely, if

consumption shows very little intertemporal substitutability consumption

remains an entirely flat profile and consumers smooth completely, whatever the

pattern of real interest rates. The schedule cc in Figure 1 below represents

equation (5).



2. The Home Goods Market

      The demand for home goods can be expressed in terms of the relative price

and the level of consumption:




(6)             cN = $ cP

Home goods demand is proportional to consumption, the factor of proportionality
                                           —6—




 depending positively on the relative price of traded goods.

        On the supply side, home goods output is a function of the relative price

 and a shift parameter               The supply elasticity is e.



 (7)                  =   qp


 Equilibrium in the home goods market then yields a relation between

 consumption and the relative price:



 (8)           Pt =



and


                               —      —
                                                     —l/(a+e)
                                   t+l't' (c/c+i)]



Equation (9) is shown, for                    = 1 as the NN schedule in Figure 1.

The schedule is negatively sloped since a high current relative to future

consumption level implies a high current relative to future demand for home

goods, thus requiring a high current relative price of home goods. The

elasticity of the relative price with respect to the consumption profile

is given by —l/(a+e) and thus is smaller the higher the supply elasticity

and the larger the share of traded goods in consumption.

       From (9) we note that the equilibrium relative price is affected by

the position of the supply curve. A rise in current relative to future

supply would raise the current relative price of traded goods and would

appear in Figure 1 as a rightward shift of NN.
                                          —7—




3.     Stationary Equilibrium

       With output stationary and the home discount rate equal to the world

interest rate point A in Figure 1 represents the stationary equilibrium.

Consumers chose a flat profile of consumption since there is no incentive

to tilt, because of differences between home interest rates and those pre-

vailing in the world, consumption toward the present or the future. The

flat level of consumption        will be chosen so as to satisfy (3) and (8),

leading to the values of consumption and the relative price:



(10)              =    q,b,..)    ,
                                      =




       Figure   1 shows as the schedule cc the optimal consumption profile

between adjacent periods as a function of the intertemporal relative price

structure. Current consumption rises relative to future consumption as

today's relative price of home goods rises relative to that next period.

The elasticity of substitution with respect to the intertemporal relative

price structure is (l—a)/G, reflecting both the coefficient of risk

aversion and the share of home goods in the consumption basket. The

explanation for the positively sloped cc schedule and for the elasticity

(1—a)/O are the following. The household substitutes in response to changes

in the real interest rate. Increased real interest rates lead the consumer

to raise future relative to current consumption. Now suppose the relative

price of home goods is expected to fall. Then a unit of traded goods

borrowed today has relatively little purchasing power in terms of the

consumption basket today, but costs a lot in terms of the consumption basket

upon repayment of the loan next period. Since the loan adds less to consump-

tion today than it costs to repay tomorrow It is clear that with falling
                           —8—




pt/pt+1
                                 C
                   N




    1     —




              C

                                     N




     0                 1
                                         ct/ct+1


        Figure 1
                                    —9—




relative prices the real interest rate in terms of our consumption basket

exceeds the world real rate. Conversely, if the relative price of home goods

were rising the home real interest rate would be less than the world rate,

changing relative prices induce consumers to choose a profile of consump-

tion that is tilted toward the present or the future.

     Two factors determine the extent to which changing relative prices of

home goods affect the consumption profile. One is the share of home goods

in consumption, 1—a, the other is the coefficient of risk aversion. It is

clear that if the home goods share is negligible the home real interest rate

is practically equal to the given world rate. Variations in relative prices

over time are only important if the share of home goods in consumption is

significant. The larger the share the flatter the cc schedule because now

even a small change in the relative price structure over time involves a

relative large change in the home real interest rate.

     In the stationary equilibrium spending, cN4pcT will fall short of or

exceed income in every period depending on the initial debt position. With

an initial indebtedness the country would run an indefinite trade surplus,

spending falling short of output thus transferring the debt service. We

consider next how this equilibrium is affected by transitory or permanent

disturbances in output.



4. An Output Increase

     Suppose that currently households learn about a permanent increase in

output starting next period. Thus         =   q'   starting next period. We

want to investigate the effect of the output increase on the profile of
                                        —10—




consumption, relative prices and borrowing.' In Figure 2 we show that the

rise in future home goods output leads to a shift of the NN schedule to

N'N'. At each level of relative consumption the present relative price

of traded goods will fall relative to that prevailing next period. The

new equilibrium is at point A'. Thus a future rise in output will reduce

current consumption relative to the future because the output increase

raises the home real rate of interest.

       The equilibrium relative price structure and the equilibrium

consumption profile can be derived by equatihg (5) and (9) to yield:



(11)                             =        k ;       l/[e(a+e)+(l-a)J



and


(12)
                 Ct
                      /
                          Ct+l   = ( / )(la) k(a+
       Consider now the extent to which the consumption profile is moved by

a change in future output. Two reference points are A1 and A2 correspond-

ing respectively to the cases of zero and infinite intertemporal substitu-

tion elasticities. Consider first the case where the elasticity of substitu-

tion is infinite, point A2. In this case relative prices do not change and

hence the composition of demand between home goods and traded goods is un-

changed. In the case of perfect substitutability the consumption profile

exactly mirrors the profile of real income or output. Starting from a zero

debt equilibrium there is no change in consumption until the increase in real



'A future increase in output in the traded goods sector that leaves home goods
supply unchanged will lead to a rise in the level of consumption. There will
be current borrowing to finance the higher, flat consumption profile with the
debt serviced and paid once income rises. Because the relative price of non—
traded goods remains unchanged over time, rising once and for all, there are
no interest rate effects on the time profile of consumption.
            N



                         C
        N'
            \
1




        C

                    N'   N


    0           1            ct/ct+1

    Figure 2
                                     —12—




income materializes. At that time consumption rises in proportion to (and

by the same amount) as real income. The intuition of this result Is the

following: With unchanged output and current consumption there is no change

in the current relative price of traded goods. Next, period, as (8) shows,

a proportional rise of output (q) and consumption again leaves the relative

price unchanged. Therefore              remains unchanged as shown in Figure 2.

The solution, as can be verified from (3) satisfies the lifetime budget

constraint.

         Consider next the case where consumption levels are proportional, with

a zero intertemporal elasticity of substitution, as shown by point A1. With

the consumption profile entirely flat and with wealth or the present value

of income increased there will be a rise in the level of consumption from

C   to   c'. Consumption rises in anticipation of higher future level of income

as shown in Figure 3. But because consumption rises relative to present

income there is current borrowing with the debt serviced and repaid through

subsequent trade surpluses.

         From the examination of the extreme cases it is clear that the response

to a future, permanent increase in income is never one of a trade surplus.

Either the home country remains in trade balance or consumption rises in

anticipation of the future income increase, leading to external borrowing.

The tendency toward a deficit and borrowing will be larger the more important

the consumption smoothing. The share of nontraded goods likewise affects the

outcome. If the share is near zero the cc schedule in Figure 2 is close to

vertical and the consumption smoothing dominates because the home real interest

rate in unchanged.

         The alternative exercise to be studied is a current, transitory rise in

income. In this event there is a rightward shift in NN and the current period

equilibrium involves a rise in present relative to future consumption induced
                —13—




Ct


                            yt
                       ——




                            te

     Figure 3
                                   —14—




by the fall in the home equilibrium real interest rate. Again consider the

cases where there is perfect or zero intertemporal substitutability in

consumption. With zero substitutability, the consumption profile remains

flat and rises uniformly, though by less than the increase in current income.

Therefore a present trade surplus develops financing a longrun trade deficit.

     When risk aversion is zero and intertemporal substitutability is

infinite we have the other limiting case. Present consumption rises to

match fully the present increase in income. Future consumption remains at

the level of permanent income and there is no change in the trade balance.

Thus once more we find that the consumption smoothing is not offset by real

interest rate movements. Income and consumption move in the same direction,

a present rise in income leading to lending and a future rise in income

leading to borrowing, never to lending.

     What is the role of the home goods sector in influencing the magnitude

of the trade balance effects and the tilting of the consumption profile?

From (12) it can be seen that a rise in either the elasticity of home goods

supply or in the share of traded goods, a, will lower the elasticity of the

consumption profile with respect to relative output levels. A high home goods

supply elasticity reduces the impact of disturbances both on intertemporal

relative prices and on the consumption profile. A higher traded goods share

will reduce the elasticity of the consumption profile although it may raise

the movement in relative prices.



4. Transitory Changes in the World Interest Rate

     So far we have assumed a given world rate of interest r* and furthermore

equality of the world interst rate and the domestic discount rate, (l+r*)/(l+S)k=l.
                                       —15--




We now assume that there is a transitory increase in the world rate of interest

in the present period. From (5) a rise in the current world rate of interest

tilts the consumption profile toward the future. In Figure 4 this is shown

as the leftward shift of cc to c'c'. The rise in the world rate of interest

thus leads a rise in the present relative to the future relative price of traded

goods.

       Consider first the case of zero intertemporal substitution. Starting with

a zero initial debt and hence the equality of income and spending along the

stationary path, higher interest rates have no effect on the consumption

profile. The consumption profile remains flat at the unchanged level of income.

The existence of an initial debt or net foreign assets modifies the result in

the following manner. With external net assets the higher interest receipts

raise current income and therefore raise the consumption path. Conversely with

initial debt there is a reduction in the consumption profile.

       The case of some substitutability, as shown in Figure 4, leads to a

reduction in present relative to future consumption. Starting from zero debt

that implies a reduction in present consumption and a rise in the entire

future level of consumption. Thus the home country will run a trade surplus

in the high interest period and a trade deficit when interest rates return to

their initial levels. The extent of intertemporal substitution can be seen

from the expression for the equilibirum relative consumption levels:


                                   a+e
(13)            c/c+1 = k      e(a+e)+(l—a)




Equation (11) shows the role of the nontraded goods sector. If either the share

of traded goods approaches unity or the elasticity of home goods supply tends
                     —16—




p/p
 t t+1           N              C,




    1


             /
             C
                                     N



         0                  1            c/c.1

         Figure 4
                                    —17—




toward infinity the elasticity in (11) tends to —i/e which is the result of

the small open economy without home goods. The presence of the home goods

sector tends to dampen the effect of international interest rate changes on

the consumption profile and the trade balance. Current consumption (hence

home goods demand) rises relative to future consumption when the current

relative price of traded goods rises relative to that in the future. The

change in the term structure of relative prices in turn implies that the home

component of the real interest rate——due to relative price changes——moves in

the opposite direction to the increase in the world rate thus dampening the

adjustment in consumption. This dampening effect is directly apparent from

the fact that the absolute value of the elasticity in (11) is less than 1/0

which is the appropriate elasticity in the absence of home goods.



Concluding Remarks

    We have studied the role of the nontraded goods sector in influencing

the consumption and trade balance response to changes in output or in the

world rate of interest. The finding is that the presence of a nontraded goods

sector, as already noted by Bruno (1976) and Martin and Selowsky (1981),

introduces a discrepancy between the home real rate of interest and that pre-

vailing in the rest of the world. The distinction implies that changes in the

time profile of home goods output will affect the profile of consumption. The

extent to which this occurs is inversely related to the share of traded goods

in consumption and to the elasticity of home goods supply. Transitory

changes in the world rate of interest likewise affect the time profile of

consumption. This time, the home goods market serves to dampen the movements in

the consumption profile as the international and domestic components of the

real interest rate move in offsetting directions.
                                     —18—




        The present model is oversimplified far a complete analysis of trade

balance issues. For that purpose it would be interesting to introduce also

capital accumulation to study the interaction of saving and investment on

relative prices and the balance of trade, but that is the topic of further

work.
                                         —19—




Appendix

      We use equations (1), (2) and (4) to derive the first order conditions

establishing the optimal composition of current consumption between home

goods and traded goods as well as the optimal consumption profile.

Differentiating (1), using (2), with respect to consumption of traded goods

yields:


A-i                = p
            t t       t


where U1 is the partial derivative of U (           ) with     respect to the ith argument.

      Maximizing (1), using (2), with respect to the optimal borrowing, b+i,

yields:


A-2        UN/UN+1 =   DR(p+i/p)

      Using the functional form U =
                                            1
                                                c
                                                    1—0    .
                                                          with c =
                                                                          al—a
                                                                                 we derive
                                                                      cTcN

A—3
           CN/CT     $pt
                           ; $   (l—a)/a

and

A—4        U =     (1—a) c° (cT/cN)a =
                                           (1_a)c0($p)

Therefore A—2 can be rewritten as:


                                    —0              —a
A—5        DR(p+i/pt) =     (ct/c+i) t't+l
or


A—6        c/c+i = [k (p+l,p)la]l/O                   ;        k     DR


which is the equation of the cc schedule.
                                  —20—




References



Bruno, N.     "The Two Sector Open Economy and the Real Exchange Rate,"
              American Economic Review, September 1976.


Dornbusch, R. "International and Intergenerational Trade." Unpublished
              manuscript, June 1981, M.I.T.

Martin, R. and Selowsky, N. "Energy Prices, Substitution, and Optimal
              Borrowing in the Short Run an Analysis of Adjustment in Oil
              Importing Developing Countries." Unpublished manuscript,
              February 1981, World Bank.

Obstfeld, N. "Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is There a
             Laursen—Metzler Effect," NBER Working Paper, June 1981.

Sachs, J.    "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the 1970's."
             Forthcoming, Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, 1981.
