                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 GOVERNMENT AND HEALTH OUTCOMES




                        Michael   Grossman



                      Working Paper No. 180




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                          October 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Health Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Res earch.
                                               NBER Working Paper #780
                                                    October 1981




                     GOVERNMENT AND HEALTH OUTCOMES




                                ABSTRACT



      In   this paper, I summarize the results of empirical studies in

the areas of schooling and health, public programs and infant mortal-

ity, and government regulation of teenage smoking. My review is

selective and is based on my own research. It is neutral with respect

to the question of whether the government should pursue policies to

improve the health of its citizens. But it calls attention to the

consequences with respect to health of alternative decisions by policy

makers.



                                  Michael Grossman
                                  Department of Economics
                                  City University of New York
                                    Graduate School
                                  33 West 42nd Street
                                  New York, New York 10036
                                  (212)790—4426


                                  National Bureau of Economic Research
                                  269 Mercer Street, 8th Floor
                                  New York, New York 10003
                                  (212) 598—3321
                      GOVERNMENT AND HEALTH OUTCOMES


                           by Michael Grossman*




        I have been engaged in research in health economics at the National

Bureau of Economic Research for more than a decade, A common theme in

much of my research is that health is the output of a multivariate pro-

duction process in which medical care is siiply one of many inputs.

This distinction between health and medical care is a useful point of

departure in a discussion of government and health outcomes because it

underscores that actual and potential government policies with respect

to a variety of nonmedical inputs can have important impacts on health

outcomes. Indeed, a good deal of evidence suggests that these inputs

are more important determinants of health in the United States than

medical care. Consequently, the way in which the government affects

the health of its citizens may have more to do with its impacts on non—

medical than on medical inputs.

        In this paper, I summarize the results of empirical studies in

the   areas of schooling and   health,   public   programs and infant mortal-

ity, and   government regulation of teenage smoking. My review is selec-
tive and   is based on my own research. It is neutral with respect to the

question of whether the government should pursue policies         to improve
the   health of its citizens. But it calls attention to the consequences

with respect to health of aLternative decisions by policy makers.
                                     —2—


                            I.   Schooling and Health

        A number of studies in the United States indicate that among socio-

economic   variables years of schooling completed is probably the most un—
portant   correlate of good health in adult populations. This finding

emerges   whether health levels are measured by mortality rates, morbid-
ity rates, or self—evaluation of health status, and whether the units
of observation are individuals or groups. The relationship is usually

statistically   significant at levels of confidence of .05 or better in
both simple and partial correlations. Moreover, a significant and
large   schooling effect is observed with income held constant.

        Clearly, schooling is a variable within the purview of public

policy.    Its average level is determined in part by such Federal pro-
-rams as elementary and secondary school aid, grants to colleges and to
1—income     students, and guaranteed and subsidized student loans. If
the correlation between schooling and health reflects causality from
the former to the latter,   health   levels may grow more slowly than
otherwise and may even   decline as a result of the recently enacted bud-

get cut—backs in Federal aid to education by the Reagan Administration.

Correlation, however, is not synonymous    with   causality. The   direction
of causality may run from better health to more schooling because
healthier students may be more efficient producers      of additions to the

stock   of knowledge, or human capital, via formal schooling and because
current   and past health are likely to be positively related. Alterna-

tively, no causal relationship need be implied by the correlation be—

tween schooling and   health.    Instead, differences in one or more
                                     —3—




 "third variables," such as physical and mental      ability   and parental char-
 acteristics, may   affect   both health and schooling in the same direction.
        I have subjected the alternative explanations of the observed posi-
 tive correlation between schooling and health to empirical testing and
have concluded that schooling has    significant and large causal impact
                                         a

on the current self—rated health of middle—aged white male adults in the
NBER-.Thorndjke sample. The estimated schooling effect in my        study   con-
trols   for health in high school, parents' schooling, scores on physical

and mental tests taken by the men when they were in their early twenties,

current hourly wage rate, property income, and job satisfaction. My

finding is particularly notable because all of the men graduated from

high school. Hence, it suggests that the favorable impact of schooling

on health persists even at high levels of schooling.

        Additional evidence that schooling causes health is contained in

research by Linda Edwards, Robert Shakotko, and me on the determinants

of child and adolescent health. We study child and adolescent health

in the context of the nature—nurture controversy. Our research uses

data from Cycle II of the U.S. Health Examination Survey (children aged

6 through 11 years in the period 1963 through 1965), Cycle III of the

Ialth Examination Survey (adolescents aged 12 through 17 years in the

period 1966 through 1970), and     the   panel of individuals (one-third of

the full Cycle III   sample) who were examined in both cycles.
        We find that the home environment in general and mother's school-

ing   in particular play an extremely important role in the determination
of child and adolescent health. It is not surprising to find that a
                                             —4—


child's home environment has a positive impact on his health with no

other variables held constant. Moreover, it is difficult to sort out

the effect of nature from that of nurture because it is difficult to

measure a child's genetic endowment and because genetic differences

may induce environmental changes. Nevertheless, we have accumulated

a number of suggestive pieces of evidence on the true importance of

the home environment. With birth weight, mother's age at birth,

congenital abnormalities, other proxies for genetic endowment, and

family income held constant, parents' schooling has positive and sta-

tistically significant effects on many measures of health in childhood

and adolescence. Children and teenagers of more educated mothers have

better oral health, are less likely to be obese, and less likely to

have anemia than children of less educated mothers. Father's school-

ing plays a much less important role in the determination of oral

liectith, obesity, and anemia than mother's schooling. The latter find-

ings are important because equal effects would be expected if the

schooling variables were simply proxies for unmeasured genetic endow-

ments.     On the   other   hand, if   the   effect of schooling is primarily
environmental, we would expect the impact of mother's schooling to be
larger because she is the family member most concerned with children's
health care.
      Several additional pieces of evidence underline the robustness
of   the above finding. When oral health is examined in a longitudinal
context,    mother's schooling dominates father's schooling in the        deter-
mination of the periodontal       index in adolescence, with the     periodontal
                                        —5—


index in childhood     held   constant. Similar comments apply to the effect

of mother's schooling on      school    absence due to illness in adolescence

(with   school absence due to illness in childhood held constant) and
to   the effect of mother's schooling on obesity in adolescence (with

obesity in childhood held constant).


                    II.   Public Programs and Infant Mortality
        From   1964 to 1977, the   infant mortality rate in the United States

declined   at an annually compounded rate of 4.4 percent per year. This
was an extremely rapid rate of decline compared to the figure of 0.6
percent per year from 1955 to 1964. The reduction in mortality pro-
ceeded at an even faster pace in the l970s than in the late 1960s (5.2

percent per year from 1971 to 1977 versus 3.8 percent per year from

1964 to 1971). The period from 1964 to 1977 witnessed the introduction

of   Medicaid, maternal and    infant   care projects, Federally subsidized
family planning services for low—income women, and   legalization of
                                                          the

abortion. Steven Jacobowitz and I recently have completed a study in
which we estimate the relative impacts of these public policies and

ptgrams    on infant mortality in a multivariate context.
        We focus on the neonatal mortality rate (deaths of infants within
the first 27 days of life per thousand live births). This rate is gen-
erally about three times as high as the postheonatal mortality rate
(deaths of infants between the ages of 28 and 364 days per thousand
live births), making the neonatal mortality rate the most important
contributor to infant mortality. Moreover, the policy variables at
                                     —6—


issue are more relevant to neonatal mortality than to postheonatal mor-

tal ity.

        The methodology of our study involves a cross—sectional regres-

sion analyses of variations in race—specific neonatal mortality rates

among large counties of the United States in 1971. Independent vari-

ables in the regressions include physicians per       capita,   the percent-

age of women in childbearing ages who had at least a high school

education, the percentage of the population in poverty, and policy

measures pertaining to Medicaid coverage of prenatal and perinatal

care   services, maternal and infant care projects, the use of organi-
zed family planning clinics by low—income women in childbearing ages,
and abortion reform. This procedure capitalizes on        variations in
the   programs at issue among   counties   at a moment in time, while miti-

gating the multicollinearity problems that almost certainly would

arise in a time—series analysis for the U.S. as a whole.

        To examine the relative contributions of schooling, poverty,

physician availability, and the public programs to the recent U.S.

neonatal experience, we apply the regression coefficients to trends

in the exogenous variables between 1964 and 1977. In that period

the wh.'te neonatal mortality rate declined by 7.5 deaths per thou-

sand live births, and the nonwhite neonatal mortality rate declined

by 11.8 deaths per thousand live births. The regressions explain

approximately 35 percent of the white decline and 41 percent of the

nonwhite decline.

        The increase in the legal abortion rate is the single most impor-

tant factor in reductions in both     race—specific   death rates. Not only
                                     —7—



does the growth in abortion dominate the other program measures, but it
also dominates trends in schooling, poverty, and physician availability.
For    the entire 1964—77 period, the reduction in the white neonatal inor—

tality rate due to abortion amounts to approximately 1.6 deaths per

thousand live births or 21 percent of the observed decline. The com-

parable figure for nonwhites is 2.5 deaths per thousand live births,

which also amounts to 21 percent of the observed decline. When the

subperiods of 1964—71 and 1971-77 are examined separately, abortion

makes the largest contribution except for nonwhites in the 1964—71

period. Here it ranks second to the impact of the rise in the use of

organized family planning services by low—income women. The extremely

large expansion in the abortion rate in the latter period (1971—77)

•rovides a cogent explanation of the acceleration in the percentage

rates of decline in both race—specific mortality rates and the accel-

eration in the absolute rate of change for whites.

        These results are relevant to current U.S. policy debates with

respect   to the financing of abortions and   family planning services

under   Medicaid and with respect to attempts to outlaw abortion except
when it is necessary to preserve a pregnant woman's life. Taken at
face   value, the most striking implication of our study pertains to a

ban on abortions. The current US, abortion rate is 400 abortions

per thousand live births, while the rate in 1969 was 4 abortions per

thousand live births. If a ban reduced the rate to its 1969 level,

our regressions predict that the nonwhite neonatal mortality rate

would rise by approximately 2.8 per thousand live births or by 19
                                   —8—


percent above its 1977 level. The white neonatal mortality rate would

rise by approximately 1.8 deaths per thousand live births or by 21 per-

cent above its 1977 level. Yet these estimates must be regarded with

caution because they assume that all other factors would remain the

same if a ban were enacted. In particular, they overstate the impact

of an abortion ban to the extent that more conventional methods of

birth control would be substituted for abortions.


              III. Government Regulation of Teenage Smoking

        Since the issuance of the first Surgeon General's Report on

Smoking and Health in 1964, the Federal government has been involved

in a sporadic campaign to discourage cigarette smoking. This cam-

paign has consisted primarily of policies designed to increase pub—

lic knowledge of the harmful effects of cigarette smoking and to
restrict advertising by cigarette manufacturers. The major elements
of this campaign have been the Fairness Doctrine of the Federal Com-
munications   Commission, which resulted in the airing of anti—smoking

mecages on radio and television from July 1, 1967 to January 1, 1971,

nd the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act of 1970, which banned pro—

smoking cigarette advertising on radio and television after January 1,

1971.   The ban greatly reduced the airing of anti—smoking messages,

relegating them to the same status as other public service advertising.

This has caused a number of observers to question the substitution of

the broadcast advertising ban   for   the active anti—smoking campaign

mounted   under the Fairness Doctrine.
                                      9—



         Eugene Lewit, Douglas Coate, and   I   recently have completed a study

 which contains the first set of estimates of the impact of the Fairness

 Doctrine and advertising ban policies on the demand for cigarettes by

 teenagers in the United States. In addition, we examine the extent to
 which an increase in the Federal excise tax on cigarettes would reduce
 teenage smoking. Excise tax changes are reflected in cigarette prices

 and comprise an additional public policy that influences cigarette de-

mand. We focus on teenagers because cigarette smoking is, in part, an

habitual behavior that begins early in life. Therefore, changes in

teenage smoking behavior in response to government regulatory actions

can have a substantial and sustained impact on aggregate smoking in the

long run. Moreover, age at onset of smoking is negatively correlated

with the amount smoked and the incidence of negative health effects.

        Trends in smoking participation rates of teenagers underscore

another reason for studying this group in the context of the anti—

smoking campaign. Supporters of the advertising ban have pointed to

the increase in teenage smoking rates between 1968 and 1970 as evi-

dence that, whatever the impact of the Fairness Doctrine on aggregate

cigarette consumption, the doctrine was not effective in the case of
trgers. Ignored in this argument is the important point that the
Fairness Doctrine went into effect on July 1, 1967. Therefore,
smoking rates in 1968 pertain   to rates in the second    half of the first
year   and first half of the second year of the doctrine. Thus, trends

between 1968 and 1970 do not allow one to compare teenage smoking in

the period before the Fairness Doctrine to smoking during the doctrine.
                                   — 10 —




        Our empirical research is based on Cycle III of the Health Exam-

ination   Survey. Since some of the teenagers   in this sample were inter-

viewed   before the period of the Fairness Doctrine while others were
interviewed during the period of the doctrine, we are able to present
the first multivariate evaluation of the Fairness Doctrine on teenage
smoking. In addition, since some of our estimated equations include
the   number of pro— and anti—smoking messages seen by each youth, we

are able to make predictions about the potential impacts of the adver-

tising ban. We also present the first estimates of the responsive-

ness of smoking by teenagers to variations in the price of cigarettes.

This is possible because of cross—sectional differences in the price

of cigarettes, primarily due to differences in state excise tax rates.

        We find that teenage price elasticities of demand for cigarettes

      substantial and   much larger than the corresponding adult price

elasticities. The teenage smoking participation elasticity equals

—1.2, and the quantity smoked elasticity equals    —1.4. It follows
that,   if future reductions in youth smoking are desired, an increase

in the Federal excise tax is a potent policy to accomplish this goal.

        The contention of the proponents of the advertising ban that the

raraess Doctrine failed in the case of teenagers is incorrect. Ac-

cording to our results, the doctrine had a substantial negative impact

on teenage smoking participation rates. Extrapolations that assume no

changes in the determinants of     teenage smoking except for variables
related   to the Fairness Doctrine suggest that the advertising ban was

no better or worse a policy than the Fairness Doctrine. When, how-

ever, we take   account of the 6 percent reduction in the relative price
                                    — 11 —




of   cigarettes between 1970 and 1974, which Benjamin       Klein,   Kevin Murphy,

and Lynne Schneider attribute to the advertising ban, we predict an in-

crease   in smoking participation of .4 percentage    points. This coincides

with   the   observed increase and calls into question the wisdom of the ad-

vertising ban, at least in the short run.


                         IV. Agenda for Future   Research

       In lieu of a conclusion, I want to highlight three items on an

agenda for future research. In the area of neonatal mortality, I

plan to study the determinants of variations in these rates among

counties of the U.S. in 1977. This will enable me to address the

question: Do the effects that were observed in 1971 differ when

data for 1977 are examined? Moreover, Jacobowitz and I were not

able to measure the contributions of advances in neoriatology to re-

ductions in neonatal mortality. It is true that the state—of—the—

art in neonatology is fixed in the cross section. But the extent to

which state—of—the—art services are delivered to infants is not fixed

because of differences in the availability of neonatal intensive care

units among counties. Measures of the availability of these units

will be included in my new study.

       In the area of teenage smoking, Lewit, Coate, and I will assess

the long-run impacts of the advertising ban using the National Surveys

on Drug Abuse conducted in 1971, 1972, 1974, 1976, 1977, and 1979. It

is plausible that the possible long—run effects of the ban primarily

will be experienced as succeeding cohorts of children are reared with-

out exposure to pro—cigarette advertising on television. In particular,
                                         — 12 —




as the advertising ban remains in effect, children of the same age will

have had less total lifetime exposure to cigarette advertising in each

succeeding year. Consequently, we will pay particular attention to

interaction effects between age and the duration of the ban as re—

vea].ed in the six       recent   surveys.

      In the area of schooling and health, Victor Fuchs has challenged

my conclusion that schooling has a substantial causal impact on health.

He argues     that the   relationship may    be due to an omitted third factor:
namely, differences in time preference among individuals. Fuchs has

attempted to measure time preference in a telephone survey by asking

respondents questions in which they choose between a sum of money now

and a larger sum    in    the future. He includes an index of time prefer—

ccc in a multiple regression in which health status is the dependent

variable and schooling is one of the independent variables. To date,

Fuchs has not been able to demonstrate that the schooling effect is

due to time preference, but his results must be regarded as preliminary.

In particular, they are based on one small sample of adults in Long

Island arid   on exploratory measures of time preference. In general, I
applaud his effort to study the relationship between schooling and

health in more detail, and I agree with his contention that the mecha-

nisms through which schooling affects health have not been fully iden-

tified.
                                         F—i



                                      FOOTNOTES




        *
            This   paper will be presented at an American Economic Association

invited session on Government and Health at the Allied Social Science

Associations annual meeting, Washington, D.C., December 28—30,

1981. I am indebted to Douglas Coate and Linda Edwards for their

conunents on an earlier draft. Research summarized in this paper was

supported by Grant Numbers 5 P01 HS00451 and 1 ROl HSO2917 from the

National Center for Health Services Research to the National Bureau

of Economic Research, by Grant Number DAR-80 14959 from the National

Science Foundation to the NBER, and by grants from the Ford Founda-

tion   and the Robert     Wood Johnson   Foundation to the NBER.
                                      R-l


                                REFERENCES



Edwards, Linda    N., and Grossman, Michael. "Adolescent Health, Family

       Background, and   Preventive   Medical Care." In Volume III of

       Research in Human   Capital and Development,     edited by Ismail

       Sirageldin,   David Salkever, and    Alan Sorkin. Greenwich,

       Connecticut: JAI Press, Inc., forthcoming.

Edwards, Linda N., and   Grossman, Michael. "Children's Health and the
       Family." In Volume II of Advances in Health Economics and

       Health   Services Research, edited by Richard M. Scheffler and

       Louis F.   Rossiter. Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press, Inc.,

       1981.


Fuchs, Victor R. "Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study."

       In Economic Aspects of Health, edited by Victor R. Fuchs.

       Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau

       of Economic Research, 1982.

Grossman, Michael. "The Correlation between Health and Schooling."

       In Household Production and     Consumption,   edited by Nestor E.

      Terleckyj. New York: Columbia University Press for the

       National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.

Grossman, Michael, and Jacobowitz, Steven. "Variations in Infant Mor-

       tality Rates among Counties of the United States: The Roles of

       Public Policies and Programs." Demography, 18, No. 4 (November

       1981).
                                      R— 2



Klein, Benjamin; Murphy, Kevin M.; and Schneider, Lynne. "Government

         Regulation   of Cigarette Health Information." Journal of Law
         and Economics, 24, No. 3   (December   1981).

Lewit,   Eugene M.; Coate, Douglas; and Grossman, Michael. "The Effects

         of Government Regulation on Teenage Smoking." Journal of Law

         and Economics, 24, No. 3 (December 1981).


Shakotko, Robert A.; Edwards, Linda N.; and Grossman, Michael. "An

         Exploration of the Dynamic   Relationship   between Health and

         Cognitive   Development in Adolescence." In Contributions to

         Economic Analysis: Health, Economics, and Health Economics,

         edited by Jaques van der Gaag and Mark Penman. Amsterdam:

         North—Holland Publishing Company, 1981.
