                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CENTRAL PLANNING AND MONETABISM:
                       FELLOW TRAVELLERS?




                         Richard   Fortes




                      Working Fper No. 182




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     105p Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          October 1981




This paper was presented at the NBER 1981 Summer Institute in the
International Studies program. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Re search.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #782
                                                      October 1981




               Central Planning and Monetarism: Fellow Travellers?



                                      ABSTRACT



     We discuss the monetary institutions
                                            and macroeconomics of centrally

planned economies (CPEs); objectives and techniques of monetary control;

the relevance to CPEs of the
                               neutrality property, the natural rate hypothesis,
and the quantity theory; the roles of stock .and flow variables and the

stability of asset demand and expenditure
                                            functions; the relation between
monetary policy, fiscal policy and incomes policy in CPEs; the CPE equi-

valent of a floating exchange rate and its implications for monetary
                                                                     policy;
and "super crowding out."    Many considerations suggest that monetarism

as theory and policy might be more applicable under central planning than

it is in market economies.




                                         Professor Richard Portes
                                         Department of Economics
                                         Birkbeck College
                                         7—15 Gresse St.
                                         London W1P 1PA
                                         England
                  Central Planning and Monetarism:    Fellow Travellers?*

                                     Richard Portes

                                      August 1981



          The essential characteristic of
                                       central planning, or of a centrally planned
  economy (CPE), is the detailed allocation
                                             by a centralised hierarchy of goods
  and services among producing and
                                      distributing organisations. This entails that
  the allocating bureaucracy also
                                     issues binding targets (plans) to each separate
  organisation for its production of individual
                                                      outputs and use of the inputs
  needed to make them. By contrast, in a market economy these decisions
                                                                        are taken
  in a decentralised
                       way, at least partly in response to signals
                                                                      of demands, sup-
 plies and prices communicated between
                                            independent agents.
         The economic institutions of
                                        central planning are unfamiliar to many in
 the West, but we all have more or less immediate experience with
                                                                        monetarism.
 To say that it shall be known
                                  by its works might be too harsh, but lengthy def i—
 nition is unnecessary.
                            Indeed, any attempt at precise characterization would have
 to be
              lengthy. The controversies over
                                             monetarist theory and policy have
 been so extensive and its current influence so ubiquitous that
                                                                numerous variants
have been specified. There is no single monetarist model, however.
                                                                   We may
therefore take ntonetarjsm as a general body of thought
                                                        stressing the pervasive
importance of the aggregate stock of
                                         money in macroeconmjc relationships,

especially those determining quantities denominated in money terms, such as


     *
         I am grateful to Jol-ni Burkett, John Muellbauer, Ron Smith and Dennis Snower
for comments, to Stan Rudcenko and David Winter for
                                                     many discussions in the
course of our joint work, and to the SSRC
for Quantitative and Comparative          (U.K.)  for support under its Programme
of this paper was completed at the 1981 NBER Summer Institute.The final version
                                 Macroeconomics  at Birkbeck.
                                       —2—



                *
money income.
     I have no intention whatsoever to          either central planning or mone—

                                                 to Britain, the United States,
tarism in its potential or actual application
                                             policy. Nor is the title meant to
or anywhere else, either as theory or as
                                                                       indeed
tar monetarism with the brush of association with central planning, or
                                         understand one who does not explicitly
the converse. By "fellow traveller" I
                                         identify with it, but who acts as those
adopt a given doctrine nor even openly
                                               analytical premises, methods and con-
who do. Here the metaphor suggests common

clusions, albeit usually applied to very different environments.

     The title's query, then, is: Along what road might central planners and

monetarists travel together, and how far?      Are monetarist principles applicable

                                                    between the macroeconomics of
under central planning? Are there similarities
                                                monetarists, between their attitudes
central planners and that of market economy

and intellectual predispositions?
                                              the macroeconomics or monetary econo-
     A final disclaimer: when discussing

mics of central planning, I am not in general referring to Marxist monetary

 theory, whether applied to a CPE or a market economy. I am certainly not ask-
                                      is monetarist, although this too is by no
 ing whether Marx's monetary theory

 means an absurd question.
                                               little macroeconomics for CPEs, and
      Until quite recently, there was very

 virtually all of this centered on the suppiy side (aggregate production func—
                                                       **
         ignoring aggregate demand and its components.    A striking example is
 tions),
                                                  in CPEs, in which these fluctuations
 the best—known theory of investment "cycles"



      *                                                     references.
       Mayer (1978) and Purvis (1980) are excellent general
      **
                exceptions are Robert Campbell (1970), Frank Holzman (1968), and
           Notable                        Carol Nussey, had also embarked on such
 Peter Wiles (1969, 1977). My colleague,
 work before her untimely death.
                                         —3—



  are entirely determined by supply—side forces (Goldmann, 1964).

       Resistance to a theoretical and applied
                                                   macroeconomics of CPEs arises from
  several distinct arguments, none of which I find convincing. First is the

  belief that if all quantities are planned and determined at the disaggregated,

  microeconomic level, macroeconomics simply cannot matter. But the planners

  themselves do not accept this, and
                                       they rightly carry out macroeconomic and
  financial planning, because at least
                                         some macroeconomic aggregates, like house-
 holds' money balances, do play a role which cannot be planned centrally at the

 micro level.

      A second reason for ignoring
                                     macroeconomics, or at least monetary economics,
 in CPEs is the widespread, long—standing
                                             belief that demand always exceeds sup—

 ply under central planning, so supply must determine everything. For the house-

 hold sector, I have challenged the factual premise on a wide variety of empiri-

 cal grounds (1974, 1977) and, with David Winter, on econometric evidence (1980).

 Those who start from this assumption often find it hard to implement
                                                                         consistently
 (Green and Higgins, 1977, reviewed in Portes, 1979a).

      It has also been contended that it is
                                               strictly impossible to deal with
macroeconomic aggregates in CPEs, because relative prices are so distorted, and

in practice the aggregates are meaningless, because any total of expenditures

will include many items bought only because the buyers could not find what
                                                                           they
really wanted. Such "forced substitution" is
                                              a consequence of both excess
aggregate demand and distorted relative prices (Kornai, 1981). We find, how-
ever, that   there will still be a natural correspondence between what is happen-

ing at the microeconomic level and what is measured
                                                        by macroeconomic aggregates
(Portes and Winter, 1980). Aggregation over quantity—constrained micro markets,

some in excess demand and others in excess
                                               supply, can yield smooth behaviour
and well—defined macro variables (Nuellbauer, 1978).
                                      —4—



                                               about theoretical and econometric
    Finally, there is a general scepticism
                                              to macroeconomics. Thus a leading
modelling of CPEs, applied most forcefully
                                            "Standard Western analytical models
expert on Soviet money and banking says,
                                                      are not applicable to Soviet
for testing monetary aspects of economic processes
                                               that the data are inadequate and
reality" (Garvy, 1977, p. 8). lie believes
                                      rules of economic behaviour in CPEs.    I
that we cannot properly specify the
                                            below presupposes that CPE households,
reject both propositions. The analysis
                                      stable behaviour which we can model, and
enterprises and planners do exhibit

that macroeconomic data in these economies are adequate to describe events

both to the planners and to us as observers.      Our empirical work fully justi-

fies this maintained hypothesis.*

     A brief description of CPE macroeconomic institutions is necessary. This
                                                       for many years in the USSR
refers to the "standard system", as it has applied
                                            economic "reforms" which have in any
and the Six of Eastern Europe, ignoring

 case made little change, except in Hungary.

      The main difference from our own macroeconomic structure is that theirs is

 much simpler. We have a diverse and complex set of financial institutions,

 from the central bank to a range of separate commercial deposit banks, building
                                                all performing different roles in
 societies, investment banks, and so forth,
                                              between lenders and borrowers, savers
 the process of financial intermediation
                                         combined central and commercial bank with
 and investors. The CPE has a single,
                       monobank facilitates central control over enterprises and
 many branches. This

 monitoring of households' financial
                                       behaviour. It also enforces a separation

                                             sectors: transactions between enter—
 of the types of money used by these two

      *
       It does not, however, justify macroecofloliletric
                                      the use for forecasting or policy analysis
                                                         models of CPEs. Before one
 of any of the existing large—scale
                                               much more work on small structural
 will be able to take that activity seriously,
                                                 (e.g., Burkett, Portes and Win-
 models and hypothesis testing will be necessary
 ter, 1981).
                                           —5—



   prises are conducted entirely with
                                         deposit money, i.e., entries on the monobank's
   books; while those between
                             enterprises and households, and within the household
   sector, are conducted with cash. Household
                                              financial assets are cash and sav-
   ings deposits.

       In the state productive
                                  sector, therefore, where resources are allocated
  centrally in physical terms,
                                  money is "passive". Although there is indeed gener-
  alized excess monetary demand here (resulting from
                                                     excess real demand, or "over—
  full employment planning"), this has little effect or relevance.
                                                                       For producing
  enterprises, liquidity is offered by stocks of goods, which may be hard to
                                                                              get,
 rather than the passive
                          money, which is all too easy to obtain. Producers do
 face a "soft" budget constraint
                                  (Kornai, 1981). But only if the bank permits
 can passive money finance
                            wage payments and thereby "leak" into active
                                                                         money,
 that which circulates in the household sector.

      Here money is active because
                                     wage labour and material incentives have been
 maintained in these CPEs. Thus
                                    although the planners set centrally the demand
 for labour and wage rates, there is a labour market on which
                                                              workers are (rela-
 tively) free in offering their
                                  services; and while the supplies of consumer
 goods and their prices are also fixed
                                         centrally, there is a market on which
 households are free to use their
                                    money to purchase from among what is offered.
     I have for some time argued that
                                         for the consumer goods market in CPEs
since the mid—19505, there is no clear evidence that
                                                        generalized, macro—level
excess demand or repressed inflation has
                                            prevailed for long periods (Portes,
1977; Portes and Winter, 1977,
                                  1978, 1980). This is contrary to conventional
wisdom, but many phenomena usually attributed to monetary disequilibrium,
                                                                           such
as shortages and the "second
                              economy" (unofficial, often unrecorded markets and
production of various kinds),
                               are in good part due to distorted relative prices
and deficiencies of the distributive
                                      network. This distinction is important
                                       —6—



                                cannot be used effectively to deal with relative
here because monetary control

                       the planners' monetary and macroeconomic policies may still
price problems,* and
                                                                                  to
be adequate although we observe many microeconomic disequilibria. Moreover,

judge these issues we need macroeconoIfl analysis and evidence.
                                                                            them that
     Prices are fixed by the planners for long periods. They can keep
                                                               taxes (or subsidies)
way while enterprise costs vary, by altering the turnover
                                                                deductions from (sub-
set at different rates for each good, or by altering their
                                                                     need not affect
                                   Thus a rise in wage costs, say,
sidies to) enterprise profits.
                           rise in prices can be met by a reduction in turnover
prices at all; just as a
                                affect enterprise or household incomes and hence
taxes and therefore need not
                                    there were excess demand for goods, the plan-
 their expenditure. Moreover, if
                                             that there might be no consequent effect
 ners' direct control over supply means

 on the demand for labour.   All this makes macroeconomic control simpler by cut-
                                                                  in the infla-
 ting the links and feedbacks along which disturbances propagate
                            economies. Recent consumer price rises in Eastern
 tionary spirals of market
                           due to aggregate excess demand (except in Poland) or
 Europe are not primarily
                                 (Portes, 1980), and their repercussions have been
 the effects of world inflation

 contained.
                                                              the structure of
      Monetary control in CPEs is also much easier because of
                                     restricted range of financial assets. There
 financial institutions and the very

                           debentures, no stock or bond markets; there is little
 are no equity shares or
                                                                       its customer is
  consumer credit; and trade credit from a supplier enterprise to
                             well. Thus the planners need not worry about the prices
  in principle excluded as
                                   (i.e., interest rates) and their effects on
  and yields of financial assets

                                        asset and income levels, or rise in the
        How much reduction in household
                             be necessary to eliminate excess demand for housing,
  general price level, would                                                How
  automobiles and meat in the East European CPEs (given current supplies)?
  many other goods would then be in excess supply?
                                               —7—



    expenditure, nor about open market operations. There
                                                              are no independent commer-
    cial banks, so the planners need not control
                                                      their lending behaviour with reserve
    or liquidity ratios or
                           interest rates; and there is no such thing as
                                                                         a secondary
    expansion of credit generated
                                  by an expansion of the monetary base.
         Finally, the domestic
                                 monetary system IS   completely   insulated from and
   unaffected by foreign
                           sector transactions, whether on current or capital
                                                                              account.
    Transactions with non—residents are centralizI
                                                     in the foreign trade bank (another
   branch of the
                  monobank), and there are no
                                               problems of control over the
                                                                            operations
   of international banks and multinational
                                             corporations.
         It should already be evident that a basic
                                                      empirical prerequisite for monetar_
   ism is met more
                     clearly in CPEs than in market
                                                      economies. The monetary authori-
   ties can indeed control
                             and monitor the
                                               money supply quite precisely (see Rud—
  cenko, 1978, on how they do
                                 so Operationally)    That this control may not be
  fully effective when its
                             consequences conflict with other
                                                                   objectives, Policies
  and presres does not invalidate this
                                       propositjo which emerges clearly from
   the comparison of monetary institutions outlined
                                                     above.
        We can now consider how
                                monetarist thought might apply to the macroeconomics
  of central planning.
                         We may start
                                      conveniently with the general
                                                                     monetarist pro-
  position for market economies
                                 that money is neutral. One form of this is famil-
  iarly expressed by the notion
                                 that "money is a veil":
                                                           in the long run, at least,
 real variables like production and employment
                                                 are independent of monetary pheno—
 mena.,* Now in
                 a CPE, no macroeconomic full
                                               employment policy is necessary,
 because full  employment is assured at the
                                            microeconomic planning level (Ellman,
1979). Detailed
                  manpow planning, the planners'
                                                       (and enterprises') desire to
maximise ontput by using all the labour which is
                                                      supplied, and the difficulty
which any enterprise with
                             some temporarily excess workers would encount in
     *
     And in the short run
                          as well, if expectations
unsystej monetary shocks ("surprises")             are rational, except for any
                                       —8—

                                     that anyone desiring a job at the going wage
trying to sack them, all guarantee

is employed. The objective of monetary policy in CPEs is the control of infla-

tionary pressures.
                                                         macroeconomic policy for full
      In a properly functioning market economy, too,
                                             monetarist view. Hahn (1980) attributes
employment is strictly superfluous, on a

to monetarism the belief that the economy will not be very often or very far out
                                                      for our purposes here can be
of a "rational expectations equilibrium", which
                                                 Thus output stays around the level
taken to imply no involuntary unemployment.

given   by full employment of labour (unemployment    at the "natural rate"). In
these circumstances, monetary policy should not seek to affect real variables,
but   rather to adjust to them, in a CPE, or to avoid perturbing them from their

long—run paths, in a market economy.      In both cases, provided these fundamental

criteria are met, monetary policy has of course a legitimate independent role
                                                nominal variables such as the price
in pursuing the authorities' objectives for
                                                                   should be concerned
level. With a vertical Phillips curve, macroeconomic policy

with inflation, leaving the reduction of the natural rate of unemployment to

micro economic measures.

        All this is a straightforward coincidence of views. Note, however, that

 this aspect of monetarism is in the market economies based on the belief that
                                                             coherence, even eff i—
 markets work, that decentralised allocation can ensure

 ciency, but in the CPEs based on the belief that planning and centralized sig-

 nals work, so monetary regulation need not be used to adjust for any mistakes.

 Regrettably, perfect administration is as rare as perfect markets.

        Closely associated with monetarism in the public as well as the professional

                                     MV   = Y = Py.    The nominal stock of money out-
 mind is the quantity equation ,
                                               circulates equals the value of national
 standing times the velocity with which it
                                     real national income. As it stands, this is of
 income, or the price level times
                                          —9—



   course a tautology, but there are at least two monetarjst interpretations
                                                                             which
   share the title of the
                          Quantity Theory of Money. One is that V is stable, at
   least in the medium to long
                               run, so that changes in N will be the principal cau-
   ses of changes in Y, subject perhaps to
                                              long and variable lags. A second is
  the strict version of the
                              neutrality property: if V and y are determined by
  real (non—monetary) forces, then changes in M will determine changes in
                                                                                the price
  level; again, the causal
                             processes through which this impulse is transmitted are

  complex, so that lags may be long and
                                          variable. Both versions ignore the prob-
  lem of effective demand,
                             essentially excluding it from the center of macroeco—
  nomic concerns; and central planners
                                         would certainly go along with that. But we
 can say more.

         Milton Friedman once set
                                     up a model which, he argued, was Common to mone—
 tarists and Keynesians, but
                            was missing one equation to make it complete, or
 determinate. He then maintained that
                                      the different between monetarists and
 Keynesians was that for the missing
                                       equation, monetarists chose to fix   y   at its
 full—employment (natural rate) level, while Keynesians chose to fix P at a level

 determined exogenously. In a CPE, both are fixed "exogenously",
                                                                     by the planners.
 What does that leave for the
                                quantity equation? With velocity again taken as
constant, it now gives us the stock of
                                          money required to finance transactions.
 (Here we are coming close to
                                Marxist monetary theory's Law of Circulation,
according to which P, V, and
                                y determine the quantity of money which will be
drawn into circulation from hoards.)

        The obvious relation, then, between the two cases is that in the
                                                                         market
economy, the quantity theory becomes a
                                          theory of open inflation, while in the
CPE, it is a theory of repressed
                                   inflation; or alternatively, in both, a guide
to non—inflationary monetary policy. Either as theory or policy, the
                                                                     causal
mechanism is likely to be quicker and more reliable in the CPE——or
                                                                     velocity
                                   —10—




more stable——given the much simpler institutional and asset structures.*

     A strong similarity in analytical method emerges from the observation that

monetarists center attention on stocks of assets more than on flows of expendi-

tures or receipts. Central planners, too, emphasize in their analyses the stocks

of currency and savings deposits held by the public, as well as inventories held

by distributive trade enterprises, and ratios of these stocks to retail trade

turnover, rather than any marginal propensities.

     It has often been regarded as a basic tenet of monetarism that the stock

demand for money function is more stable than the Keynesian flow consumption

expenditure function. In a CPE, if we take household money to include both

currency and savings deposits, then the absence of other financial assets and

debts means that the two functions are virtually equivalent: Savings equals

the increment to money stocks.

     It might nevertheless be argued that in a CPE the demand for money is more

fundamental, or more stable, for at least two reasons: The rate of interest

paid on savings deposits does not vary in the short run; and prices are quite

stable, so price expectations are not volatile. Nor are quantity expectations,

either of employment or of aggregate consumption goods supplies.   Thus although

the planners are concerned about temonetary overhang" and the possibility that

in some crisis households may suddenly and massively seek to convert their money

savings into goods, in fact this does not appear to happen.** Their concern may

perhaps be traced to another residual influence of Marxist monetary theory,



         • .A planner in an almost totally controlled economy.. .should find the
 quantity theory more useful than the Keynesian theory"(Mayer, 1978, pp. 40—41).
      **                                                            1981 was due
       Even the breakdown of the consumer goods market in Poland in
mainly to wage increases exceeding 20% (with fixed consumer prices) and cuts in
 supplies, rather than massive dishoarding.
                                          —11--




   Marx's emphasis on              and his view that
                                                        paper money will not be hoarded,
   so that amounts of
                      paper money Outstanding in excess of the needs of circulation
   cause paper money to depreciate
                                   relative to gold (commodities)
        Both central planners
                                 and monetarists, of course, tend to attribute special
   significance to one type of
                                 asset: money. This is perhaps more understandable
   for the planners, since money is the only financial
                                                            asset in CPEs. But its dis-
   tribution between
                       currency, demand deposits and time
                                                             deposits would appear impor-
  tant, because only
                       currency can be used for
                                                    payment in the shops and between
  households (in particular, in the "second
                                                  economy"), while time deposits are
  often tied to accumulation
                                of the purchase price of specific durable goods.
       In fact, it is notable that in those CPEs for
                                                      which we have data, the ratios
  of currency to total
                       household money have followed
                                                     remarkably stable, secular
  trends downwards since the
                             mid—1950s,* Nevertheless, households have since the
 l960s been able to purchase substantial
                                          quantities of durable goods, and it is
 surprising that the planners seem to be uninterested in
                                                          household portfolio allo-
 cation between money and durables.

      The stress on money by market economy monetarists
                                                             and their attempt to draw
 somewhere a sharp line between it and other household
                                                            assets is even less compre-
 hensible, insofar as their view of the mechanism
                                                       transmitting impulses from
money rests on substitutability
                                   across a wide range of financial and real assets.
But monetarists do often act as if there were
                                                    only one condition for stock
equilibrium, that of equality between
                                         the demand for and supply of money.
     Despite the mutual analytical
                                      and policy emphasis on stocks, there is a
major difference in styles of
                                economic policy and monetary control. Whereas

      See Rudcenko (1979) for
                               Czechoslovakia, the GDR, Hungary and Poland. For
the U.S.S.R., Peebles (1981) shows  the same
upwards jump in the mid—1960s.               picture, except for a temporary
                                      —12—



                                  stocks at the forefront by making their policy
market economy monetarists keep

targets the level of monetary aggregates, the central planners' actual monetary

control is exercised on the flow of income.
                                                                             and
     This observation reveals a common misconception about monetary planning
                                             although the main function of monetary
control in CPEs. It is often said that
                                                                  household sec-
planning in CPEs is to maintain macroeconomic equilibrium (in the
                                                                  inicroeconOiflic level.
tor), this is 4pemented with controls which operate at the
                                                                      each
These controls are applied directly by the bank, regulating credit to

enterprise on the basis of its plan.
                                             starts with aggregate macroeconomic quan-
      In this view, the planning process
                                                                 down" (disaggrega—
 tities (plans for real macro variables), which are then "broken
                                       down to the enterprise level. The resulting
 ted) through the planning hierarchy
                                                   and outputs for each enterprise,
 microeconomic quantities, targets for inputs
                                                which are summed to give the macroeco-
 then imply microecOfloifliC financial plans,
                                       There is in this scheme no aggregate—level
 nomic or aggregate monetary plan.
                                                a direct control over total currency
 control over monetary variables, not even

 emission.
                                                CPEs would be much less effective than
      If this were so, monetary policy in
                                        the micro—level control over each enterprise's
 it actually is. In implementation,
                                                     targets, and it would always be
 credit is unrelated to the aggregate monetary
                                                goals, the impossibility of suppressing
 frustrated by the priority of production
                                          But the story so far omits a central charac-
  trade credit (Podoiski, 1972), etc.
                                                                  monetary policy
  ter, incomes polçy, which in CPEs plays a leading role opposite

  and in harmony with it.
                                                                            of wage
       The primary tool of monetary control is the planning and prescribing
                                  These too are "broken down" to enterprises from
  rates and wage fund targets.
                                                   and the aggregate wage and output
  initial aggregates, just like output plans,
                                              —13—



    targets are intended to be
                                    Consistent in both production
                                                                        and consumption    That
    is, the wage rates set are intended to draw
                                                   a labour supply equal to the planned
    demand for labour; the
                            wage fund plan Corresponds to the total remuneration
                                                                                    at
    those rates, of the planned volume of
                                            employment; the production plan is related
    to an aggregate
                     target for consumption
                                             goods supply; and at the given consumer
   prices, the aggregate value of this supply is
                                                    planned to equal the demand which
   households will
                    express, given their initial
                                                   assets and the planned
                                                                          wage pay-
   ments.

          This then gives a much
                                    more direct relation between
                                                                   wages and the money sup-
   ply than in any view of a market economy,
                                                    monetarist or non—monetarist__but
  explicitly the other
                             way round: wages determine the
                                                               supply of money to the
  household sector. This relation is the key to
                                                         the monetary economics of CPEs.
  The cash plan derives
                        from wages, the essential elements of the
                                                                  credit plan
  derive from the cash
                       plan, and at the center of
                                                  monetary control is the balance
  of honey incomes and
                       expenditures of the population.
                                                        Thus the actual control is
 o'v'er the flow of incomes
                                rather than the
                                                  aggregate stock of household
 The former is the instrument                                                     money.
                                     the latter is the                       *
                                                         proximate target, with the
 ultimate targets being consujption demand and labour
                                                              supply.
         Here the planners
                             part company with monetarism
                                                            on an essential point: in
 market economy
               monetarism, there appears to be no long—run role whatsoever
                                                                            for
incomes policy, because in the long run
                                        wages have no independent effect
                                                                         on
prices or real output, and
                           in the short run
                                            controls are aimed directly at the
monetary aggregates. In the
                                  CPEs, monetary policy reduces to incomes policy
(which in fact is fiscal
                              Policy as well, parallel to our income and
                                                                         payroll
taxes——see below).
     *
      Note that if they abjure
have only a derivative           changing the general price
                         control (flow) to regulate a stock. level, the planners
                                      —14—



                                         CPEs has dealt with the intention and
     This story of monetary control in
                                         The control over wages, and thus over
the process, rather than the outcome.
                                                                                front
                                     Whereas in a market economy, divergence
the money supply, can break down.
                                 in either the public or the private sector, in
monetary targets may originate
                                                    the relation between the state
the CPE there is only one fundamental source:

enterprises and their branches of the monobank. The priority of output among
                                                     and Party secretaries means
the objectives of planners, enterprise managers
                                                                          either
that the bank will often have to concede finance for above—plan payments,
                                                                   exceed plans
directly or by extending general credit to enterprises whose costs
                                                                         "soft"
and which consequently find themselves with liquidity problems (Kornai's
                                                                  bankrupt
budget constraint). Bank managers are understandably reluctant to
                                                                      viola-
state enterprises, and this would in any case probably be useless. So

                            "financed when they overshoot (Wiles, 1977, p. 372)".
 tors of cost targets are
                                        control technique of shooting the bankers
 Even Stalin never used the monetary
                                             would have been quite effective.
 when they overfinance, which doubtless

      This weakness of monetary control in CPEs has its aggregate—level parallel
                                                                    the past
 in market economies. Here, an accommodating monetary policy has in
                                                                     this ver-
 permitted firms to pass on wage increases in price increases. Where
                                       has not sufficed, often the state has
 sion of the soft budget constraint
                                         ,Lockheed and Chrysler in the U.S.).
 directly intervened financially (e.g.
                                                                       U.K. But as
 Policy recently changed under the Conservative government in the
                                             let public sector enterprises go bank-
 in CPEs, the authorities still do not
                                                           remains an open
 rupt, whatever level of wage increases they grant. And it
                                      of applied monetarism will prove to be a
 question whether the key weakness
                                                     sector bankruptcies and conse-
  reluctance to permit major, extensive private
                              Whatever the likelihood that this will lead to a
  quent mass unemployment.
                                         —15—



   policy "U—turn", it is greater than it would be if, like the
                                                                    CPE, there were an
   incomes policy
                    Supporting monetary control.
        From a fundamental issue
                                   we now turn to a minor but
                                                                interesting analogy.
   It was once regarded
                          as a principal tenet of monetarism that the demand for

  money IS relatively insensitive to the
                                           rate of interest. Though this is now a
  less important part of the
                               monetarist story, we should note that it is easily
   applicable to CPEs. Here the
                                  monetary control mechanism has
                                                                 never given any
   role to the interest rate.
                                Although household saving or portfolio allocation
   behaviour might well vary with the interest rate, this is
                                                              impossible to estab-
   lish empirically, because the planners have altered
                                                        the interest rate so sel-
  dom (and then in discrete
                             steps, and Practically always upwards) since the mid—
  1950s. They do not use the interest rate as a
                                                  macroeconomic control variable,
  either in relation to
                         households, or to affect
                                                  aggregate enterprise investment
  demand, or aggregate inventory
                                  holdings. And the interest rate does not vary
 without an explicit planners'
                                 decision: it is not a flexible
                                                                 price in any mar-
 ket. Clearly, therefore, the central planners would
                                                        follow market economy
 monetarists in regarding the
                               price of money as the inverse of
                                                                 the price level
 of goods, rather than as the interest rate.

     So far, I have ignored
                               foreign trade and payments. But
                                                                 all existing CPEs
except the U.S.S.R. are now
                              relatively open economies, and even Soviet parti-
cipation in foreign trade is not negligible. The standard
                                                          CPE isolates the
domestic monetary system and price level from the foreign
                                                          sector and foreign
prices*; to do this, it uses the "price_equa1isat0
                                                     subsidy (tax)". At the
macroeconomic level, this is the equivalent of a continuously
                                                                  floating exchange
rate, the means by which monetarists
                                       seek to preserve the
                                                              autonomy of domestic
—----------------------
      See Wolf (1980) for details.
                                    This does not mean that domestic
policy cannot affect the foreign                                     monetary
                                 sector——see Portes (1979b).
                                    —16—



                                                                           float-
monetary policy and its effects on the domestic price level. Conversely, a

ing exchange rate eliminates the discipline exerted on domestic policy and infla-
                                                     it appears that for this disci-
tion rates by the balance of payments constraint,

pline we must substitute either central planning or a suitably austere and

restrictive monetary policy.
                                                     fixed exchange rates and a
     The alternative framework is that provided by
                                       offers an external, autonomous form of con-
gold or gold—exchange standard. This

trol over the domestic money supply and macroeconomic policy (though some mone-

tarists would now agree that even in the medium run, a considerable degree of

sterilization of the effects of reserve flows on the domestic money supply is

feasible——see Darby, 1980). The CPEs do have a doctrinal attachment to gold,

both because of its importance in Marxist monetary theory, and more practically
                                                      gold producer. But neither a
because the U.S.S.R. is the world's second—largest

foreigner nor a resident of any CPE could redeem rubles or zlotys or lei, how-

ever earned, for gold, at either the official or the market rate. Nor could a

holder of the domestic currency buy dollars or sterling, except possibly in very

limited quantities for authorized tourism.
                                                           valueless in the CPEs——
      This is not to say that convertible currencies are

 quite the contrary, as Mr. Honecker is said to have confirmed on his trip to

 West Germany, which he found really just like the East: he could buy anything

 there for Westmarks. Nevertheless, to go to a fixed exchange rate system, with

 consequent direct relations between domestic and foreign prices and money sup-

 plies, would be totally incompatible with central planning. Despite their
                                                     monetarists have also favoured
 acknowledgements to David Hume, in practice most

 floating rates.
                                                  and non—monetarists in the 1970s
      Central to the debate between monetarists

 was the issue of "crowding out", which supplanted earlier arguments over the
                                          —17—



   relative size and stability of
                                     the effects on nominal income
                                                                     of monetary injec-
   tions and changes in
                          autonomous expenditures. Monetarists assert that govern-

   ment expenditure ultimately "crowds
                                          out" (displaces or substitutes for) an
   equivalent volume of private
                                   expenditure, through some combination of interest
   rate and price level changes.
                                  The consequence is that at least in the long
                                                                               run,
   fiscal policy cannot affect output.

       In the centrally planned
                                   economy, with full employment and
                                                                       central physical
  allocation of resources, it is evident that an increase in
                                                             the state sector's
  use of output (say for investment
                                    or military expenditure) must entail an equiva-
  lent reduction in the household sector's use (consumption)
                                                                  The only exception
  could be when the planners
                             adjust net exports, but although there is some evi-
  dence they do this in the short
                                  run, it is not likely to be a feasible shift of
  the long run equilibrjum•

      Indeed, with prices fixed we have in the CPE a sort of "super
                                                                         crowding out",
 due to repressed inflation.
                                Starting in full employment
                                                              equilibrj with no
 excess demand and holding
                            wages constant, a shift in output away from consump-
 tion causes excess demand for
                                consumer goods, which discourages labour supply.
As workers find they
                      cannot spend as much as they would
                                                          like, they will react
at least partly by working less. The result will be
                                                       a fall in output, hence in
the amount available for
                          consumption, hence perhaps a further fall in labour
supply, until this "supply multiplier"
                                        process comes to rest (Barro and Gross—
man, 1974; Portes, 1981).

     If however excess demand means that some individuals
                                                              are now unable to pur-
chase particular goods or services which they find
                                                      sufficiently important, they
may offer (instead of money) goods
                                      or services at their disposal which are also
in short supply. Thus I may offer to fix your car if
                                                        you paint my flat, because
neither of us can find these
                               services we want offered for
                                                              money. If this
                                         —18—



                                                             merely an equal
opportunity to barter results in additioi labour supply (not
                                                 have a paradoxical result: the use-
reduction of hours worked for money), we
                                                             will create or
lessness of money hoards means that some unsatisfied demands
                                                 This is an unfamiliar side of Say's Law,
evoke their own corresponding supplies.
                                                                     its own demand (in
which holds that if     there   is no hoarding, supply will create

                                           services must constitute a demand for their
the sense that any offer of goods or
                                                            and with no trans-
equivalent in exchange). If barter were organised properly,
                                                                 demand.
actions costs or uncertainty, there could be no aggregate excess

      Paradoxical effects of excess demand extend to CPE foreign trade policy.
                                                typically those of excess real demand,
The macroeconomic problems of CPE5 are
                                                     certainly in the state productive
if   not   necessarily in the household sector,

sector——"overfull     employment planning". The macroeconomic problems of market
                                                     excess supply and unemployment.     In
 economies     are typically, though not always,
                                   combat unemployment is to export it, by running an
 a market economy, one way to
                           "beggar_ThY_fleighb0" policy has its CPE counterpart,
 export surplus. This
                                           running an import surplus.    When the coun-
 which is to export excess demand by
                                                each other, it is indeed a "beggar—my—
 tries of Comecon seek to do this among
                                       economies and CPE5 are in symmetrical circum-
 neighbour" policy. When market
                                          however, each will be willing to satisfy the
 stances and trade with each other,
                                           there is some way of financing the cen-
 other's policy objectives, provided
                                          with the market economies. This is precisely
 trally planned economies' deficits
                                     the early 1970s (Fortes, 1980).
 what has been happening since
                                                      relevant to the relations between
           Neither of these paradoxes is strictly
                                        but the second does lead directly to an impor-
  central planning and monetarism,
                                                                   "acid test" for a
  tant     parallel. It has been suggested (Purvis, 1980) that the
                                                  following an increase in the oil price
  monetarist is the policy recommendation
                                          —19--




    for a major oil importer.
                                The monetarist would argue that this will require a
    reduction in real income and the real value of
                                                    money holdings, so that the nomi-
   nal stock of money should
                              certainly not be increased; while a non—monetarist
   would argue that the oil price rise will have the
                                                       deflationary effect of an
   indirect tax increase,
                           so that monetary policy should
                                                              be expansionary. On this
   test, the macroeconomics of
                                 central planning must be monetarist: the tax
   effect does not operate and
                                 full employment is not
                                                           threatened (except insofar
  as the real income loss
                            may induce bottlenecks in
                                                          Production); the only alter-
  native to reducing real incomes and demand is to run
                                                       an import surplus, export-
  ing the excess demand created
                                by the deterioration of the terms of trade.
       Let us return to the roles of fiscal and
                                                  monetary Policies in a closed
   economy. The monetarist would say, in view of the relation between
                                                                         money stock
  and nominal income, the
                           stability of the demand for
                                                         money relative to consump-
  tion behaviour, and tcrowding out", that fiscal
                                                     policy has no independent status
  and should adjust to
                       monetary targets. In fact, fiscal
                                                             policy is implied by
  these targets and by the
                            government budget constraint, given a stable private
 sector demand for money. Thus
                                  the nionetarist experiment in the U.K. has stressed

 the (empirically weak) relationship between the
                                                    government deficit, its borrowing
 requirement, and the monetary
                                 aggregates.
      In the CPE, with no
                            secondary credit expansion and
                                                              no Possibility for the
private sector to create
                            money, fiscal policy is equivalent
                                                                  to monetary policy.
The relation is strong and direct. The planners
                                                    always plan and normally achieve
a balanced budget or slight
                              surplus. A surplus would be deflationary, but it is
more straightforw to place
                                 the responsibility for
                                                     any inflationary pressures
directly on the bank, where it belongs (since an excessive
                                                           increase in the money
supply to households can be identified
                                       with an excessive increase
                                                                  in credits to
enterprises, net of their deposits with
                                        the bank).
                                   —20—



    Monetarism has long been associated with the case against "fine—tuning" the

                                discretionary monetary policy.      Friedman's
economy, using an activist or

early arguments rested on the authorities' lack of knowledge about the mechanism

of transmission of monetary effects, the lags, etc., so that the private sector
                                                      to follow a fixed rule. A
would be more stable if monetary policy were simply

more recent justification of a similar conclusion is the argument from the sup-
                                                      that agents use information
posed rationality of private sector expectations:

efficiently in making their forecasts about the economy and taking decisions

based on them, and that such information must include' knowledge of any systema-
                                          If so, it is argued, the path of real
tic policy pursued by the authorities.
                                                                           anti-
output is affected only by changes in the money supply which agents cannot

cipate, and so cannot be part of a systematic policy.
                                              the planners do not want or need an
     For the CPE, we have already seen that

active monetary policy, in the sense of one which seeks to influence output or

employment. Hence the rule that the state budget should balance, so that any

change in household cash will be the mirror image of a change in enterprises'

aggregate net liabilities to the monobank. This in turn should be consistent

with the material balances and wage plans.

      The planners know, of course, that there will be some overshooting (and

 hence bank overfinancing of enterprises), and that they must compensate by some

 conscious underplanning of wages. The hypothesis that expectations are formed
                                           the CPE than in the market economy,
 rationally is perhaps more plausible in
                                          better defined, better known to agents;
 because the planners' policy rules are

 and their policies change less often.
                                                      that monetarism as theory and
      Thus, a wide range of considerations suggest

 policy might work better in CPE circumstances, with soviet—style financial
                                           —21—



    Institutions, than it does in
                                   our developed market economies. Our monetary
                                                                                  sys-
    tem is excessively
                       intricate, and this makes
                                                  monetarist regularjti8 less regular
   than they might be. These complexities
                                             appear to come at a high cost with rela-
   tively little benefit.
                            Certainly bankers,
                                                Particularly central bankers, could
   easily adjust to the changed
                                 circumstances. Indeed, the two major classes of
   economic agents whose behaviour
                                    seems system_invariant
                                                            are central bankers and
   peasants. Soviet bankers
                               would be quite at home
                                                        at meetings of the BIS in Basle,
  and Polish bankers
                     identified more with the Outlook of the Western bankers
                                                                             with
  whom they dealt than that of their own
                                         economic planning, ministry and Party
  officials

       Successful monetary
                              Planning and control in a CPE requires a thoroughgoing,
  serious incomes policy,
                             coordinated with the
                                                    monetary targets. It is in this
  light ironic that if the
                             current British experiment
                                                          (1979—81) should fail, the
 country might react by going
                                 much further towards
                                                        central planning than ever
 before. Should this
                         occur, it might well involve
                                                        a new structure for the bank-
 ing system; and it is difficult
                                    to imagine such a set of
                                                               policies without a
 serious policy for incomes, whatever the political
                                                        Opposition. But either con-
 sistent monetarism or
                         consistent central Planning
                                                        is so painful a discipline that
 it may require a degree of political
                                        control impossible to realise in a Pluralis-
tic Society.

      The dictionary definition of ttfellow_travellervv
                                                        is one who Supports or sym—
pathises with the prograimne of an organised
                                              group without actually joining it;
especially a supporter of the
                               Communist Party. Thus there is an asymmetry, and
clearly room for a final
                          paradox: my title left
                                                   open the question of who follows
whom. Perhaps the dictionary definition
                                         suggests the wrong leader. Professor
Friedman might be alarmed if he looked over his
                                                left shoulder.
                                     —22—



                                  REFERENCES


                                  Suppressed inflation and the supply multi-
Barro, R., and H. Grossman, 1974,
     plier, Review of Economic Studies 41, 87-104.
                                                                      and
Burkett, J., R. Portes, and D. Winter, 1981, MacroeconOmic adjustment
                                        economies, NBER Working Paper No.
     foreign trade of centrally planned

                                   models and central price_setting in the Soviet
Campbell, R., 1970, Macroeconomicetal., Essays in economic analysis and policy
     economy, in: Gehrels, F.,
     (Bloomington: Indiana U.P.), 253—270.
                               and monetary control under pegged exchange rates:
Darby, M., 1980, Sterilization                                         Paper No.
     theory and evidence, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     449.
                                               from state socialism, De Economist
Ellman, M., 1979, Full employment__lessons
     127, 489—512.
                        financial flows, and credit in the Soviet Union (Cam—
Garvy, G., 1977, Money,
     bridge, Mass: Ballinger).
                                 and trend in the rate of economic growth in
Goldmann, J., 1964, Fluctuations
                               Economics of Planning 4, 88—98.
     some socialist countries,
                                 SOVMOD I: A macroeconomic model of the Soviet
Green, D., and C. Higgins, 1977,
     Union (New York: Academic Press).

                              and economic theory, Economica 47, 1—17.
 Hahn, F., 1980, Monetarism
                                   planning and its impact on foreign trade adjust-
 Holzman, F., 1968, Soviet central                             International trade
      ment mechanisms, in: Brown, A., and E. Neuberger, eds.,
                                      Univ. of California Press).
      and central planning (Berkeley,
                                             (Amsterdam: North—Holland).
 Kornai, J., 1981, Economics of shortage
                            The structure of monetarism (New York: Norton).
 Mayer, T., et al., 1978,
                                                               the treatment of
 Muellbauer, J., 1978, Macro theory vs. macroeconOifletrics
                                        models, Birkbeck Discussion Paper in
       disequilibrium in macroeconomic
       Economics No. 59.
                                    and expenditures of the population of the Soviet
  Peebles, G., 1981, Money incomes           forthcoming in Hong Kong Economic Papers.
       Union: an East European comparison,
                                         and monetary control (Cambridge:    C.U.P.).
  Podolski, T., 1972, Socialist banking
                                   equilibrium under central planning, Institute for
  Portes, R., 1974, MacroeconOmic                   of Stockholm, Seminar Paper No. 40.
        International Economic Studies, University
                                         —23—



   Portes, R., 1977, The control of inflation:
        ence, Economjca 44, 109—130.              lessons from East
                                                                      European experi-

  Portes, R., 1979a, Review
                            article: SOW4OD, Economic Journal 89, 669—674.
  Portes, R., l979b, Internal and external balance
       Journal of Comparative                      in a centrally planned
                              Economics 3, 325—345                        economy,

  Portes, R., 1980, Effects of the world economic
       economies The World                        crisis on the East
                            Economy 3, 13—52.                        European

  Portes, R., 1981, Macroeconomic
                                    equilibrium and
        planned economies, Economic                                 in centrally
                                     Inquiry, forthcoming.
  Portes, R., and D.
                      Winter, 1977, The
                                         Supply of consumption goods in centrally
       planned economies, Journal of Comparative Economics
                                                             1, 351—365.
 Portes, R., and D.
                      Winter, 1978, The demand for
                                                    money and for consumption
       in centrally planned economies, Review of Economics                    goods
                                                             and Statistics 60, 8—18.
 Portes, R., and D.
                     Winter, 1980, Disequjlib estimates for consumption
      markets in centrally
                             planned economies, Review of Economic Studies    goods
      159.
                                                                            47, 137—

Purvis, D., 1980, Monetarism:
                                 a review, Canadian Journal
                                                              of Economics 13, 96—122.
Rudcenko S., 1979,
                    Household money income, expenditure and monetary
     Czechoslovakia                                                  assets in
                      CDR, Hungary and Poland,
     Osteuropas 8, 431—450.                    1956—1975, Jahrbuch der Wirtschaft

Wiles, P., 1969, Counist
                             international economics (Oxford:
                                                                Blackwell).
Wiles, P., 1977, Economic
                            institutions compared (Oxford:
                                                          Blackwell).
Wolf, T., 1980, On the adjustment of centrally
                                               planned economies to ternal eco-
     nomic disturbances, in: Marer, P., and J.M.
     integration and East—West                    Nontias, eds., East European
     Press).                   trade (Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana
                                                                     University
