                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             SEIGNIORAGE AND FIXED EXCHANGE RATES:
               AN OPTIMAL INFLATION TAX ANALYSIS




                        Stanley Fischer



                     Working Paper No. 783




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         October 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations and International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #783
                                                     October 1981




                       Seigniorage and Fixed Exchange Rates:
                         An Optimal Inflation Tax Analysis



                                     ABSTRACT



    A country that decides to fix its exchange rate thereby gives up

control over its own inflation rate and the determination of the revenue

received from seigniorage. If the country goes further and uses a foreign

money, it loses all seigniorage. This paper uses an optimal inflation tax

approach to analyze the consequences for optimal rates of income taxation

and welfare of the alternative exchange rate and monetary arrangements.

From the viewpoint of seigniorage, a system in which the country is free

to determine its own rates of inflation is optimal; fixed exchange rates

are second best, and the use of a foreign money is worse. The paper notes

that seigniorage   is only one of the factors determining the choice of op-
timal   exchange rate regime, but also points out that rates of seigniorage

collection are high, typically accounting for five or more percent of

government revenue.



                                                Stanley Fischer
                                                Hoover Institution
                                                Stanford University
                                                Stanford, CA 94305
                                                (415)   497—9175
                                                                  Fischer



                                                                September 1981



    Seigniorage and Fixed Exchange Rates: An Optimal Inflation Tax Analysis


                             Stanley Fischer*


       In choosing fixed over flexible exchange rates, a country gives up

the right to determine its own rate of inflation, and thus the amount of

revenue collected by the inflation tax. This constraint imposes an excess

burden that should be included in the cost/benefit analysis of the choice

of exchange rate regime. If the country goes further, by giving up its

seigniorage and using a foreign money in place of the domestic money, it

loses more tax revenue and has to adjust government spending and other

taxes accordingly. The choice of exchange rate regime is thus related to

questions discussed in optimal inflation tax analysis.

      This paper presents an analysis of the optimal inflation tax in Section

1.1 The consequences of a constraint on the rate of money creation are

studied in Section II, while Section III analyzes the effects of the loss

of revenue from the inflation tax. Section IV presents an interpretation

of the preceding analysis as applied to alternative exchange rate regimes.

The interest in the paper derives from the explicit calculation of optimal

inflation taxes for a specific utility function and production function,

embodied in an intertemporal framework, as well as from the application to

exchange rate regimes.


I. The Optimal Inflation Tax.

      The representative infinitely lived family in the economy is growing

at rate n, and derives utility from private consumption, from the services

*
   Department of Economics, M.I.T., Research Associate, National Bureau of
Economic Research, and Visiting Scholar, Hoover Institution. I am indebted
to Jeffrey Miron for research assistance. Research support was provided by
the National Science Foundation.
                                             —2—


provided by holding real balances,2'3 and from leisure, as well as

consumption of a public good. There are no non—distorting taxes, and the

government finances its expenditures through the issue of money and taxes

on labor income. It is convenient to assume there is no capital.

       The utility function of the representative household is

        (1) V =
                  J U (c,m,x,g) et dt
where c is per capita consumption, m is per capita real balances, x=—i

is leisure (and         is labor supply), and g is government spending;            5>o is the

discount rate or rate of time preference.

       The household budget constraint is

        (2) c + i'n + (IT+n) in    w(1—t) Q

where Jr is the rate of inflation, n the growth rate of family population,

w is the wage rate, and t the tax rate on labor income. It is assumed

throughout that w is constant.4

       The household maximizes (1)       subject       to the budget constraint (2), and

taking    g, government spending, as given. The government budget constraint is
                         M
        (3) g = twi +        =    tw   +m+    (Jr+n)   UI




where    M/PN is the flow of real resources, per capita, the government obtains by
printing money. (N is population).
     The analysis proceeds in stages. First, the household
optimization problem, taking iT and t as given, is solved. I              then   note
that    there is no inherent dynamics in this model, since there is no

capital accumulation, and that for a given rate of nominal money, 0, the
                                           —3—

rational expectations solution for the price level will have the economy

jump initially to its steady state, in which th = 0 and TT = 0—n.         The

remainder of the analysis is therefore conducted under the assumption that

the economy is in steady state.

       At the second stage, a Cobb—Douglas utility function is used to study

the optimal tax problem. For any given level of g, there is an optimal

coubination of taxes to finance the spending. The optimal tax combination

and its variation as g changes are examined. Finally, I ask what the

optimal level of g is, under the assumption that the government maximizes (1),

subject to the private sector behavioral functions and its budget constraint

(3).


       The first order conditions for maximization of (1) subject to (2) are

       (4) 0 =U —     A


       (5) 0 = U   — Xw(1—t)

       (6) A =   (it +n+)   A —
                                  Urn

where A is the multiplier associated with the budget constraint (2), and

from (4), is also the marginal utility of consumption.5

       Now, consideration of equilibrium paths in which IT,     the   rate of

inflation in (6), is equated to the rate of inflation implied by solution

of the full system (4)—(6)         for given constant 0 will show that the

only   path that converges to a steady state is one that goes immediately
to that steady state.6 Thus we can set A =         0   and work henceforth with
the steady state system, (4), (5) and
                                            —4—




       (6)' O=U_X (Tr+n÷5)
      The general optimal tax analysis approach could now be applied but

I prefer to use a specific, Cobb—Douglas, example to illustrate the

relevant considerations.7 Assume

       (7) U (c,m,x,g)       camx'(gc       with y,E > 0
                                            and    a+-Ey+E   <1

Then, uing equations (4) —        (6)',   and the budget constraint (2):



                 ctw(1—t)                                          Bc
       (8)c=
                        +Y



                                                      Bm
       (9) m = ________________
               (c++y)B + (a-4-)


       (1O)Z= (1—                     )




       The properties of the functions (8) — (10) are unsurprising, except for the

absence of a wage or labor tax effect on labor supply. This last result is

a consequence of the cancelling of income and substitution effects and ensures,

in this model, that total taxes from labor rise as the income tax rate

inc r ea Se s.


       Note from (9), that for an interior maximum with m>0, it is required that



       (11)         >   -    (a+y )


 which implies also that O+S> 0

      The government budget constraint (3) implies that for any tax rates,

t   and   0
                                           —5—




                   —
                 g - W
                             at (8+5) +   6
       (12 )
                           (a+y)   0 + 6(a+)

where I have substituted from (9) and (10) into (3). It is convenient to

define

        (13)     11

                      w2
which    is a measure of the        share of government spending in potential (full time

work) output.

       Different combinations of 0 and t can be used to finance any feasible

level of government spending. Locus BB in Figure 1 shows those combinations

in t, S space, for a given value of p. The locus does not necessarily

cross the t and S axes, since there is a maximum i        that   can be financed

through exclusive use of either the income tax or seignorage. In particular,

if there is no use of seignorage (0=0), then it is required that

                      p



When     t=rl,   the government is using the income tax to appropriate all income

and government spending is given by8:

         (14)         p1 =

         In    the case of non—use of the income tax, maximum g is achieved as S

 goes to infinity and

         (15)         P2

 Since         is likely to be small relative to a and y, the maximum steady state

 (g/w2) that can be financed by seigniorage alone is also likely to be small.

Use of the inflation tax does increase the level of output through its effect

on labor supply; thus when the inflation tax alone is used to finance govern-

ment spending, the level of output is higher than when the income tax is used

 to finance the same level of government spending.
                               t



                                        t= 1




                               ¶1




                                        S.



                                                        B'
                                                                                 0




0 = — _______
      a + t3 +y




Figure 1: Alternative Tax Combinations to Finance a Given Level of Government Spending.
                                             —6—


        The maximum attainable level of government spending when both taxes

are used, 3.i3 is obtained by setting t=l and letting 0 go to infinity

in (12)
                         a+e,
        p16'
        '     /
       Whether the BB locus crosses the t and 0 axes as shown in Figure 1 deoenls on

the value of p. For the BB locus in Figure 1, p is less than both p1

and               As p increases the locus shifts up to the right. The B'B' locus

applies for a level of government spending larger than 2 but smaller

than          and p3.

       The BB locus shows combinations of t and 0 that can be used to finance

a given level of government spending. But of course only one of these

coiibinations will be the optimal tax combination for given P.                 Given t,

e and    g,       the consumer demand and supply functions (8)—(lO)

imply the flow of utility



        (17)        u* =((+y)0 +                                          gE



where               is a constant of no significance.

        The marginal disutilities of the two tax rates and hence the slope

of an indifference curve in (O,t) space are obtained from (17), treating

g as given. Then equating the slope of an indifference curve to that of

the budget constraint BB, and solving, pairs of 0 and t that are optimal

for each level of government spending are obtained. This optimal tax

locus is given by:


        (18) ot        [(c÷+y) 0   +   6(+2y)]   —   cB(a+--y)   =


        The optimal tax locus, TT, is shown             in Figure    2.


Its slope is
        t

                F



                                               I
                                           t




T
                                                   8


                    0




    Figure 2: The Optimal Tax Locus, TI.
                                                   —7—




                     (1-t)(c-i-+y)
      (19)     dO - B(a++y)        +(a--2y)

which is positive. Thus both the seigniorage and the labor income
tax   increase as government spending rises. Corresponding to each
point on TT is a level of government spending. Whether the TT locus
crosses the 0=0 axis at t>0, as shown, depends on the sign of a(cz+y)—y,
the right hand side of (18). Since is related to the share of
spending on real balance rentals, it is likely to be small and thus
the case shown in Figure 2 is more likely.
      The optimum government policy is found by choosing the best point
on Figure 2. This is done by maximizing (17) with respect to Oand
t after substituting for g from the government budget constraint (12):
 the resultant expression for the optimal rate of seigniorage is


                 2
       (20)     0 (c.+B)(a++y) +0[(a--)(ct+y) ÷ a(a++y) - ye]
                                         2
                                    +5       [a(ci+y) —   y(+e)]   = 0


       Three   comments about (20) are in order. First, assuming that the coefficient

 of S in the equation is positive, there will be no positive root of (20)

 unless
                 a (a+y) <   'y'    (+c)
This condition requires government spending optimally to take a relatively

large share of output. For values of the parameters that generate

approximately the observed racios of consumption to income, consumption to

real balances, labor to leisure, and government spending to consumption,

in the U.S. economy, the condition is not satisfied. Thus the current

analysis does not give support to the notion that optimal rates of
                                     —8—


seigniorage can be high. In part, no doubt, this is a result of the func-

tional form being used. It may also reflect the absence of a banking system

in this model.1°


     Second, the analysis nowhere has had occasion to enter the variables

S and i   separately.   Thus in this example the optimal use of seigniorage

is independent of the rate of population growth.'1 The optimal steady state

rate of inflation therefore falls one for one as the population growth

rate rises.

     Third, the optimal rate of seigniorage use, 0, is directly proportional

to 6, the rate of time preference. If optimal 0 is positive, it increases

proportionately with 6, which may be thought of in this context as the interest

rate. If optimal e is negative, then higher 6 would mean a lower optimal

rate of inflation, which is consistent with the optimal quantity of money

argument.

II. Constrained Optimal Taxation.

     The optimal position for this economy to be at is a point like A

in Figure 2.    In this section I consider the effects of constraining the

rate of money growth, 0, to a level B. Such a constraint would apply

for example, if the exchange rate were kept fixed. In terms of Figure 2,

the government is constrained to the locus FF. Two questions about the

rate of income tax to be used are considered.

     First, we could ask what rate tf would be necessary to maintain

any specified level of government spending, for instance the optimal level

associated with point A. That is a purely technical question to be

answered using the budget constraint (12).
                                          —9—



The implied point B is shown, illustratively, in Figure 2.

       The second question asks what, given the constraint 0, is the optimal

level of government spending. The answer is found by maximizing (17)

with respect to t, after substituting in for g from the government budget

equation (12), and treating B as a constant. The resultant locus, giving

optimal t (and by implication from-(12), also g) as a function of

, is

 21        t   —
               - ______   _____________


This   optimal income tax locus, tt, in Figure 2, is negatively sloped and

lies above TT to the left of the optimal point A. When some seigniorage

is taken away from the government, it optimally reduces government spending

and increases its use of the labor income tax. Given the constraint on

  in Figure 2, the optimal point is C.


       Figure 3 shows the utility implications of giving up control over

0. The curve describes the level of utility traced out along tt. Point C

shows the utility level corresponding to optimal policy when 0 is fixed at

0. The utility level corresponding to B, where government spending is

held to the level that obtains at A, lies below C. The utility loss from

A to C can be compensated for by some amount of resources, which is not in

general equal to the amount of seigriiorage lost in moving from A to C.

In the context of discussion of fixed exchange rates, that amount of com-

pensation is the excess burden of accepting fixed exchange rates.
                                                               A



                                          D
                                          B




Figure 3: Utility Implications of Alternative Monetary and Exchange Arrangements.
                                         —10—


III. Losing the Inflation Revenue.

           Finally suppose that the revenue generated by seigniorage is no

longer available to the government. This would occur if, for instance,

the country used a foreign money. The maximal attainable level of

utility is certainly less than that shown by C in Figure 3. The govern-

ment loses a source of revenue, and will again optimally reduce government

spending below its level at C and increase the income tax rate above

its level at C. The optimal tax rate is now


(22)      t=

which   is independent of e;   however, government spending optimally increases
with 0.    This is a result of the fact that an increase in 0, which may

be thought of as increase in the rate of inflation, increases labor supply

and thus income tax revenue.


        Corresponding to the higher rate of income tax when the government

 loses seigniorage, optimal holdings of real balances will be lower than

 the level corresponding to point C in Figure 3, even though the inflation

 rate is the same. Point D in Figure 3 represents the maximum utility

 attainable when the government loses its seigniorage.


IV.     Exchange Rate Regimes.
               The above analysis is relevant to one aspect of the differences

among exchange rate regimes. The full optimal tax analysis presented in

Section I describes the options available when the exchange rate is

flexible. The excess burden imposed by the constraint on 0 in Section II

describes one of the costs of adoption of a fixed rate regime which, however,

uses a domestic money. The rate of money creation U in Section II is that

rate required to maintain fixity of the exchange rate. Section III

calculates the further cost of giving up the domestic money, using instead
                                   —11—



a foreign money. The rate of inflation will in this case too be consistent

with the rate of money growth 0.

     The ranking of utilities of these sets of arrangments is unambiguous.

Free choice of the rate of money growth is preferred to the situation

where the rate of money growth is fixed at 0, with use of a domestic money.

Utility at point A in Figure 3 is undoubtedly above (or no lower than)

that at C. Use of a foreign money imposes a further cost, implying that

point D is below C in Figure 3.

     It is entirely reasonable to ask whether the seigniorage considera-

tions emphasized in this paper are of any empirical significance. The

possibly surprising answer is yes. For the industrial countries, over

the period 1960—1978, seigniorage provided 5.7% of government revenue,

representing 1% of GNP on average. In some other countries, such as Greece

and Spain, seigniorage revenue exceeded 10% of government revenue.'2

Such high rates of seigniorage are perhaps non—optimal in the light of the

preceding analysis, but certainly indicate that seigniorage is a factor

to be taken into account in the choice of exchange rate regime. But of

course it is not the only consideration determining, the desirability of

alternative exchange arrangements.
                                                                    Fischer



                                 Footnotes



1. Phelps (1973) is the original reference in this tradition. See also

Aghevli (1977), Drazen (1979) and Brock and Turnovsky (1980) for further

developments

2. Fischer (1974) discusses the issue of money in the production (and utility)

function, which is emphasized by Thomas Sargent in his comments on this paper

and the paper byGuille.rmo Ortiz. The essential point is that of revealed prefer-

ence: putting money in the utility (or production) function is equivalent

to postulating a demand function for money. Deeper analyses of the demand for

money require a more detailed specification of the transactions environment.

It is well known that the choice of medium of exchange in any model of trans-

actions is extremely delicate in that there is no good reason for one asset

rather than another to serve as medium of exchange. The Kareken—Wallace (1981)

indeterminacy of exchange rates in a multi—country world represents the same

logical difficulty as that of accounting for the use of non—interest bearing

currency in a single country where there are alternative assets. This prob-

lem was stressed by Keynes (1936) and Samuelson (1947) as the essential diffi-

culty of monetary theory. In the light of these difficulties at the theore-

tical level, it is remarkable that there is so little difficulty in getting

private economic agents to use the domestic currency: it takes extraordinary

rates of inflation before there is a flight from a given national currency.

The theoretical challenge is to explain this phenomenon.

3. For use of a similar framework in a multi—asset context, see Fischer (1972)

4.   If capital were included in the model, w would become variable.

5. For a similar optimization problem, see Fischer (1979).

6. See ibid. for the type of argument needed.
7. The Cobb—Douglas form does not permit the level of government spending

to affect the rates of substitution between other pairs of variables. Thus

a utility function like (7) cannot, for instance, reflect the notion that

government and private consumption are close substitutes.

8.   I an grateful to Olivier Blanchard for correcting an error at this point

in a previous draft.

9. For instance, the likelihood of positive use of seigniorage at the optimum

would be increased if real balances entered the utility function in Stone—

Geary form as (m—). See Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) for an example. In the

present paper use of the Stone—Geary form turns (20) into a quartic equation

and thus is not appealing. Barro (1972) argues that optimal rates of infla-

tion are low.

10. Calvo and Frenkel (1981) show that the introduction of a banking system

with fractional reserves in an optimal inflation tax analysis increases the

optimal inflation rate.

11. Cf. Friedman (1971).

12. More detailed estimates of the amount of revenue collected from seignior—

age are presented in Fischer (1982), along with a less formal discussion of

the analysis presented in the present paper.
                                                                     Fischer




                                 ibliography



Aghevli, Bijan B.   1977. Inflationary finance and growth. Journal of Political

     Economy 85, 6: 1295—1308.

Barro, Robert J. 1972. Inflationary finance and the welfare cost of inflation.

     Journal of Political Economy 80, 5: 978—1001.

Brock, William A., and Turnovsky, Stephen J. 1980. The analysis of macroeconomic

     policies in perfect foresight equilibrium. International Economic Review,

     forthcoming.

Calvo, Cuillermo, and Frenkel, Jacob A. 1981. Title to be supplied later.

Diamond, Peter, and Mirriess, James A. 1971. Optimal taxation and public

     production: II. American Economic Review 61, 3: 261—278

                                                              Journal of
Drazen, Allan. 1979. The optimal rate of inflation revisited. __________

     Economic Theory 5, 2: 231—248.

Fischer, Stanley. 1972. Money, income, wealth, and welfare. Journal of

     Economic Theory 4, 2: 289—311.

____________    1974.   Money and the production function. Economic Inquiry

     XII, 4: 517—533.

_____________   1979.   Capital accumulation on the transition path in a monetary

     optimizing model. Econometrica 47, 6.

                1982. Seigniorage and the case for a national money. Journal

     of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Friedman, Milton. 1971. Government revenue from inflation. Journal of

     Political Economy, 79, 4: 846—856.

Karken, John H., and Wallace, Neil. 1981. On the indeterminacy of equilibrium

     exchange rates. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The general theory of employment, interest,

    and money. New York: Harcourt Brace.

Saniuelson, Paul A. 1947. Foundations of economic analysis. Cambridge,

    Mass.: Harvard University Press.
