NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOMESTIC TAX LICY AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT:
SOME EVIDENCE

David G. Hartman

Working Paper No. T84

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

October 1981

The research reported here is part of
in International Studies and Taxation

the

NBER's research programs

and is part of the project in
Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

"Domestic Tax Policy and Foreign Investment: Some Evidence"

ABSTRACT

Investment abroad has come to play a major role in the total investlittle attentLon
ment undertaken by U.S. firms. Despite this development, veryinvestment.
has been paid to the impacts of domestic tax policy on foreign
changes in domestiu
tax rules ordinarily also apply to foreign—source income, policy changes should
affect foreign and domestic investment similarly. However, the fact that the
tax on foreign—source income is deferred until the income is repatriated represents a crucial difference in the treatment of foreign and domestic income. So
long as the U.S. tax is deferred, the effective U.S. tax rate on foreign—source
income can be shown to be irrelevant to a firm' s optimal foreign reinvestment
decision. Foreign investment is now largely accomplished by firms reinvesting
a
earnings abroad, so the reinvestment decision is of primary importance. Thu ,
to
both
domestic
and
decrease in the effective U.S. tax rate which applies
foreign investment income can be thought of as a cut in the tax on domestic
investment income, which is encouraging to domestic investment (perhaps at the
expense of foreign investment), combined with a cut in the tax on foreign
investment income, which has no effect on the optimal foreign reinvestment decision. Consequently, the impacts on foreign and domestic investment of an
apparently neutral policy could be very different.

One reason has been the presumption that, since

Another reason that the response of foreign investment has been
neglected in domestic policy discussions is the lack of evidence on the magnt—
tude of that response. This paper utilizes the theory just described to confirm
that foreign investment is influenced negatively and quite strongly by the
after—tax rate of return to domestic investment. A further test, in which a
tax" term are included
"gross domestic rate of return" term and a "domestic
in
absolute value, confirming
separately, produces coefficients virtually equal
that the net domestic rate of return is the appropriate variable. The results
indicate that a tax incentive which has been found to raise net domestic investment by a dollar reduces net foreign investment by at least twenty cents. This
conclusion is further reinforced by results from a forward—looking (Tobin's q)
model.

While these results do not point to the primary outcome of a domestic
policy change being a domestic—foreign reallocation of the capital stock, they
indicate that a significant reallocation does take place. With open econony tax
analysis still in its infancy, the question of how this evidence alters the
usual conclusions is largely an open one.
David G. Hartman
National Bureau of Economic
Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138

"Domestic Thx Policy and Foreign Investment: Some Evidence"
David G. Hartman*
National Bureau of Economic Research
and
Harvard University
The rate of investment in the United States has recently become the

focus of unprecedented concern. Feldstein (1981), for example, demonstrates
that net fixed nonresidential investment as a fraction of GNP dropped by nearly
forty percent between the late l960's and the late 1910's. He has also argued
that much of the investment decline can be attributed to tax laws and, in
particular, to the interaction of tax laws with the high rates of inflation

experienced in the l910s.l Recent initiatives to alter the tax treatment of
capital income have been based, at least in part, on a desire to increase th
rate of capital formation.
At the same time that increasing the rate of domestic investment bs

become an objective of tax policy, foreign investment by U.S.—based firms ha3
come to play a major role in the total business investment undertaken. Inded,
foreign

investment as a fraction of GNP grew at nearly the same rate as dome3tic

investment fell over the most recent decade.

In the theoretical public finance literature, serious attention is for
the first time being devoted to the possible inadequacies of the closed—ecOfl)rnY

models of taxation on which our predictions of tax effects are based. For
example, Goulder, Shoven, and 1Jhalley (forthcoming) have recently demonstrated

that savings and investment incentives can produce outcomes that differ grealy
depending on the elasticities of international

investment with respect to ra;es

of return at home and abroad. Unfortunately, there is virtually no evidence on

10/09/81

—2—

which to base an assumption about these crucial parameters.
In fact, even the size of U.S. foreign investment relative to dom€tic

investment has often been poorly understood. It is argued here that, becaus
figures on foreign investment should be compared to net domestic investment,
investment abroad by U.S. firms has reached levels approximately as high as ialf
of the domestic counterpart in recent years. With foreign investment of thi;

magnitude, it is at least plausible that the closed econonr models of taxatin
would lead to inaccurate conclusions,

regarding the impacts of investment an

savings policies on total investment.

This paper examines the importance of the response in U.S. foreign
direct investment to changes in domestic tax policy..2

First, a brief review of

the recent pattern of direct investment and of the literature on its deter-

minants will be presented. In Section II, a simple theory of foreign investient
is developed. Evidence from the past fifteen years is then used to both
strongly confirm the implications of the theory and to indicate the existenc of
highly significant domestic policy effects on foreign investment.

In the

conclusion, the importance of these results for domestic policy analysis is
considered.

I. Foreign Investment and Existing Evidence on Its Determinants
As noted in the introduction, investment abroad has come to occupy a

major position in the total investment undertaken by U.S. firms. As Figure J
illustrates, increases in foreign investment coupled with domestic investmen.,
declines have resulted in foreign investment between about one—third and one-half as large as net domestic fixed investment.

Indeed, foreign direct inve3t—

ment as a fraction of GNP increased between the late 1960's and the late 191)'s

.01

.02

.03

.04

.135

NOTES:

65

1

74 75 76 7? 78 79
73
72
70
71
69
68
66 67
described in the text.
Investment figures are net of depreciation, as
adjusted to remove the influence
The net foreign investment figure for 1974 was
18.
of a major oil divestiture, as discussed in footnote

DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN IHUESTMENT
AS A FRACTION OF GNP

FIGURE

—3—

by over 115 percent, while the comparable domestic measure fell by nearly 40

percent. It should be noted that foreign direct investment is a figure most
accurately compared to net domestic investment, since one component of foreign
investment, earnings reinvested abroad, is net of depreciation allowances.3
The fact that foreign direct investment is by nature a net figure

helps explain why the situation depicted in Figure 1 diverges so significantly
from the popular perception of the relative size of foreign to domestic

investment. Goldsbrough (1919), for example, illustrates the relative importance of direct investment by reporting that it is less than five percent as

large as gross domestic fixed capital formation.
These figures demonstrating the importance of foreign investment might
also seem surprising in light of the important and widely—cited conclusion of
Feldstein and Horioka (1980) that domestic savings and domestic investment are

very closely linked; that is, most of the world appears to be best characterized
as consisting of economies nearly closed to net international investment flows.

One explanation is that the previous result was based on a study of a cross—
section of countries, so the U.S., as only one observation, does not necessarily

exhibit such a savings—investment relationship. More importantly, net business
fixed investment represents only a small fraction of total gross national

investment. So, while investment abroad is a large part of the net investment
undertaken by U.S. firms, it may not appear significant as a fraction of total
national savings or investment.
The existence of sizable foreign investment flows does not, of course,
hold any implication for the role of rates of return (and, hence, tax rates)

in determining investment flows. In fact, efforts to relate the level of

_)4

foreign

investment to rates of return at home and abroad have met with a

striking lack of success.5 Hufbauer (1915) was led to the conclusion that there
is no "observable connection between HNC expansion, cost of capital at home, and

average earnings on investment abroad. The behavior of MNCs might have ratier
little to do with the classical theory of foreign investment." As a result,
studies of direct investment have often resorted to explaining U.S. investment
abroad based on investment levels in the U.S. (Herring and Willett (1912) arid

Kohihagen (1911)), on GNP in the host countries (Scaperlanda and Mauer (l97)),
or on total investment levels in the host countries (Snoy (1975)).

Notable exceptions to the ad hoc nature of much of the work on fo'eign

investment are the Jorgenson—type neoclassical investment models, which hav
been estimated for foreign investment by, for example, Stevens (1972), Kwack

(1912), and Goldsbrough (1919). While these models provide good explanations of
foreign investment, it can be argued that the encouraging results are mainly

to the numerator of the "optimal capital stock" term (output or
foreign subsidiaries), rather than the denominator (the cost of capital) which

attributable

is

of primary interest for policy analysis. In fact, none of these models

incorporates tax effects in the cost of capital measure, but it would be
straightforward to replace the cost of capital term by the tax—adjusted cost of

capital, as Kopits (1972) has done in his study of dividend remittances. One
could also test the separate significance of the tax—adjusted cost of capitii

term and

the

output term.

There are more serious questions about the applicability of the

neoclassical investment model, however. One important aspect of the model i
that there is no connection between the domestic and foreign investment deci—

—5—

sions of the firm. That is, the foreign subsidiary is implicitly viewed as a
perfect competitor, even with the domestic parent firm. With foreign production
and domestic production often representing alternative means of serving the same
markets, this characterization leaves a good deal to be desired.
Looked at in a slightly different way, the neoclassical closed—economy
investment model is used to determine the combination of factors optimally used

to produce a given output. The foreign investment decision, by contrast to the
closed—economy investment decision, primarily concerns the location of

production. Thking the location of production (the level of foreign subsidiary
output) as given in a model of foreign investment neglects the most interesting
aspect of the problem.
As we shall see in Section III, the recent evidence suggests that a
simple economic model which meets these objections can be used to successfully
explain annual movements in direct investment and to test for the effects of

taxes. A crucial element in that success is the careful theoretical specification of the influence of tax policy. The next section is devoted to a
discussion of the determinants of foreign investment and, in particular, the
influence of taxes.

II. xes and Foreign Investment
Our

analysis

of foreign investment begins with the familiar proposi-

tion of classical foreign investment theory that firms tend to invest more
abroad as the rate of return available abroad rises and as that available at

home declines. This simple specification is best thought of as the product of a
disequilibrium model of investment, in which a firm's decision to invest at home

or abroad is a function of the differential return available abroad.6 It

—6—

raises, however, a fundamental question
of foreign for home investment.

about the nature of the substitutability

In particular, the classical theory appears to

neglect the possibility of expansion

both at home and abroad up to the point

t

which the marginal return to capital equals the marginal (debt) cost, in whic
case the firm's domestic rate

of return would be irrelevant in its foreign

investment decision.

As was noted in the previous section,
are often alternative methods

foreign and domestic production

of serving the same market, so the notion of

5ubstitutability among different locations

A

of production is well established.

and
fully consistent story can be told of a firm deciding between foreign

domestic investments, either of which would tend to drive both rates of return
down toward the cost of funds, on the basis of such factors as taxes and

locali

wages which are reflected in current measured rates of return.
A further reason for foreign investment to compete with domestic
investments can be introduced by appealing to either externally— or internally—
imposed financial constraints on

the firm. The existence of external financial

constraints has been the subject of a lengthy

debate which will not be repeated

subsidiary
here. Clearly, if a firm's decision to transfer capital to a foreign
borrowing to finance the previous level of
cannot be accompanied by increased
firm
domestic operations, there is a foreign-dOme5tic tradeoff. Similarly, a

might impose a target debt—equity

ratio on itself as an internal control mecta.—

nism for requiring managers to justify
foreign investment is a function

their plans.1 Thus, the theory that

of alternative rates of return can be justified

on a number of grounds.
Even granting the classical model a solid theoretical foundatiofl,

it

—7—

is

frequently asserted that any measure of available returns neglects such

important determinants of expected return as to be empirically useless. Such
factors as the desire of innovative, oligopolistjc firms

to exploit their par-

ticular advantages in production or distribution, and the presence of impediments

to international trade, no doubt play a major role in explaining the existence of
multinational firms, as does the quest for stability through vertical

integration.8 However, unless we include in our study a period in which firms
are discovering and exploiting major new opportunities abroad, the factors which
explain the existence of multinational firms may not so strongly cause year—to—

year variations in foreign investment. Bather, as is shown in the next section,
measured rates of return can account for a great deal of the fluctuation in
investment over recent years.
The complexity of the tax treatment of foreign source income makes
necessary

a careful specification of the net—of--tax rate of return to which

foreign investment would be

countries

expected

to respond. The

governments

of

host

have the first opportunity to tax the returns produced in their

jurisdictions. The rate of return net of the foreign corporate income tax can
be written as:

rfj =

r*(l

—

t*)

(i)

where r* is the gross rate of return earned abroad9 and t is the effective
rate of host country taxation.

Foreign countries often collect another tax (a

"withholding tax") at a time dividends are paid to

the

parent company. The

return, after total foreign taxes, on a one—period investment with income
repatriated to the parent firm can, therefore, be written as:

—8—

r*(l - t*)(l

=

raft

-

t)

(2)

The U.S., in turn collects on foreign source income a tax at the regular corporate rate, but allows a credit for taxes paid to the foreign governnent

(up to the level of the U.S. tax liability). The U.S. tax is ordinarily
collected only upon repatriation of profits to the U.S. parent. Thus, the
parent

firm can receive a net—of—tax rate of return from an investment abroad

of:

r*(l

=

=

r*(l

t),

—

—

if t t +

t*)(i

—

t),

t

—

t*t

(3)

otherwise

where t is the effective U.S. tax rate on foreign—source income, prior to the
credit.1°
Obviously the effective tax rate on foreign source income is affected,
in all except the "excess credits" case, by the firm's decision of whether to

repatriate earnings. The question of how to characterize this feature of the
tax system in a tractable model of the foreign investment decision has plagued

researchers. Horst (1911) takes the approach of weighting the tax liabilities
by the fraction of foreign—source income typically paid out, to derive an after—
tax return:

rp = r*El

—

= r*[l

(i
—

—

t

p)t*

—

pt],

if t t + 4— t*4
(14)

—

ptw(l

—

t*)1,

where p is the foreign subsidiary payout ratio.

otherwise

—9—

The specification is deceptively simple, however. First, the dividend
payout ratio is chosen by the firm and, in general, will depend on the tax
rates, so the temptation to interpret an average of tax rates weighted by an

observable payout ratio as the appropriate influence over marginal investment
decisions should be avoided.11

Also, expression (Ii) is appropriate only if a

firm which is making a marginal investment will continue to pay out the current

fraction p of its earnings over the live of the investment. Finally,

is

derived by assuming that direct investment abroad is accomplished by an explicit
transfer of funds from the parent to the subsidiary, rather than the implicit
transfer implied by a retention of earnings by a foreign subsidiary.

In fact, Hartman (1981) argues that U.S. foreign direct investment now
typically is accomplished by foreign subsidiaries retaining earnings.
Furthermore, the nature of the U.S. tax system provides a strong incentive for

foreign subsidiaries to be self—financing to the greatest extent possible. That
is, the present value of tax liabilities is reduced, without any corresponding
change in financial characteristics of the firm, if a foreign subsidiary retains
it.s earnings, rather than paying dividends to its parent while receiving from

the parent additional explicit direct investment (whether in the form of debt or

equity). The reason for this strong result is that U.S. taxes are due only upon
the repatriation of earnings. Thus, it is not surprising that dividend payments
are discouraged, unless a net financial transfer from the subsidiary to the

parent is desired. This proposition is not completely general in the complex
universe of interacting tax systems, as is clear from an example considered by
Alworth (1981).

If a host country provides so high a level of dividend relief

to foreign—owned subsidiaries that the firm's total current tax burden declines

—10—

with higher repatriation rates, a firm will tend to accelerate rather than defer

its dividend payments to its parent. As a general proposition, however, the
logic underlying expression ()4) —— that a U.S. firm undertaking a transfer of

funds abroad is receiving dividends at rate p which is expected to continue
over the life of the investment ——

is

open to question.

The importance of this insight rests in its implications for the

financing of a marginal investment. Based on this theory, the marginal direct
investment comes at the expense to the parent firm of a repatriated dollar, up

to the point of subsidiary profits being exhausted. For total investments
larger than available earnings, the marginal investment is financed by an expli—
cit transfer from the parent.

A. Retained Ernings
Consider, first, the subsidiary deciding whether to reinvest for one
period or to repatriate a dollar of after—foreign—income tax earnings.
(i—t)
Repatriation gives the parent (it*) dollars to invest at, say, a net domestic

rate of return r, or, at the end of the period,

produces 1 +

r*(l

—

t*)

at the end of the period,

(i +

re).

Reinvestment

of foreign earnings or, upon repatriation to the parent
(i +

r*(i

—

t*)).12

That is, a firm can pay

the U.S. tax, thereafter earning a rate of return r or can defer the U.S. tax
but later pay the same rate on the original dollar plus the rate of return that

dollar earns in the interim. Thus, the present value of tax payments to the
U.S. on a dollar of foreign—source income, when discounted at

r*(l_t*), are

equal in the two cases. Therefore, the relevant net foreign rate of return Lo

be compared to the opportunity cost (re) of investing abroad is the after—
foreign—income—tax rate of return. As discussed in more detail by Hartinan

—11--

(1981), this argument is not crucially dependent on the one—period nature of

this example, as long as repatriation of earnings from abroad is expected to
occur eventually.13
This result highlights the crucial role of deferral, in cases of the

U.S. tax rate on foreign—source income exceeding the foreign tax rate. If
deferral were not available, a higher U.S. tax would obviously represent a

disincentive to reinvestment abroad. The conventional analysis of the tax
system, including deferral, which relies on some weighted average formula similar to equation (1), still incorporates a disincentive effect of higher U.S.

taxes on foreign—source income.1 As we have seen, once both the current and
future tax liabilities relevant to the repatriation decision have been taken
into account, the U.S. tax on foreign source income is neutral with respect to

the reinvestment decision. Of course, the U.S. tax is entirely irrelevant when
the foreign tax rate exceeds the U.S. tax rate on foreign—source income. Thus,
within our general model foreign investment accomplished by retaining foreign
earnings abroad can be described by:

=

T*
re(..n'

*(i — t*))

(c)

This general neutrality of the U.S. tax treatment of foreign source

income has important implications for the country's mix of domestic and foreign
investment, since the U.S. tax law treats domestic and foreign investment income
similarly, except for the deferral of foreign—source income and depreciation

provisions to be discussed below. That is, while an increase in the general rate
of corporate income taxation decreases the alternative rate of return rn, it has

no effect on r*(1 —

t*)

and, hence, it tends to encourage foreign reinvestment

—12—

of earnings. The extent of this encouragement is the topic of Section III.

B. Transfers of Funds
The tax effects on the foreign investment accomplished by a transfer

of funds from parent to subsidiary are less straightforward, depending on anticipated paths of investment in the future. Th.ke, first, the case of a U.S. tax

higher than the corresponding—foreign tax. We know from the discussion above
that after an investment project begins to generate earnings, the rate of reLurn
on reinvestment, appropriate for comparison with the

domestic rn, is the after—

foreign—income tax rate of return. Thus, we can view an investment abroad as

earning a present value of r(1 —

t)

in the first period, but also gaining a

firm access to the higher return r(1 —

t*)

on earnings reinvested, because of

the deferral of the U.S. tax. The future reinvestment opportunities will, as a
consequence, affect current decisions. Suppose, for example, that r* is
expected to be so low in the future that only a one—period investment is con—

templated. Then, the relevant effective tax rate on foreign—source income is t,
since there is no deferral advantage. On the other hand, if repatriation of
earnings will be deferred indefinitely, the value of reinvesting at the higher

return may come to dominate the decision, in which case the firm's decision takes
on the character of the reinvestment decision discussed above. So, the relevant

tax rate on foreign source income is between t

and t, with the exact vaue

depending on the set of future investment opportunities.'5 Of course, if the
foreign tax exceeds the U.S. tax, some combination of the foreign corporate
income tax and the foreign withholding tax is the important

parameter. Thus for

a new investment, we can write the general expression:

It*

=

*

It(rn,

*
r*, r*t, r*t*, r*tw(l —

t*))

(6)

—13—

where the I- function is specific to the particular firm being considered.
It could well be highly unstable in aggregate form.

III. Domestic Taxes and Reinvestment Abroad
Fortunately, since reinvestment of foreign source income accounts for
nearly ninety percent of U.S. direct investment abroad, the theory of this
source of direct investment, given by equation (5),

is

by far the more straight-

forward. In order to facilitate comparison with Feldstein's results on tax
impacts on domestic investment as a fraction of GNP, a simple linear relationship is chosen for estimation:

1*

=

a +

+ 2r*(1

—

t*)

(T)

where Y is U.S. GNP.16 In measuring real net rates of return, it is important
to correct for the tax laws' mismeasureinent of profits and to take account of

all the taxes paid. t.ta on rn are taken from Feldstein (forthcoming), where
considerable attention has been paid to the accurate measurement of depreciation
and to the taxes paid by corporations, shareholders, and creditors in the U.S.
By contrast, only the taxes paid currently by the foreign subsidiary to the

foreign government are relevant in the construction of r*(l —

t*),

so, aside

from the mismeasurement of profits under a nrriad of foreign tax systems, the
foreign variable is directly observable.17

The use of reported after—tax earnings is problematic, but information
on depreciation and inventory accounting is not available, so no adjustment can

be made. Measurement errors in r*(l —

t*)

will be systematically related to

1*

measurement errors in — ,

so we can anticipate the estimate 2 being

—1 14...

biased. A bias will, in general, occur in our estimate

as well, but, as

we will see, these problems do not appear to be serious.

When (7) is estimated using annual date for the 15 years 1965—1919, we
obtain: 18

're

=

.o6i

r + .1412 r*(1_t*) - .00186 D714
.003136 (.0001489) (.oo198 (.oo1414)
(.0001489)

(standard errors in parentheses)

(8)

= 937
D.W. = 2.15
SER
.000)405

These results imply that the simple model of foreign direct investment deve-

loped in the previous section provides for successful explanation. Of particular interest, here, is the highly significant negative estimated impact of

the domestic real net rate of return. Even more significant is the rate of
return to U.S. investment abroad, although, as mentioned above, it is

constructed in such a way as to introduce spurious correlation with Ie
Equation (8) has very important implications for the impact of

domestic tax policy on foreign investment. Before exploring these implications,

further tests are performed to confirm the result. First, since r can be

thought of as r(l —

where

is the effective tax rate on domestic

income, the variable can be split into a "gross rate of return" term r and a

"tax" term rt5 .

=

This

produces the result:

.003681 — .0674 r + .0684
(.oor58) (.0138) (.0420)

+ .01411 r*(l_t*) — .00188 D74 (9)
(.oo4i6)

(.000637)

= .931
D.W. = 2.15
SER = .0004214

—15—

As expected due to the corriation of r with rtus

,

it

is difficult to esti—

mate precisely the separate tax effect. However, the similarity of the

rt5 coefficients certainly supports the hypothesis.that r(l —

t5)

r and

is the

appropriate variable. 19

As noted above, these results cannot be taken too seriously without

addressing the issue of bias caused by the measurement error in the real after—

foreign—tax rate of return r*(1 —

t*),

and its correlation with the measurement

error in foreign investment. Since it is the domestic variables on which we
will place major emphasis, it is reassuring that the correlation of rn and
r*(l —

t*)

is only —.03.

To confirm that the potential bias is small, equation (8) was reesti—

mated using instrumental variables. The real after—foreign—tax rate of return

r*(i —

t*)

was instrumented using variables expected to be related to worldwide

real capital returns but not the measurement error in r*(l —

t*).

Specifically, current and lagged employment, industrial production, and the real

GNP of the seven most significant host countries were weighted by their share of

U.S. foreign investment.20 While these variables explained only 81.1 percent of

the variation in r*(1 —

t*)

,

in

the first stage regression, the following

results emerged:

Y

.003796 —

.O67 r +

(.oooii) (.0080)

r*(1_t*) — .00185 D71
(.oo19)

(.ooo19)

=
D.W. =

937

2.13

SER = .000405

(10)

—16—
*

= .003696

- .0681 r + .0701 rt5 + .003 r*(l_t*) — .ooi8y D7
(.001760) (.0139)
(.o123)
(.0052)
(.ooo6')

(ii)

= .931
D.W. = 2.12

SER = .000125
These instrumental variables estimates are virtually identical to the ordinary
least squares results reported as equations (8) and (9), implying that we can

have a great deal of confidence in the estimated domestic tax impacts. Thken
together, the empirical results have the important implication that a tax change
which makes domestic investment more attractive will significantly reduce

foreign investment. Furthermore, they are supportive of the theory developed in
Section II, with respect to the impact of a change in the tax rate applied to
all corporate income.

While the tax rate on domestic income, t5 ,

differs

from the U.S. tax

rate on foreign source income, t (for example, foreign subsidiaries are not
allowed to use accelerated depreciation and do not receive the investment tax
credit), annual fluctuations in the two series, which result largely from the
inflation—induced mismeasurement of taxable profits, are undoubtedly highly

correlated. The fact that the r and rt5 coefficients are virtually iden—
tical in absolute value would, thus, seem to be very strong evidence that t does

not affect foreign investment. M noted above, a specification including a

separate tus variable serves to reinforce our conclusion. The weight of the
evidence., therefore, strongly supports the basic proposition that even an

apparently non—discriminatory tax change is far from neutral in its effects on
the domestic—foreign investment decision.
These results can be placed in perspective by reference to the

—11—

Feldstein

conclusions. His estimated coefficient of rn's impact on domestic

investment as a fraction of GNP for the 195I_1918 period is •)459•21 When his

equation was re—run for the 1965—1979 period, incorporating the major revisions
to

the net domestic investment figures performed in early 1981, the coefficient

was reduced to

.312, with a standard error of .072. Thus, a change in tax

policy affecting domestic investment has an opposing effect on foreign invest-

ment (by retained earnings) approximately twenty percent as large. How the analysis of domestic policy changes might be affected by this factor will be considered later, but first we turn to the estimation of tax effects on "immature"

foreign operations, i.e., those not generating sufficient earnings to finance
their investments.

IV. Domestic xes and "New" Direct Investment
Compared to reinvested earnings, the explanation of capital transfers
to foreign affiliates presents serious difficulties of both a conceptual and an

empirical nature. One obvious problem is the complexity and ambiguity of the
possible tax effects discussed above. The unavailability of tax data also
requires unattractive compromises. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the
return on the existing stock of U.S. capital abroad has much relevance to firms

which are primarily involved in the beginning phases of new investments. ken
together, these factors are not encouraging to empirical work, so it is not
surprising that the results are not as significant as those in the case of
reinvestment.

The most obvious problems encountered in estimating the tax effects
included in equation (6) is the lack of reliable data on the effective foreign

corporate tax rate t , the foreign withholding rate t, and the effective

—18—

U.S. tax rate on foreign—source income t. While one could construct average
effective tax rates from tax return information, only the rates on repatriated
earnings are reported and there is little reason to believe such information is

representative. Consequently, instead of estimating the appropriate equation
(6), we are forced to use an equation like (11):

4 =

+

+

2r*(1

—

t*)

+

tusr*(1

—

t*)

(ii)

The estimates produced by this equation could be meaningful if two conditions

are met. First, if, as argued above, t , the effective U.S. tax rate on
domestic income, is highly correlated through time with the effective U.S. tax

rate on foreign source income, t ,

it

can be used as a proxy for unobservable t

as shown. Also, if variations through time in r*(1 —

variations in r* ,

equation

t*)

primarily result from

(ii) may provide an unbiased estimate of the effect

of domestic taxes, though, of course, no information about the effect of t*
Unfortunately, all of these problems appear to cause the noise in the
regression to overwhelm the signal, as shown by the result (12).

.OO3I + .0178r + .O251r*(l_t*)
4 = (.001439)
(.o444 (.ioii)

—

.O53Gtusr*(l_t*)
(.1399)

— .OOO421

D714

(12)

(.00192)

=

.532

DW = 1.83
SER =

While

.000765

the equation implies the expected positive response to the foreign rate of

return and negative response to the tax parameter, the estimated coefficients

are so insignificant as to be nearly meaningless. The instrumental variables

—19—

estimation procedure (equation (13)) produces the anticipated sign for the
coefficient as well, the coefficients are again so imprecisely estimated as
not to be usefull for analysis.

= .006066 —

.0152r + .2456r*(1_t*) — .3625tusr*(l_t*) — .00411

(.oo4o68) (.i4o6 (.3312)

(.4636)

D14
(.00591)

=

(13)

.302

DW = 1.85
SER =

.000935

Thus, we must conclude that based on the available information, one can say very
little about the domestic tax effects on the foreign investment of firms with
relatively new operations abroad.

V. Further Confirmation of the Results
One could legitimately argue that a model describing foreign investment as a function of current alternative rates of return neglects important

components of the anticipated return to investments made today. Similar concerns Lth respect to domestic investment have led to increased use of models
based on Tobin's "q" theory of investment. By relating investment to the ratio
("q") of the stock market valuation of existing assets to the replacement costs

of those assets, this theory incorporates anticipated future rate—of—return
changes which are reflected in current market values.
This "forward—looking't approach to investment has a great deal to

recommend it. Unfortunately, no direct application to foreign investment is
possible, since the market does not provide a separate valuation of domestic and

foreign assets owned by a U.S. multinational firm. Rather, we have available a

—20—

variety of estimates of qt? which are largely, but not, of course, totally,

representative of domestic capital and no estimate of the corresponding "q."
It is worth noting that domestic investment models of the "q" type are subject to
the criticism that the desirability of domestic and foreign investment are con-

founded in the tq measure.
In order to confirm our results from Section III that the increasel
attractiveness of domestic investment tends to reduce foreign investraent, we

ignore the problem and estimate a model in which

're

is a function of only "q"

and a variable removing 19714 from consideration, as above. Using the "q"
measure reported in Summers (1981) produces equation (114).

—

= .007509
(.001107)

- .003770 q + .0009867

(.0010514)

(114)

D714

(.00097114)
=

.52314

DW = 1.78

SER = .0009120
Interval: 1965—1978

While this model does not produce the precise explanation of foreign investment
we obtained with the rate of returns equations, the "q" coefficient is highly
significant and of the expected negative sign, and the

is similar to the

values given in similar domestic investment equations. Summers also presents
data which allow us to construct a tax—adjusted value q', which takes into
account the effects of accelerated depreciation and the investment tax credit on

investment incentives. Reestimation using q' produces:

—21—

.005853 — .oo6o8 q' + .001002 D71
(.000619) (.001319)
(.000983)

(15)

=

.51JJ

DW =l.7

SER = .0009232

That

is, the tax—adjusted "q'T provides a slightly worse

worrisome

explanation.

More

is the fact that the residual for 1913 is so large as to account for

over seventy percent of the total residual variance. It is obvious from the
data that our exclusion of any information on the attractiveness of investment

abroad has

prevented

these equations from explaining the large investment

increase in 1973, which r*(1 —

t*)

was able to explain in the Section III

regressions. Since an outlier like 1973 can so drastically affect the results,
equations (ib) and (15) were re—run excluding 1973 information by use of a
second dunmr variable.

=

.007323 - .003795 q + .002732 D73 - .001918 DTh

(.000578)

(.000550)

(.ooo195)

(16)

(.000508)

= .87o1
D.W. = 2.38

SEE = .0004755

Y

=

.005696 - .00733 q' + .002816 D73 - .001198
(.000335) (.ooo6!9)

(.000)473)

D7

(17)

(.000)485)

= .8818
D.W. = 2.53
SER = .000)45)42

This time, the tax—adjusted variable performs slightly better. Otherwise, the

-22—

coefficients of the "q" variables are virtually identical to the previous set.
Clearly, the significant results were not an artifact of the one outlier.
Using

this very different model of investment has tended to confiri:i

our previous conclusions: that the attractiveness of domestic investment has a

significant negative impact on the level of foreign investment. The results
regarding domestic tax effects are not nearly so strong as in the previous
model,

but Summers found the results on domestic investment to be mixed as well.

Summer' s parameter estimates were unstable, but our coefficients are between

about ten percent and fifty percent as large in absolute value as his estimated

effects on domestic investment (and, of course, the opposite sign). In
conclusion, the "q" model

of

investment, despite its obvious shortcoming of

allowing no measurement of a "q" for investment abroad, has added evidence in

of our previous results.

favor

IV. Implications

and Conclusions

The evidence presented in this paper points to U.S. multinational
firms being strongly influenced in their decisions to reinvest earnings abroad
by the after—tax rate of return abroad compared to that available in the U.S.

With

reinvestment of earnings now being the predominant form of U.S. foreign

direct

investment and with foreign direct investment representing a sizable part

of the

total investment of U. S.

foreign

firms, the

impact on the relative return to

investment should, it would seem, be an important factor in evaluating

proposed tax changes.
In particular, the theoretical model argues that changes in the tax

treatment of corporate earnings, even when these changes apply to both domestLc
and foreign source income, can have effects on the incentive to invest abroad

—23—

versus at home. This surprising result follows because the tax on foreign
source income is deferred until income is repatriated. Thus the tax is best
thought of as a tax on dividends and, as such, can be shown to have no effect on

the foreign subsidiary's optimal reinvestment decision. Changes in the tax
treatment of domestic income, on the other hand, do change the relative attractiveness of investing at horse, and so, can affect foreign investment if there is

substitutability. Since most provisions of the U.S. tax law apply to income
wherever earned, tax policy changes often appear to affect foreign and domestic

investment incentives similarly, but, according to this theory, can be far from
neutral.

The empirical evidence supports the conclusions of the model and indicates that domestic tax policy has powerful effects on decisions to invest

abroad at the expense, in the aggregate, of investment at home. We estimate
that an effective tax rate change which would increase domestic investment by
one dollar would, at the same time, cut U.S. investment abroad by at least
twenty cents (taking into account only the estimated impact on the reinvestment
decision).

How this conclusion might influence the support for investment incentives clearly depends on the reasons that increased capital formation is

favored. For instance, if concern over labor productivity or the "overall
strength of the economy" make increasing the level of domestic productive assets

one's goal, the considerations raised here would be of little importance. Of
course, one who did not accept the evidence that total investment responds to
tax policy might still favor the shift toward domestic investment implied by our
estimated tax effects.

—2 —

On

the other hand, many view increased capital formation as a way to

promote "international competitiveness," and might argue that operating abroad
tends to promote exports, so that any decline in foreign investment would be

counterproductive. This position is, of course, controversial, as some evidence
points to foreign investment substituting for exports.

Those who support investment incentives on economic welfare grounds
might find their case altered by the recognieion of international investment

effects. Since the welfare argument centers on the discouragement to investment
produced by the tax wedge between private and social returns, the finding that
the total investment effect is exaggerated by at least one—fourth by looking at
only

domestic investment might be thought to weaken the argument. However, such

a conclusion

neglects the issue of sectoral misallocation of capital. As has

been noted by p. 4usgrave (1969), the foreign tax credit produces an unfavorable
allocation of capital, from the standpoint of "national welfare," because the
nation receives only the after—foreign—tax return to capital invested abroad

while receiving the gross return to capital invested at home. The multinational
firm, responding to after—tax rates of return, is encouraged to invest abroad

even when the national return at home exceeds that abroad. That argument is
much strengthened by our conclusion that the firm's reinvestment decision is
based on a comparison of the after—foreign—tax

domestic

foreign return with the after—tax

return. Any policy, such as a tax cut, which results in domestic

investment at the expense of foreign investment, by helping correct this
misallocation of capital, produces a welfare gain in addition to the gain from

any increase in total investment. Furthermore, one might be

concerned about

worldwide economic welfare. As we have shown, the effective tax rate on

foreign

—25—

source income, as viewed from the perspective of a reinvesting subsidiary, is

given by the host country tax alone. Thus, if the home country effective tax
rate is brought closer to the host tax rate, worldwide economic efficiency gains
should follow, as capital is reallocated toward its most productive use.
The results reported here, while confirming the importance of domestic
tax effects on international invesbrnent, are only a beginning. For example, the

investment in the U.S. by foreign firms has been completely ignored. While that
investment is also growing rapidly in importance, the specification of tax
incentives provided by each foreign country's treatment of foreign source income
and the availability of data present more difficult problems than those
confronted in this paper.

—26—

Footnotes

*The author is Executive Director of the National Bureau of Economic

Research and Associate Professor of Economics, Harvard University. I am gra;e—
ful to Alan Auerbach, Angus

Deaton,

and participants in seminars at the NBER,

Harvard, and NYU Business School for their suggestions. ta Resources, Inc.,
generously provided access to their data and statistical estimation systems.

1-See Feldstein (forthcoming). This work has generated much controversy.
See, for example, Fair (1981).

2Foreign direct investment, as distinguished from portfolio investment,
takes place in a foreign operation over which the U.S. parent firm has control.

3For several reasons, foreign direct investment figures cannot be thought of

as the precise equivalent of the domestic investment numbers. One difference is
that the net domestic investment figures cited by Feldstein are obtained by
subtracting from gross investment a depreciation figure adjusted for such factors as inflation to approximate as closely as possible economic depreciation.

Given the different currencies in which some foreign subsidiaries' books are
kept as well as the variety of depreciation practices prevailing in different
areas, the Commerce Department makes no attempt to similarly adjust the book
depreciation figures used in computing foreign investment.

In addition, foreign direct investment is most accurately thought of
as a financial transaction: an implicit or explicit supply of parent firm

funds to a foreign affiliate. To the extent that additional funds are borrowed
abroad or supplied by foreign "minority" owners, our figures understate the

—27—

investment undertaken abroad under the control of U.S. firms. On the other
hand, foreign direct investment does not necessarily mean purchase of real
assets and, so, may overstate the foreign equivalent of domestic net fixed

investment. However, the tendency of foreign financing to be short—term
(Robbins and Stobaugh (1973, Ch. 4)) and the incentive to minimize exchange risk
by financing current assets, but not fixed assets, through foreign short—term
borrowing (Robbins and Stobaugh (1972)), both imply that foreign direct investment may be an adequate indicator of net fixed investment abroad.

The estimates of Kopits (1980) provide dramatic confirmation of this
theory.

to

The elasticity of the stock of foreign direct investment with respect

total subsidiary assets is almost identically one (1.014), while the corresponding

derivative (.351) is very close to the typical share of plant and equipment
•

•

•

in total subsidiary assets .4o. Kopits estimated

t

direct investment
total subsidiary assets

of .351 (estimated with a 1966 cross section of countries) is virtually iden—

tical to the value, .36,

of

investment in subsidiaries

Lx fixed
L total subsidiary assets

implied by the

time series (1958—65) estimates of Robbins and Stobaugh (1972). Thus, even

though

data limitations force us to

direct

investment

figures

as

follow the usual practice of using foreign

if they represented net fixed investment (See

Goldsbrough (1919)), there is ample evidence to support this procedure.

careful reading of Goldsbrough reveals a precise treatment of the "net

versus gross" problem in the remainder of

survey

the paper.

of the relevant empirical iork can be found in Hufbauer (1975).

Frisch (1981) provides some evidence that rates of return influence the distribution of investment across foreign countries, but whether relative rates of

—28—

return influence the total amount of foreign investment is an open question.
6The existence of differential risk patterns across countries, providing
opportunities for diversification which individuals may not be able to pursue

except through the operations of multinational firms, casts doubt on the
stronger proposition that the firm's desired capital stock in each region would

be at the level required to equalize marginal returns. Recognition of the risk
factor suggests its inclusion in the model of the foreign investment decision.

However, risk serves to complicate the analysis, without holding potential for

measurement in the present context, and so, it is ignored here. As will be
clear from Section III, this amounts to assuming that the riskiness of anticipated returns on foreign investment as a whole is unrelated to the mean return
over time.

TThe author owes this observation to Stewart Myers.

8For discussions of these aspects of foreign investment, see Caves (1911)
and Vernon (1971, Ch. 3 and 1).

9For simplicity, we will consider the two—country case here.

-0It should be noted that, while the statutory tax rate on domestic incore

equals that on foreign—source income, some provisions of the law, such as

allowable depreciation, do differ. Therefore t should not necessarily be thought
of as the effective tax rate applied to domestic income, although the two rates
might be highly correlated over time.

11Horst explicitly examines the dependence of p on tax parameters in his

—29—

1977 paper, but is forced to utilize an observed value to weight tax rates in
his calculations.

firm with an excess of foreign tax credits faces alternatives of
(i —

4)(l + r)

versus (i —

t)(i + r*(1 —

13The one exception to this fairly general proposition is the case of a subsidiary which, according to the rates—of—return test just described, would
repartriate earnings but which also anticipates more profitable opportunities in

the "near future." Just as it is not optimal for a subsidiary to repatriate
earnings and receive capital transfers simultaneously, an optimal strater would
not involve repatriating earnings and receiving capital transfers very soon

thereafter. Thus, a firm might be willing to reinvest abroad over the short run
even when the investment does not produce an acceptable one—period after—foreign

income—tax rate of return when compared to the opportunity cost. That is, the
conclusion is even more at odds with the conventional wisdom, which sets higher

standards for reinvestment, than is our basic result. Since this lock—in effect
is the product of a very special pattern of expected future returns and of the

time period over which r* is measured, it is not very interesting conceptually
and is ignored in the remaining analysis.

114A notable exception is the work of Kopits (1972, 1980), who focuses on the

repatriation decision, arguing that higher deferrable U.S. taxes on foreign
source income increase the "cost of repatriation" and, hence, encourage reinvestment.

15mese results are derived more explicitly in Hartman (1981).

—30—

l6hile

're
-y--

is

not an obviOus choice as a dependent variable, the analysis

was repeated for deflated Ie and for Ie as a fraction of the direct investment
stock, with no important effect on the results.

l7r*(l —

t*)

is "reinvested earnings" (Ie) plus "income from interest,

dividends, and earnings of unincorporated affiliates" (both from "Balance of
Payments" tables in U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis,

Survey of Current Business, selected issues), divided by "direct investment
position" (from Survey of Current Business, August, 1980, 'Dable 11, and previous

issues). It is adjusted for anticipated inflation by subtracting the new—issue
long—term corporate bond rate, courtesy of Data Resources, Inc. The results are
similar with other estimates of expected inflation.

l8DTlr is a dumnr variable for l97L to represent both "speculative

activity" and, more importantly, a $7 billion plus—fall in the direct investment
stock caused by the acquisition, by Middle Eastern countries, of oil company
assets (see Goldsbrough (1979)).

the expense of comparability with the Feldstein results for domestic

investment, the basis model s.as also estimated in logs with ln(r) and ln(i—t)
having separate coefficients. The coefficients did not differ significantly and

the coefficient of ln(l—t) was statistically significant, at the .05

level.

20Al1 of these data were taken from International Financial Statistics

published by the International bnetary Fund, various issues.

21Feldstein lags r in his equation. Since foreign direct investment Ls

—31—

measured as the financial transaction, rather than the resulting real capital

investment, the use of lagged values seems less appropriate here. Nevertheless,
when equation (8) was

similar

run

with lagged returns, the r coefficient was

.0608 and still statistically significant.

a

very

—32—

References

Alworth, Julian, 1981, "Taxation and

the

Financial Policies of Multinational

Companies," mimeo.

Caves, Richard E., 1911, "International Corporations: The

Industrial

Economics

of Foreign Investment," Econornica, Vol. 38 (February), pp. 1—21.

Fair,

Ray, 1981, "A Comment on Feldstein's Fisher—Schultz Lecture," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Number 716, July.

Feldstein, Martin, "Inflation, Tax

Rules

and Investment, National Bureau of

Economic Research Working Paper No. 577,

Econometrica,

forthcoming.

Feldstein, Martin, 1981, "Has the Rate of Investment Fallen?" National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 679.

Feldstein, Martin and

Charles

Horioka, 1980, "Domestic Saving and International

Capital Flows," The Economic Journal, Vol. 90 (June), pp. 31)-—329.

Frisch, 1niel, 1981, Taxation of Multinational Companies, unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Harvard University.

1vid J.,

Goldsbrough,
External

Adjustment Process," IMF

(December),

Goulder,

1979, "The Role of Foreign Direct Investment in the

Staff

Papers, Vol. 26,

Number

pp. 725—154.

Lawrence H., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, "Domestic Tax Policy and

the Foreign Sector," in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy

—33—

Analysis edited by Martin Feldstein, Chicago, University of Chicago Press,
forthcoming.

Hartman, 1vid G., 1981, "Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 689, June.

Herring,
U.S.

Richard and Thomas

Investment Activity Abroad," Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 35,

Number

Horst,

D. Willett, 1972, "The Capital Control Program and

1 (July) pp. 58—ti.

Thomas, 1977, "American Taxation of Multinational Firms," The American

Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 3 (June), pp. 376—389
Hufbauer, G. C., 1975, "The Multinational Corporation and Direct Investment," in
International Trade and Finance, edited by Peter B. Kenen, pp. 253—319,
Cambridge University Press.

International Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund, various issues.

Kohihagen, Steven W., 1977, "Exchange Rate Changes, Profitability, and Direct

Foreign Investment, Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 4, Number 1 (July),
pp 13...52.

Kopits, George F., 1980, "Effects of Tax Changes on Direct Investment Abroad,"
in United States Taxation and Developing Countries, edited by Robert
Hellawell, New York, Columbia University Press, pp. 223—262.

Kopits,

George F., 1972, "Dividend Remittance Behavior Within the International

Firm: A Cross—Country Pnalysis," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
54 (August 1972), pp. 339—42

_3)4_

Kwack, Sung Y., 1912, "A Model of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: A Neoclassical
Approach," Western Economic Journal, Vol. 10 (December), pp. 316—83.

Musgrave, Peggy B., 1969, United States Taxation of Foreign Investment Income:

Issues and Arguments, Cambridge, Harvard Law

School

International Thx

Program.

Bobbins, Sidney M. and Robert B. Stobaugh, 1913, Money in the Multinational
Enterprise, (New York: Basic Books, 1973).

Robbins,

Sidney and Robert Stobaugh, 1912, "Comments" in International Mobility

and Movement of Capital, edited by F. Machlup, W. S. Salant, and L.
Tarshis, pp. 3514_361, New York, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Scaperlanda, Anthony E., and Laurence Jay Mauer, 1913, "The Impact of Controls
on United States Direct Foreign Investment in the European Economic
Community," Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 35, Number 3 (January), pp.

19-23.
Snoy, Bernard, 1915, Taxes on Direct Income in the EEC, New York: Praeger.

Stevens,

Guy V. G., 1912, "Capital Mobility and the International Firm," in

International Mobility and Movement of Capital,
Salant, and L. Lrshis, pp. 323—353,

edited by F. Machiup, W. S.

New York, National Bureau of Economic

Re search.
Summers, Lawrence, 1981, "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A a—Theory
Approach," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Volume 1, pp. 67—127.

—35—

Survey of Current Business, U.S. Department of Commerce, various issues.

Vernon, Raymond, 19'TT, Storm Over the Multinationals, Cambridge; Harvard
University Press.

