NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATENTS, R&D, AND THE STOCK MARKET

BATE OF RETURN

Ariel F.kes
Working Fper No. 86

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge M& 02138

October 1981

This paper is an offshoot of ongoing research with Zvi Griliches
(See Fkes and Griliches, 198Oa). His comments on it have been of
great help. I would also like to thank Andrew Abel, Charles
Manski, Morris Teubal, Un Ben—Zion and John Bound for helpful
discussions. John Bound's research assistance is gratefully
acknowledged as is the financial assistance of the NSF through
grants PRAT9—1375O and 50C79_O1279. I, of course, retain sole
responsibility for errors. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of &onomic Research.

NBER Working Paper #786
October 1981

Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to present and estimate a model which

allows one to use the recently computerized U.S. Patent Office's data base
to identify when and where changes in inventive output have occurred.
The model assumes a firm which chooses a research strategy to maximize
the expected discounted value of the net cash flows from its activities,
and a stock market that evaluates this expectation at different dates

(it is a version of the Lucas—Prescott, 1971, Investment model). Patents
are taken as an indicator of the output of the fin's research laboratories.
These assumptions place a set of testable restrictions on the stochastic

process generating patents, R&D, and the stock market rate of return on
the firm's equity (the econometric framework used is that of a restricted
index, or dynamic factor—analysis model (Sargent and Sims, 1977; Geweke,

1977b)). The data contain observations on these three variables for 120

fins

over an eight year period. The model fits these data quite well and

the final section reports on the implications of the parameter estimates.
Ariel Pakes
Department of Economics

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Mount Scopus Campus

Jerusalem, Israel 91905

PATENTS, R&D, AND THE STOCK MARKET RATE OF RETURN

For sout time

there has been a feeling in the profession that the

process of invention and innovation is a major source of growth and

structural change in the economy. Unfortunately, however, our analysis
of the role of inventive activity is hampered by a lack of empirical evi-

dence on its casues and its effects. A major part of the reason for the
lack of empirical results in this area is the difficulty in finding (or
constructing) meaningful measures of inventive output.

Early studies

often used successful patent applications as their output measure (Schmookler
and Brownlee, 1962; Griliches and Schmcokler, 1963; Scherer, l965a, l965b;

Schmookler, 1966). The patent variable had the advantage of being a
more direct consequence of inventive activity than the other indicators
of performance available (examples used include profits, productivity,
and sales of new products) and that patent applications were, at least in
principle, available in an extremely detailed breakdown (by both grantee
and product class, see tJSDC, 1973—79). In fact, the only other variable

available which was directly related to inventive activity was R
expenditures.

D

R&D, however, is really an input measure (and to analyse

many issues one requires measures of both inputs and outputs);' and
publicly available data on R

0 are not nearly as rich as those on

patents (particularly when one considers breakdowns by product class).
There were, however, two serious problems with the patent variable.

11n Section I and in be appendix I discuss briefly the advanta2es of
having
both input and output measures for analysing the determinants of R&D demand.

—2—

First, though patent counts were available in principle, they were
inaccessible in practice; second, variation in the number of patents

granted had no clear interpretation. The recent computerization of the
U.S Patent Office's data base has changed this situation. One can now
obtain annual patent applications in a variety of different breakdowns at.

reasonable cost (for an example, see Pakes and Griliches, 198Ob).
Thus the interpretative problem now takes on renewed importance. That is,
to use the Patent Office's data base effectively we require some indication
of the relationship between successful patent applications and meaningful
measures of the economic value of the output of inventive activity.
The question of the relationship between successful patent applications
and different economic magnitudes is not new, but the ev!idence

available on it is still inconclusive (see, in particular, the contributions
of Kuznets, Sanders, and Schmookler in Nelson, 1962; Comanor and Scherer,

1969; and Taylor and Silberston, 1973).

It is clear that

patent applications are only granted when a useful and
technologically feasible advance has been made (U.S. Department of
Commerce, 1978), and that the patentee expects some positive benefit frcn

the patent (since the process of application is costly in itself). But it
is also clear that a variety of circumstances (technological, institutional,
and market) can cause patents to vary greatly in their economic value, and that
not all useful innovations are patented.

The purpose of this paper is to present and estimate a model which
allows us to interpret variations in patent applications in terms of

variations in the stock market value of the output of the fir&s research
activities. The paper, therefore, investigates the relationships between
patent applications and a measure of the input:s into the inventive process

(R&D expenditures), and between these applications and a well—defined (though

—3—

indirect) measure of inventive output (stock market values). In this context
the use of stock—market values has one major advantage. As noted by Arrow
(1962) the public—good characteristics of inventive output make it extremely

difficult to market. Returns to innovations are mostly earned by embodying
it in a tangible good or service which is then sold or traded for other infor-

mation which can be so embodied (Wilson, 1975; Von Hippel, forthcoming). There
are therefore no direct measures of the value of inventions, while indirect
measures of current benefits (such as profits or productivity) are likely to
react to the output of the firm's research laboratories only slowly and

erratically (see the review by Griliches, 1979). On the other hand, under
simplifying assumptions, changes in the stock—market value of the firm should
reflect (possibly with error) changes in the expected discounted present

value of the firm's entire uncertain net cash—flow stream. Thus, if an
event does occur that causes the market to re—evaluate the accumulated

output of the firm's research laboratories, its full effect on stock—market
values ought to be recorded immediately.2

This full effect is, of course, the

expected effect of the event on future net cash flows and need not be equal to the

effect which actually materializes. The fact that we are measuring expectations

rather than realizations, however, does have its advantages. In particular it
is expectations which ought to determine research demand, so that the use of
stock-market values will allow us to check whether the interpretation we
give to our parameter estimates is consistent with the observed behavior
of the research expenditure series.

Section I describes the model which underlies the interpretation of

the empirical results to be presented. It is based on an optimizing firm
which chooses a research strategy to maximize the expected discounted
value of the net cash flows from its activities and a stock market which
evaluates this expectation on the basis of current information (a similar

model can be found in Lucas and Prescott, 1971). The model places a set
of testable restrictions on the trivariate process generating patents, R&D,
and the stock market rate of return on the firm's equity, and therefore,

pcrLts urie to check whnthnr th

interpretion

given to the parameter

estimates is consistent with the observed behaviour of the data.
2A similar point was actually made as far back as 1973 by Griliches; see
Griliches, 1973, pp. 68—69.

—4—

Econometrically it leads us to a version of index models (see Sargent
and Sims, 1977) or dynamic factor—analysis models (see Geweke, 1977b)

which have recently been used to analyze macro—economic data.3 Section•
II begins. hy explaining these points and then presents the estimates and

associated test statistics. In Section III, the implications of
the empirical results, particularly those that concern the interprtatior
of movements in the pateat variable, are considered in some detail.4 Brief
concluding remarks follow.

I.

The Model

The model used to interpret the empirical results is based on a
which

chooses its research programme to maximize the expected discounted value

of the net

this

firm

cash flows from

its activities and a stock market which evaluates

expectation at different points in time. It thus invokes the same

assumptions as those used in the Lucas and Prescott (1971) investment model ——

a model which has led to several recent empirical investigations of the demand
functions for traditional factors of production (see, for example, Sargent,

3There are two differences. First, the model used here is estimated on a
one. This allows one to
cross—section
some
of
the
stochastic
assuthptions
that
underlie
macro—economic
weaken
factor—analysis
models.
Second,
the
micro—economic
foundations of our
dynamic
model suggest more restrictions than are usually available in macro—economic
work and lead to simpler testing and estimation procedures.

of time series, rather than a single

4me appendix goes over some of the more detailed implications of the empirical
findings and provides confirmation of them under a more general set of assumptions than those used in the text.

1978, Geweke, l977a, and Meese, 1980). There is, however, one major distinction
between the models consicered in those articles and the one used here.5
The

models referred to above s.peciey a quadratic net cash—flow func-

tion and
derive

of

a stochastic process which affects it;

and then proceed

to

and estimate the relevant factor demand equation(s). From our point

view the disadvantage of this approach is that a measure of changes in

the expected discounted value of the net cash flows of the firm never
explicitly appears in the equations derived from it; and it is the
relationship between this value and patent applications that we are

primarily concerned with. An alternative, noted by Lucas and Prescott
(1971), is to approximate directly the function determining the stock—

market value of the firm

(rather

than the net cash—flow function which

generates it). This allows one to use the observed stock—market rate
of return on the fin's equity as an indicator of the change in the
expected value of the firm resulting from the events which have occurred
In a given period and to relate it to both the patent and the R&D
expenditure series.

5mere is also one minor distinction of some interest. Investment models
assume the existence of a market for ready—made capital goods. Thus, the
gradual response of investment to changes in market conditions in these models
is generally assumed to be a result of convex adjustment costs, which increase
unit costs of installing capital goods in any given period. Since the
existence of markets in which a firm can buy and sell the information context
of innovations would not, in general, be assumed in the R&D demand literature,
there is no need for the convex adjustment cost assumption in this context.
Instead one assumes that a firm must produce (or search for) an innovation in
order to use it. Moreover, the production (search) process is assumed to take
time, or rather, to be more costly the faster it it carried out, and this will
induce the firm to respond only gradually to changes in market conditions.

—6—

The firm is assumed to engage in two types of activity1 research and

commercial (production and marketing). Successful research activity either
lowers the costs of production or improves the demand conditions that will

face the firm in the future. It does not produce an output which can be
sold directly on the goods market. Commercial activity transforms nonresearch inputs into outputs which are

sold on the market. The demand and

supply conditions which will face the firm in the future are in the present
random variables whose distribution depends on the firm's R E D efforts

until they are realized. It will be assumed that inputs into commercial
activities can be adjusted costlessly at the beginning of each period so as
to maximize the profits attainable in that period.
In this environment the firm realizes that its demand for commercial

inputs in period t + T

until t +

t

will be a function of its research expenditures

and of certain exogenous variables,

which will only

be known with certainty at the beginning of period t +

t.

The latter

include the determinants of demand in the firm's output markets,
input prices, and the technological success and failure of the fin's R & D
laboratories. The firm can solve for the distribution of future commercial
input demands conditional on the realizations

z. Substituting this
=

solution into the operating-profit function we have

1r(R, R, ., Zt)

for all t, and for t ? 0. Thus from the

vantage point of period t the discounted value of the net cash flows
accruing to the firm is the random variable, Vt, where

v = ZDT[(Rt

Cl)

and

I)

...,

Zt)

-

is the (time-invariant) discount factor.

is assumed that there exist unique, finite solutions to all maximization
problems and that the expectations we shall be dealing with are finite.

—7—

It will be assumed that the stochastic process generating the sequence

is known to all economic agents. We can now formalize our two
behavioural assumptions. First, the research-decision problem confronting
the

manager of the firm is to choose a

research programme (a

probability distribution for the sequence
where

to maximize

is the expectations operator conditional on the information

set available at the beginning of period t ,
The programme is formulated by using

Q.

say
to choose

to formulate alternative strategies for R+. Rt

R

and
It is known

that the strategy which will actually be implemented will depend on the

information available when the research resources are committed. Thus

the optimum research programme consists of a number, Rti and a sequence
of random variables7
The second behavioural assumption is that the agents operating in the
stock market (who will in general include the manager of the firm) evaluate
the expected discounted valuE of the ret cash flows lik2ly to result from

the firms's decision. The stock market value of the firm is, therefore,
obtained by substituting the optimum research programme into (1), conditioning on the information set currently available, and passing through an
expectations

operator. This information set will contain current and past

research expenditures as

well as any other variables which help to predict

the distribution of future net cash flows. If one held to the model exactly,

then, an additional sequence of random variables, {A}, could be introduced to
represent the effect on the value of the firm of all those variables in the

more detailed discussion of the nature of the solution of this decision problem can be found in Sargent (1979) and the literature cited there.

—8—

information sets (other than current and past research expenditures) which
are relevant to the prediction of future net cast flows, and the equation
for the stock market value could be written as,

H(R. R_1, ...,

A)

H(R Rtl

A)

—

it

where
.,

Et{DtWt —

DTR}

Since we will, however, be estimating this model, we ought to take account

of disturbances in the relationships defined by it. Introducing these
disturbances will correspond to allowing for factors which affect market

value without affecting research activityP

I, therefore, introduce another

(from which the disturbances will be

sequence of random variables,

derived), and assume that the stock market value of the firm can be written
as,

(2)

V(Q) = EVt

=

St {u(R.

R1,

...,

A)

—

R}

(2) is the value equation. Stochastic assumptions on the evolution of S_
and At over time will be made below.

Two implications of the behavioral assumptions will be used in the

empirical analysis. First, given that (2) provides an expression for the
expected discounted value of future net cash flows, it must be the case

that the optimal choice of R will,

(3)

max H(R, Rtl •. .,
R

A)

—

It

81t should be noted that many of the firms in our data set are involved in severai
lines of business, some bf which have little or nothing to do with their R&D
activities.

—9—

(3) follows from the Bellman condition for this problem. Note that

and on R1

depend on IA} (but not on

will, in turn, depend on past values of A.

will

where the lagged R values
It follows that the stochastic

process generating {R} can be derived from the process generating {A}
and the specific form of i-1().

The second implication is that, provided dividends are paid out at
the beginning of the period, the one—period excess rate of return on the
firm's equities (capital gains plus dividends on$l invested in the firm

minus

the

interest rate),

is equal to the percentage increase in the

expected discounted value of the fin's net cash flows caused by information which accumulates over the given period:

=

(4)

(E

—

Eti)V/EtVt

9This is a discrete—Lime approximation to a continuous—rime result. Using
the notation introduced above and a continuous—time model, we have
E

Vt

I (ir1—R )e_t_t)dt,

tT=t

=
while

at

4 t_Rt1vT)Ct_t)dt

t=+6 (T_Rr)e_T_t_dT + Et
=

[V

+

div]/V

—

p

,

where

divT represents dividends paid out

'r [so that (u_R_div) equals retained earnings at t], p is the instan-

taneous discount rate, and V

lint 1/6 (V

expressions

to solve for

qt = rsV/E

tt
V

where

).

t

5÷0

Using the first two

and substituting the result into the third we obtain
E

=

lint 1/6 CEt

—

E

t

).

Equation

4 is a discrete

approximation to this result. It ignores terms equal to the within—period
interest earned on dividends per share and the within—period interest on
capital gains per share. A correction for this omission did not change the
empirical results.
time

—10—

We still require .a specification for the patent equation. A simple

model of the patenting process would be based on the production of new
bits of information by a finn's research laboratories, and a patenting
decision determining how many patents ought to be applied for given the

number

of

bits produced in any given year (here one would normalize the

bits of information in terms of their contribution to the value of the

firm). The amount of information would be determined by current and past
research expenditures as well as by a stochastic process indicating the

degree of success in transforming the research expenditures into
valuable output. Given the number of bits of information produced, the
firm's

number of patents applied for would depend on an assortment of factors
including the rules governing the behaviour of the patent office, the type

of the information produced, the costs of applying for a patent and the
advantages to be gained by obtaining them. The total effect of these
factors on patenting has been termed by Scherer (1965a, 1965b) the propensity to patent and in what follows we represent it by a stochastic process.
Adding a patent equation based on these considerations to (3) and (4)

produces a fairly rich model which is briefly discussed in the appendix.
That model distinguishes between the effect of events which lead to patentable results only by first increasing R&D expenditures (say demand shocks)
and those events which have a direct effect on patents as well as an indirect

via the research demand

induce (say technological or supply
shocks).10 As is discussed in the appendix, however, to distinguish between
effect

they

For an interesting discussion of the importance of distinguishing between
effects of demand and supply factors on inventive activity see Rosenberg
(1974) and Schmookler (1960). Clearly, many policy issues hinge on this

the

distinction.

—11—

these different events one requires more (and perhaps different) data than

is used in this paper. I, therefore, present the results from a simpler model
Where patents are taken to be a function of current and past R&D expenditures,
current and past values of the effect of the other factors which

influence R&D demand ((A}) and an additional sequence of random variables
{G} which determine the propensity to patent and, therefore, are assumed to
have no effect on either R&D demand or on the market value of the firm. That is,

Pt =

P(A

Atl. ..

., R, R1. .. , Ge).

Note that one could use (3) to solve for At in terms of current and
past R and substitute that solution into (5) to derive an observable re-

lationship between P, current and past R, and a term (Ge) which is
not (by assumption) related to (current or past) R&D expenditures. In
the light of our previous discussion, however, one should not interpret
this relationship as a production function for patentable output as it does

not distinguish the direct effect of R&D on patents from the effect of
supply shocks on R&D and patents?1
Taking (3), (4) and (5) together one finds three sequences

({A} ,

[BtJ and {C}) which determine the evolution of q, R, and P.

Let the logarithms of the random variables in these sequences be 4a} (b}and

is

the time—series analogue of the classical simultaneous equations
problem involved in estimating static production—type relationships; see
Marschak and Andrews (1944).

—12—

In what follows we shall assume that these latter sequences evolve as

three mutually uncorrelated covariance stationary stochastic processes and
use their moving average representations (see Wold, 1948), given by

(6)

!a€_,

a =

where a0 =

b1

bt =

0b30 1 and

bl,Tnl,t_t

'

03,13,tT
are the three mutually

uncorrelated white—noise processes (i.e., processes which are serially

uncorrelated with constant variance) from which {a} [b} and
can be derived.

12

Finally, using a logarithmic approximation to HC) in

(3) and to P() in (5), substituting (6) into these equations and into
(4), and eliminating all unessential constant terms, one derives the moving

average representation of the stochastic process generating {q, r, p}

(r =

log K and p = log

P) as;

£t+fllt
(7)

r =
=

technical

T=otT

+

remarks should be made here. First, time dummy variables
are added to all equations in the empirical work. These ought to pick up
any linearly deterministic component in the processes generating {a}.
and we therefore ignore such components in what follows.
{b }, and
Seond, the appendix considers tests of the basic assumptions of the model
which do not require covariance stationarity;. these assumptions made no
difference to the major results.

—13—

It is the system in (7), and its autoregressive transformation, which will
be investigated in the next sections.13

Suppose now that an unexpected, research—related event occurred during
the previous time period which increased the market value of the firm by
X percent, i.e., L

= X.

The returns on holding the firm's equity over that

period, will, as a result be X percent above the market rate of return.
This same event will also cause changes in the firm's R&D programme and in

its patent applications. Current R&D expenditures will go up by

c20X per-

cent above what would have been expected for them at t—l (past L's can be
estiraal-.ed from past R's; see the autoregressive representation of this system

in the next section), while expected R&D expenditures t

percent. Similarly patent applications t
percent.

A. realization of

periods

periods

ahead will go up by

ahead will go up by

equal to, say, X is noise in the

sense that it never (either currently or in the future) affects p or r;

while a realization of ri =

x

will never affect either research expenditures

or the value of the firm and in this sense can be interpreted as a change in

the propensity to patent given the history of the output of the firm's R&D
laboratorieg.

13Several points should be noted here. First, for purposes of interpretation
one should keep in mind that r and Pt refer to R&D expenditures and patent
applications in the coming year while q refers to the stock market rate of
return over the previous period. This is a result of the assumption that
decisions on r and p are made at the beginning of the year and that assumption
was supported well by the data (see the next section). Second, there are at
least two approximations of the R() equation which lead to the same moving
average representation of the model:
B-.-

H(.)

=

A

E wtRt
r=O

and

H(•) = A

tinguish

H R

=o Lt

.

The reason one cannot dis-

between them is that equation (7) cannot tell us whether any persistence
In the effect of past -C's on current r is a result of the complementarity of past
r's or of a persistence of the effect of past c's on A. Finally, the equation
C

for

uses the approxination e

+111

—14—

II.

Test Statis tics and Prwneter Estimates

-

The model of the last section is refutable in the sense that it places
testable restrictions on the stochastic process generating y =

ri

Before going on to the parameter estimates, it will be useful to consider
those restrictions and their interpretation in terms of the assumptions of the
model.

To begin, note that if the model of the last section is appropriate, then
the moving average representation of the process generating yCt) can be written
as,

(8)

=

c

+ B(L)n

where now (t , r l,t r2,t r3, )= (c t ,

ri')
t

are four mutually uncorrelated

white—noise deviates, c(L) is a column vector,and B(L) is a diagonal
matrix of polynomials in L. Models of this form have been called dynamic
factor analysis models (Geweke, l977b) or unobservable index models (Sargent
and Sinis, 1977). The name is a result of the fact that in (8) there is a
single stochastic process built up from the

that accounts for all the

—15—

observed

intercorrelations between the components of y. That is, each of

the components of r affect one, and only one, of the y elements (8(L)
is diagonal). In particular, ri3, which....is interpreted as the process

generating differences in the protensity to patent, is noise in the economic
sense that it never affects either the firm's value or its R&D programme.
With three observable deviates the single factor model is overidentified and

thus can be tested. The model [equation (7)] also implies that the uppermost polynomials in both c(L) and 8(L) equal unity. This is Fama's (1970)

semi—strong test of market efficiency. Since the history of 6 and

can be estimated from the history of

11

y, the implication we are testing

here is that movements in the rate of return on firms' stocks cannot be
predicted from available information: or that realizations of
represent the effect of events which were not known at the beginning of

the period. Finally, note that if the model is a good approximation to the

data then the middle polynomial in 8(L) is irrelevant

all the variance in r

0). Thus

can be accounted for by the factors affecting p

and q; that is, there is no measurement error in r. A model allowing
for measurement error in r is discussed briefly in the appendix. There it
is shown that one of the more striking implications of the empirical findings
is that there is no need to allow for such a measurement- error
14

[var(n2 )/var(e) = 01.

contrasts sMrp.y with other studies which relate current and past
research expenditures to indirect measures of current benefits (such as
productivity). See the review by Griliches, 1979, and, in particular, the
error—variance ratios estimated by Fakes and Schankerman, 1980.

—16—

Inverting the matrix polynomial which defines the nao'ing-

average representation of the y process, one derives the autoregressive
representation of this process as,

=

(9)

D(L)yt

1

+

The restrictions of the model in terms of this autoregressive representation are

r
o

D(L) =

0

0

0

d22(L)

0

and

Do =

0
d33(L)

1

1

0

0

c0

0

0

c

1

3,0
I

where

'l,t' t'

rI3,t)

133c3( -

[1—d22(L)F1 = c2(L)

,

and

1/c20,
[1-d33(L)]1 =

b(L)

—17—

Note that the restrictions the model places on D(L) are all exclusion
restrictions and thus particularly simple to test. On the other hand,
there is a nonlinear restriction on the covariance matrix of disturbances

from the projection of y on its past values; that is D0AD
[A

E(ctcP] contains only five free parameters, while its unrestricted

form has six of them. There is, however, a recursive translation of (9) in

which this nonlinear constraint becomes another exclusion restriction, an
which (by its recursive nature) permits equation-by-equation estimation
techniques. Due to the simplicity of this recursive form (which has

as a function of the history of y, r as a function of

history of y, and Pt as a function of

r

and the

and the history of

we concentrate on estimating it in what follows.

The data used here are the successful patent applications, the R

D

expenditures, and the annual rate of return on the stocks of l2u firms

over eight years. The sample of firms and the method of constructing the
patent variable are discussed in Pakes and Griliches (l98t). The
observations on the one-period rate of return are the same as those on the
Crisp Master File (1975).

The test of market efficiency in the recursive form is the test of

whether q can be predicted by past values of itself, r, or p. That
is, if the market is efficient there should be no simple (in our case
linear)

trading nile based on the history of y which allows one to

make

excess returns on the stock market.
Table

1 presents test statistics for this hypothesis. Column (1)

shows that it is reasonable to assume that

is uncorrelated with past

values of itself; column (2), that it is uncorrelated with past values of

—16—

Table

Test Statistics for

1: Tests of the Unpredictability of q
Joint Signifiecmcea

Included in the equation

Four lagged
values of

q

r,p

q,r,p

(1)

(2)

(3)

q

F'

0.llW

n.i.

O.441

r

F1'

n.i.

1.82'

2.00!

p

F"

n.j.

O.40-"

0.32k"

r,p

F8

n.r.

1.492'

1.562'

r,p,q

F'2

n.r.

n.r.

l.09'

W There

are 480 observations (120 firms over four years). Time dummies

are included in all equations.

'Not included' and 'not relevant' are

denoted by n.j. and n.r.

Critical values are 2.39 and 3.36 at 5 and 1 percent respectively.
si

Critical

values are 1.96 and

2.55

at S and

Critical values are 1.78 and

2.23

at S and 1 percent respectively.

1

percent respectively.

.

—19--

r or p; and column (3) that it is uncorrelated with past value of itself,

r, or p

Thus rates of return do seem to represent unpredictable move-

ments in the value of the firm, or at least movements that cannot be predicted
with the variables in our data set.

To obtain the recursive form of the

r equation, note that

can

written as

0qt +V

6

(10)

t

where

8 =

c?

i?

(l

in q. and v

that

,

—

e)Et

is, 0 is the signal—to—total—variance ratio
—

l,t'

from which it follows that v is un—

correlated with q and with past values of all variables. Substituting

(10) into the equation for r in (9 ) one obtains

r = c28q + d22(L)r1 +

(11)

Note that the variance of the disturbances in this equation is

so that (together with the first coefficient and a) it can be used to
identify 8 •

and therefore c20. The model predicts then that in a

regression of r

on lagged r, current and lagged q, and lagged p.

all the coefficients but those on current q and lagged r should be close
to zero.

The recursive form of the

p equation can be obtained either by

manipulating (9) or directly from (7). Multiplying the latter equation
-l

through by b3(L)

= 1 —

d33(L) and making the substitution,

=

c2(L) 1rt

—20—

Pt c2(LY [1 - d33(L)]r + d33(L)P_i +

(12)

3,t

Here the model implies that in a regression of p on current q and r
and on lagged values of all variables, all the q coefficients should be
close to zero.

Table 2 presents the results. The unrestricted autoregressive forms
of these equations have been presented for comparison, while the relevant

test statistics are presented at the bottom of the table. Beginning with
the R

D equation [column (1)] one finds two rather striking implications

of the estimates. First, the events leading the market to re-evaluate the
firm are indeed highly and positively correlated with the events leading
the firm to change its B F D policy from what would have been predicted given

There is really

the firm's observable history (i.e., the history of

no doubt on this point as the coefficient of

is large and estimated

with great precision. Equally striking is the fact that we can be quite

sure that each of the coefficients of the lagged p variables in this
equation are very close to zero (once again all of the estimates are near

zero and their standard errors are small, see also test T2 of this

column). Thus once we account for the influence of past r and past q
(or just past r, see appendix) the additional information in movements

in past p is information which never affects R & D expenditures. This
is confirmation of our interpretation of the n3 process as differences
in the propensity to patent for a given history of the firm's R&D programme,

since changes in it do not affect r.
The only implication of the model, then, which is not strongly
supported by the estimates of column (1), is the zero restriction on the

—21—
Table

2: Te8t Statistics and Paraneter E'atimatesW

R
Recursive
(1)

Patent equation

0 equation (r)
Autoregressive
(2)

Constrained
(3)

Recursive
(4)

Autoregressive
(5)

Constrained
(6)

Coefficient of

rt
r tl

n.j.

n.j.

n.j.

0.60

0.11

n.j.

0.60

0.89
0.0$

0.90

0.05

0.92

-0.21

0.15

0.34

0.12

—0.21

-0.06

-0.10

0.07

-0.04
Q.Q7

-0.13

-0.20

0.17

-0.15

0.21
O07

0.24

0.14

0.03

0.00

0.16

0l8

0.04

-0.03

-0.02

—0.03

-0.13

-0.14

0.1'.

-0.15

pti

0.00

0.00

002

n.j.

0.45

0.45

p t—2

0.03

0.02

0.03

0.02

n.i.

0.32

0.05

0.30

pt—3

-0.05

003

-0.04

n.j.

0.45
0.05
0.30
0.05
0.00

006

-0.02

0.00

pt4

0.00

0.00

0.02

n.i.

0.14
0.05

0.14

005

0.14

qt

0.13

002

n.j.

0.13

0.00

n.j.

n.j.

0.05

003

0.05

003

n.j.

-0.02

0.07

0.01

0.07

n.i.

qt—2

0.08

0.03

0.08

003

n.j.

-0.04
0.07

0.01

0.07

n.j.

qt—3

0.04

003

0.05

003

n.i.

0.05
0.07

0.08

0.07

n.j.

q t—k

—0.02

0.02

-0.02

n.j.

-0.01

-0.02

0•0'.

n.j.

0.035

0.036

0.035

0.203

0.215

0.201

0.01

0.05

Teat
T1

0•02

0.02

0.0$

0.06

0.03

0.02

0.05

0.05

0.02

O•17

0.16
0.13

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.06

statistics./
2196.52

2205.88

1.91

1.52

7.54S/'

3.29

Notes on next page

9.92
358.75

335.62
0.40

011
015
0.16

017
0.12

005
005
0•06

0.05

—22—

Small numerals are standard errors. See also note a to Table 1.

T1, T2, and T3 are the observed values of the F-test statistic for
the joint significance of, respectively, the R &.

D

variables, the

patent variables, and the one-period rates of return. The critical
values are 2.39 and 3.36 at S and 1 percent respectively, except as
specified in note d.

LI

Critical

values are 2.23 and 3.06 at S and 1 percent respectively.

—23—

lagged q coefficients. The relevant test statistic here is

T3 of

column (2) which is significant at the 5 but not at the 1 percent level.

Additional results discussed below indicate that we observe marginally

significant lagged q coefficients because the assumption that the process

generating r has a low—order autoregressive representation is questionable. Since this is a technical problem, and since correcting for it does
not change any of the basic implications of the parameter estimates, we shall
ignore it below, and accept the column (3) estimates for the

r equation.

15,16

15The series available for each of our firms were longer for rt than for
Pt or q (see Pakes and Griliches, l9BOb). When nine lagged values of r
were entered into the r equation the eighth and ninth lags were still marginally significant (which indicates that the rt process is close to not having
a low—order autoregressive representation). If one generalizes and assumes
that the r process does have a low—order autoregressive moving—average representation, one would expect lagged q to enter the rt equation. A direct set of
estimates for the autoregressive moving—average model of the r equation can be
provided by using current and lagged q as an error—ridden indicator of the
moving—average component of that process and then using the excluded earlier
values of r as instruments on the included values of that variable. When this
was done we found that the implications of the parameter estimates were
essentially the same as those of the estimates in column (3). Note that the
appendix provides a set of tests of the basic assumptions of the model which
does not require the process generating y to have an auto—regressive representation, or for that matter to be stationary. These results also support our
assumptions.

t6Another interesting detail can be gleaned from the estimates. They imply
that the process generating r is quite close to a random walk, though the
random walk and the weaker martingale hypothesis can both be rejected at conventional significance levels. Thus firms which experience events which cause
them to increase (decrease) their R&D expenditures are not likely to revert to
their former level of expenditure for some time (see also the discussion in the
next section) and a reasonable predictor for r÷1 is simply rt.

—24—

Moving to the patent equation is clear that current and past changes
in R&D (past changes only in column (5)] have a significant effect on

changes in current patent applications (test T1). Though this was,
perhaps to be expected (see Pakes and Griliches, 1980b) what is more
surprising is that once the effect of R&D expenditures on patent applications is taken care of, other factors which lead to a change in the market's

evaluation of the firm are not correlated with patent applications (test T3).

In particular, all the q coefficients in the p equation are near zero
and this leads one to accept the interpretation of the error in the

regression of p on the rt

as differences in the propensity to patent, given

the market value of the output of the firm's current and past research
expenditures.

Since the results support our interpretation, we now go on to explore
the implications of the parameter estimates in greater detail.

III. SOME I}IPLICATIONS OF THE PARAMETER ESTIMATES

We begin with the implications of our estimates for the interpretation

of movements in q and r. Noting that

=

0.10 and using the parameters

of the R&D equation one finds a O(cx2/c2) of 0.05. That is, about 5 percent
of the within—period variance in the rate of return is caused by events which

also cause changes in both R&D expenditures and patent applications?7 A U of

0.05 iuiplies that c2(=DrIaE)

= 2.60.

This implies that a 1 percent increase

in R&D expenditures above what would have been predicted given past information
is associated with events that have caused an increase in the value of the firm

of 0.39 percent. Evaluating derivatives at the means of all variables one finds
that a $100 unexpected increase in R&D is associated with research and patent—related

17The firms in our sample are all rather large (the average value of their common
shares is $1,514 million) and diversified and do a fair amount of research.

—25—

events that have increased the value of the firm by $1,870.18 Recall that
our results implied that there was no need to allow for measurement error
in R

D (see the discussion in Section II and the appendix) so that all

unpredictable changes in R F4 D have this interpretation. The unexpected
increase in patents is

+

where, from our estimates c30 = 1.56.

Thus events which lead to a unit increase in £

result

in a 1.56 percent

increase in successful patent applications. Much of the variance in the
unexpected change in the patent variable (about 94 percent of it) is

noise, so that one finds that al percent increase in patents will, again
on average, reflect only a 0.044 percent increase in the market value of
the finn; alternatively, one additional patent indicates that events have
occurred which increase the firm's market value by $810,000.

Figure 1 presents the estimates of the distributed lags from c to

r [labelled c2Cr)] and from c to- p [c3(t)}, while Figure 2 presents
the distributed lags from r to p [y(L)J and from 1)3

Figure

to

p [b3(L)II

1 makes it clear that the events which change the market value of

a firm's research programme have a persistent effect on both patents and
R

D expenditures. As a result interfirni differences in R & D

expenditures are quite stable over time, and if we are seeking their causes
we should look for factors in the firm's environment whose effects are likely

to persist. On the other hand, the small changes that do occur in the
firm's R & D expenditures are almost entirely determined by recent events.

18The means reported here are sample means, i.e., they are calculated over all
observations (N firms and T years), and thus require the use of price deflators.
The consumer price index was used to deflate stock—market values while the R&D
deflator discussed in Fakes and Griliches (l98Oa) was used for R&D expenditures.
The base year for these deflators is 1972, so all dollar figures in the text are
in 1972 dollars.

c.(T)

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

G.09

0.1

0

2

4

Figure

1:

6

8

10

c3cr)

12

14

The Distributed Lag Prom
c

16

to

r

18

jc2(r)]

20

and From

3

c

.31

63

to p
(c3(r)1.

65

67
T

69

a'

I..,

—27—

Thus events that occurred over three years earlier will have
the same effect on

them. The estimates of

as on

essentially

and cannot cause differences between

c3(r) is similar to that of c2(t) except for

the fact that the effect of the c on p tends to increase before
declining, giving the impression that p reacts to the E

a little more

slowly than r does. Thus moving to Figure 2, one sees that patent
applications follow the factors determining the productivity of current
R

D expenditures (and hence R

D demand) quite closely.

The sum of the coefficients in the distributed lag from r to p is
1.18, implying that the events leading to a 1 percent increase in R

D

expenditures will, eventually, lead to a 1.18 percent increase in patented

innovations. About 50 percent of these patents will be applied for in the

same year as the R D expenditures are incurred, while 70 percent will be
applied for within three years. In fact, if from c2(t) one gets the impression
that

events

which cause unexpected changes in R&D expenditures start a chain

reaction which leads to more R&D expenditures far into the future, then y(r)
seems to be describing a situation where firms patent around the links

of this chain almost as quickly as they are completed. There is also
a long slim tail of the distributed lag from r to p which probably represents the effect of the basic research done lit
innovations

the past on current patented

19

results on the form of the lag between R&D and patents are quite
similar to what Zvi Griliches and I, in joint preliminary work, have suggested
for that lag structure, see Pakes and Criliches (1980b). Here again the reader
should be cautioned not to interpret this lag structure as representing a
production—type relationship between past R&D and patentable output (see Section I).

I

6

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Ii

0.7

u.8

0.9

1.0

0

2

4
6

y(t)

8

10

12

b3Qr)

From

14

Figure 2: The Thstributed Lag

16

r

18

20

22

to p [y(t)J Lnd From

24

n3

to

26

28

[b_ H)]

T

30

to

—29—

The estimates of g(TJ

indicate that interfirm differences in the

propensity to patent are not as stable over time as one might have expected.
Thus, recalling that

t

is the propensity to patent (g =

we find that the correlation of
=

1,

and

Ib

ri

.r=°

—

)

is only about 0.75 for

going down to around 0.6 for t = 2, 3, and 4, and decaying at

a fairly constant rate of 0.9 thereafter.

A question of general interest is: how good a measure of inventive output can be derived from the recently computerized U.S. Patent

Office data base? Here we are associating inventive output with those
events that cause differences in the c's, that is, with those events that
are related to R&D activity and cause changes in the stock market value

of the firm. The data suggest that some differences in patent applications
approximate differences in inventive output quite closely, while others
do not.

Consider constructing a cross section of patent applications by firm
in order to study the causes of interfirm differences in inventive output

(or their effects). The estimates indicate that 76 percent of the inter—
while the rest is noise.

firm variance in patents is caused by the

If one were to ask what proportion of the variance in Pt is caused by
the events determining current research demand the answer would be a little,

but not much, less. To see this we consider the projection of p onto

+ g where cov(g ,

i.e., Pt =

tions indicate that

r)

=

a.20 Appropriate calcula-

= 1.12 while varQPr)/var(P) =

0.74.

A 1 percent

difference in R will, therefore, lead to a 1.12 percent difference in
patent applications, while about 74 percent of the interfirm variance in

Pt can be attributed to interfirm variance in r. Inverting these cal—

zere

= Ec

(r)y(T)/c (0), where cCr) =

cov(r

r) and y(T) is the

t—th lag coefficient in the distributed lag from r to p.

—30—

culations one finds that, on the average, a 1 percent difference in current
patent applications is associated with factors that have led to a 0.66 percent

difference in Rt;aor (on evaluating derivatives at the sample means
of all variables) a difference of one patent is associated with events

on average, lead t.

tk4t.

Unfortunately

a 3O thousand

dollar difference in current R&D act. .ric.

intrafirm differences in patent applications do not

seem to be as good an indicator of intrafirm differences in inventive

output as interfirm differences. The proportion of the variance in

caused by the e is about 8 percent, with 45 percent of this

-

8 percent being caused by research-related and patent-related events that

changed
ratios

the market value of the firm in

the given period (by er). These

do, however, increase significantly when one takes intrafirm

differences in patent applications that are farther apart. The proportion
of the variance in

p -

is

caused by the 6

15 percent, with

over 7S percent being caused by events that occurred during the S-year

period. For ten-year differences the figures move to over 20 and 85
percent respectively. Thus if one were to use intrafirm differences in
patent applications tO study the effect of changes in a firm's inventive
output on, say, its investment policy or its share of a given market,
then one ought, probably, to stick to longer-term changes in all variables.22

21That is

rt =

D'p+g'.

where

cov(g',

=

0,

and

=

.66.

difference between the interfirm and intrafirm results is a function of
the form of the lag structures which the data prefers, that is of the relative
stability of Y(L)r when compared with the instability of

—31—

IV.

Conc ludinq Remarks

Empirical

work on either the causes or the effects of inventive activity

has had difficulty in finding variables which are able to indicate when

and where changes in inventive output have occurred. The recent
computerization of the U.S Patent Office's data base may provide some help

in this context but there is the problem that a priori one does not know
the relationship between successful patent applications and any

economically meaningful measure of this output. To provide a partial
answer to this question this paper investigates the relationship between
successful patent applications, a measure of the inputs into the inventive

process (R

D expenditures) and a variable which provides a measure of,

among other diverse factors, the economic value of the output from this

process (movements in the stock-market value of the firm's equity). The
model used to interpret these relationships was relatively simple. The
firm was

assumed to choose its R & U

expenditures to maximiie the

discounted value of the net cash flows from its activities;
was

expected

the market

assumed to evaluate this expectation (subject to error) on the

basis

of information available at different dates; and patents were assumed to be an
error—ridden indicator of the market value of the events that lead to changes in the

firm's research activities. The error process in the patent equation was
assumed to be noise in the economic sense that it never affected either

the value of the firm or its R D expenditures. In the model, then, the
complexities and the randomness inherent in both the inventive process and
in the patenting decision are left to be captured by stochastic processes.

—32—

A distinct advantage of considering the model in detail is that it

places refutable restrictions on the process generating p, r, and q,
whfth in turn allow one to test whether the interpretation we are giving
to the parameter estimates is consistent with the observed behaviour of

the data. Here the empirical results supported our interpretation, quite
strongly, as our parameters were estimated with much more precision than
is characteristic of most studies of technological change, and, as the
appendix shows, they are quite robust to the simplifying assumptions used

in the text. Theta are two empirical implications of these test results
which, though discussed in detail only in the appendix, are likely to be

of some interest to future research in this area. First, there seems to
be very little measurement error in R&D. Second, though in principle the
availability of data on both p and r ought to allow one to investigate events
that have a direct effect on patentable output separately from those events
which only affect patents through the R&D expenditures they induce, to imple-

ment this research strategy one is likely to require an additional variable

which

discrimintes between these two types of events more sharply than R&D

does (perhaps investment expenditures).
Our major interest is in the

relationship between patent application's

and the market's evaluation of the output of the firm's research activities.

An understanding of this relationship would allow us to use the patent data
to study the causes and effects of a firm's formal inventive endeavours.

The precise parameter estimates are presented in the last section but the

general character of the results can be summarized quite succinctly. Inter—
firm differences in patent applications seem to follow interfirm differences in the market value of a firm's research output quite closely, but

—33—

intertemporal differences in a firm's patent applications are largely
a result of interteinporal differences in its propensity to patent. This
last statement must be modified when one considers longer—term differences
in the patents applied for by a firm, since a larger portion of their
variance is caused by events which lead the market to re—evaluate the
firm's inventive output during the period.

- Al-

Appendix: Generalizations and Robustness Tests

In this appendix I consider two generalizations of the model presented

in the text and show why the data indicate they are not necessary. The first

is to allow for measurement error in r (by measurement error I mean a

stochastic process which affects r but does not affect p or q). The
second is to allow for two dynamic factors. The discussion of the relevance
of these generalizations will focus attention on two of the empirical findings

which supported the model presented in the paperJ These findings are that -

the

bivariate process generating

(r, p} exhibits a Granger ordering from

r to p, i.e., r>p;2. and that the covariance matrix formed by the disturbances from the projection of (q r, p) on their past values has the
form given in equation (9) (see p.l6). The special form of this covariance
matrix can be given an intuitive explanation in terms of the model used in
the text.

The innovation (or disturbance) in

r should reflect unexpected

'There are actually three empirical findings which underlie the interpretation
given in the text to movements in (q, r, p). The third is that movements in q
cannot be predicted by a linear function of the observable variables which
describe the fin's history. This point, however, has been investigated fairly
thoroughly elsewhere and has received substantial support in many different contexts (see Fama, 1970, for a review of the literature).
-

=> p iff, in a regression of r on lagged r and lagged p, the lagged p do
not help in predicting current r, see Granger (1969). Our finding is that
r > p but p j, r.

-P.2-

events that change the expected discounted value of the firm's R&D activity

and should therefore be highly correlated with q; while that part of the

innovation in p which cannot be predicted from the innovation in the r
series is noise in the economic sense that it is not related to

q. Thus,

if one projects q on the innovations in both r and p, the coefficient
of the innovation in r should be positive and significant while that of

the innovation in p should be zero. This zero restriction is equivalent
to the restriction on the covariance matrix in equation (9).
The appendix concludes with a set of tests showing the robustness
of these two empirical results to some of the simplifying assumptions used
in the text.

Interest in the two factor model stems from replacing the patent
equation given in the text with a more structural model of the patenting

process [see equation (5) and the discussion preceding it}. To build such
a model we would introduce an additional sequence of random variables,

which

determined the productivity of current and past R&D expenditures in producing

valuable output, and retain {G} as the sequence determining the amount
of patents applied for given the output produced. Thus, one would replace
equation (5) in the text by

P = P(F,

G). Clearly, current

1t,

and past values of F would be among the determinants of R&D demand so that
if one were to use this patenting equation, the equation which sets
Rt

[equation (3)] would have to be replaced by

max H(R

,F, F_1...St)_R.

St is introduced into this equation to allow for factors which have an effect on
R&D demand but have no independent effect on patentable output; that is, for
factors which only affect patents through the change in R&D expenditures they

induce. To allow for measurement error in R&D one simply reinterprets
to be the (latent) optimal value of R&D expenditures derived from the

It

model and introduces the sequence

(W}

to represent measurement error

in R&D. That is, observed R&D expenditures, say R° ,
=

WtR.

=

Assuming

is

given by,

log W, s = log S, and f = log

P1,

evolve as three stationary processes and solving for the moving average
representation of this model (see page 13) we have:

=

r1 =

(Al)

where

b20 =

+ 2,t +

l,t

T=O 2,1,T l,t t

Pt =

t=O 3,l,t l,t r

b30

=

=
t=O

lt

6i,i:—t

r = log

1,

+

T!o 2,2,r 2,t t

+

+
E0C3,2,tc2,t_

it°,

w =

t=o2IT2tT

3t3

t—t

t=02,TZ,tT

and the rest of the variables are as

f= S f.€2
t=O

defined in the text. It is assumed that

Lit

L2,t 1l,t '

and

represent realizations of mutually uncorrelated white noise processes,
and that all sequences of the form

{a.} (here, and in the discussion below)

are square sumxnable.

The question which arises then is under which conditions can the model
in (Al) generate the empirical results referred to above. First, consider the
conditions required of (Al) in order for there to be a Granger ordering from

r to p.

It is easiest to investigate this issues by using a result due to

Sims (1972, Theorem 2); r > p

is equivalent to there being a one—sided

-Are -

distributed

lag from r to p. Let the distributed lag coefficients from

a two—sided regression of p or r be given by the sequence
S

and let their z—transfornt be h(z) =

h.z

Then

.

h(z) can be found

j=_oo3
from the appropriate covariance—generating functions as

h(z)
(A2)

—1
= g
(z)
(z)g
r,r,
p,r

=[c31(z)c21(z1)

+ c32(z)c22(z)k2]
+ c2

where

2(z)c2 2(z 1)k2 + b2(z)b2(z')k]1

generating function of x and y,

k =

Var(nz)/Var(c1),

sequence

{c1 , 1 .1

is the cross—yariance

that is

(z) = E E(x t,ytJ

g

= Var(s2)/Var(ci).

and c11 (z)

!

c1 ' 1

Z

z—transform of the

and so on for other sequences

With this notation the Sim's result is r >p

being one—sided in non—negative powers of z
that if

(the

T=o

is equivalent to h(z)

(h. = 0 for all I

< 0).

Note

= k2 = 0, one returns to the model used in the text, and the proof

of the one—sidedness of h(z) in this model can be obtained by multiplying (Al)
—1

—

—

.

by c21(z) c21(z) =1, since then, h(z) = c31(z)c21(z) [c21(z)c21(z )]

(c2 1(z)c2 1(z1)] = c 3,1 (z)c2 1(z)1,
powers of z.
or

0?

#

analysis

which involves only non—negative

Our question is, however, can h(z) be one—sided if either
The case where

= 0

but

#

0

is the dynamic factor

model with a single dynamic factor and error processes affecting

each variable. The question of whether there can be a Granger ordering in this
model has been investigated, in a slightly different context, by Sims (1977)

-AS-

and Geweke (1977b). Clearly for h(z) to be one—sided in this case we

require a relationship between c11(z) and b11(z). Though I know of no
necessary condition that this relationship must satisfy, the condition given

by both Sims and Geweke which insures that h(z) is one—sided with

is c11(z) =

Ab11(z)

k # 0

[that this is sufficient can

for some scalar, A

be verified by direct substitution into (A2)J. To see that this condition
will not satisfy the covariance restriction on the disturbances from (9) we

need only note the following fact. The coefficients from the projection of

any one error—ridden indicator of c(q = e +

v)

on any two other error—

ridden indicators of e (the innovations in r and in p) will, if all errors
are mutually uncorrelated, both be nonzero; unless, of course, one of the latter

indicators (in our case the innovation in r) contains no measurement error
(k1= 0), in which case it equals a scalar times
Now consider the case where k

0

C

but k2 t 0. This is a model

with two dynamic factors but no measurement error in r. For there to be a

one—sided h(z) in this model one requires a relationship between c21(z)
and c22(z), which is, perhaps, a little more likely since both these z—trans—
forms summarize the reaction of the same decision variable (R&D expenditures)

to events which cause unexpected changes in the firm's maximand (its stock

market value). In particular, consider the special case of the proportionality

constraint where c21(z) =

c11(z).

Not only will it generate a one—sided

h(z), but also, in this special case, the innovation in r [c21.o(ci+C2)}
is an exact multiple of the stock-market value of all the events which lead to

changes in either R&D or patenting in a given year; thus, the innovation in p

will have no effect on q, which is independent of the innovation in r. In
this case, then, we will not be able to distinguish between the two—factor and

-A6-

the one—factor models.3
6

l,t

That is in order for one to distinguish between

the time pattern of the reaction of R&D to the two different

and 62

kinds of events must be different. Alternatively, if one were considering a
research strategy based on a two factor model, a fourth yariable which does

react differently to El than to

(e.g., investment expenditures) could

be added to the model.

There are two other sets of conditions which I am aware of which can

generate a one—sided h(z) and the covariance matrix of disturbances given
by equation (9); but both of these imply further restrictions which the data

will not accept. One set is

a2 = O,
ii

=

Kc32()

I >

for

c

2,1

(z)

Kc3 1(z), and

for the sane scalar, K. The other is, c21t =

3,l,T =

3,2,t

0 for

C22T=

0

t < Z1+i2+l, and r has a uni—

autoregressive representation of order £2.4 In the first case

variate
h(z) = K,

while in the second Pt is uncorrelated with

vation in rt_t for

T C £1+L2-4-1.

and the inno-

None of these constraints are accepted

by the data.

31f

c21(z) =

c22(z),

then there is an autoregressive representation of the two

factor model which is identical to the autoregressive representation of the

r, p) process provided in equation

(9).

4The proof of both of these assertions is obtained by direct substituion.

Note that in the second case if we1et1(z) *c31(z)c21(z)+c32(z)c22(z)k2
and *2(z) =

l,t =

0

-I-c22(z)c22(z )k2 + b2(z)b2(z )k] then
L. + 1 and •2,t = 0 for
T > &21 which proves that

[c21(z)c21(z
for t

)

h(z) is one—sided. There will be, in this case, a particular value of k2
which satisfies the covariance restriction.

- A7

-

Table A-i summarizes the additional tests I have performed to ensure
the robustness of the r

p finding. Lines 1 present the test statistics

for the joint significance of four lagged p and four lagged r in the
p and r equations (here, as in lines 2 and 3, all estimated parameters
are quite similar to those presented in Table 2). Lines 2 present similar

test results after first-differencing both the p and the r series.
These lines were meant primarily to test whether the result that r

p

was an artifact of our sample selection criteria (our sample was necessarily
limited to large patentees; see Pakes and Griliches, l9SOa for more details

on the sample). Since the selection probabilities are constant over the
sample period, any sample selection bias ought to be nearly eliminated

in the within dimension. Lines 3 present the appropriate test statistics
after weighting each equation by the firm's mean It

D expenditures over

the sample period. Here there was a danger of heteroskedasticity in the

process generating Ir,

in particular I was concerned about the

possibility that the relationship between p and r might be specially
noisy at low levels of R&D expenditures.

Since the logarithmic transfor-

mation makes the associated deviations of p from its sample mean large
in absolute value, it might well induce zero coefficients on lagged p in

the r equation.
Line

4 deserves slightly more attention. All results so far presented

have assumed that the bivariate process generating {r.
covariance

is jointly

stationary, or stationary after some simple transformation of

these variables. Statistical tests performed for joint stationarity reject
it, though it is interesting to see that stationarity of the univariate

- A8-

+

Table

+

A-i: Additional Test Results on the Relationship BetweenW
r: Test Statis ties for Joint Significance
Actual values:
Dependent
variant four lagged values of
r
p

2.

3.

4.

Granger test

1

p

10.29

345.00

2.40

3.40

r

2,128.23

1.47

2.40

3.40

p

5.83

27.89

2.43

3.80

r

3.26

1.74

2.43

3.80

Weighted r.ranger

p

7.56

442.00

2.40

3.40

tests L/

r

1,303.00

1.50

2.40

3.40

Hosoya generalization
p
of Granger condition 4/ r

3.37

86.24

1.70

2.10

590.71

1.34

1.70

2.10

Granger test on
first differences b/

and

Critical values,
percent
5

1.

p

The distributions of the test statistics are F4'"8 in models 1 and 3;

F4'352 in model 2, and F164"" in model 4.

Granger tests performed on first differences of p and r series.
Each firm is weighted according to its mean R
sample period and

Granger

D expenditures over the

tests performed.

The coefficients in the projection of p and r on their lagged values
are not constrained to be the same in different years.

-A9-

process generating r could be accepted. One could allowfor non—stationarity
by permitting the parameters of the estimated model to differ from year to year.
On investigating this possibility we found that though the yearly differences
were statistically significant, their economic implications, as summarized in
the text, were not (which explains why the text only discusses the stationary

case). Line 4 presents the test results for r p and p #'r when all
coefficients are allowed to vary

between the years of the sample. This is,

in fact, the test for Hosoya's (1977) generalization of the Granger condition

for the ordering of two variables. Hosoya's condition does not require that
the bivariate process be covariance -stationary, linearly indeterministic or

have an autoregressive representation; and it is shown to be equivalent to
the Situ's (1972) condition without these assumptions.

A similar

set of robustness tests was performed on the restriction

on the covariance matrix of disturbances from the model's autoregressive form
(maximum—likelihood estimation techniques were used). In no case was the test

statistic greater than its

expected value under the null hypothesis that the

restriction was indeed appropriate.

.

+

+

REFERENCES

Arrow, Kenneth J. "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for
Invention."

In The

Rate cad

wd Social Factors. Edited

Direction of Inventive

Activity: Economic

by R.R. Nelson. (National Bureau of

Economic Research: Universities-National Bureau Conference Series
No. 13.) Princeton: Princeton University Press1 1962, Pp. 609-25.
Comanor, William 5., and F.M. Scherer. "Patent Statistics as a Measure of
Technical Change," Journal of Political Economy, LXXVII (May/June
1969), 392—98.

Crisp Master File. Chicago: Graduate School of Business, University of
Chicago, 1975.

Fama, Eugene F. "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and
Empirical Work," Journal of Finoice, XXV (May 1970), 383-417.
Geweke, John. "Wage and Price Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing." In New
Methods in Business Cycle Research: Proceedings from a Conference.

Edited

of

by Christopher A. Sims. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank

Minneapolis, 1977. Pp. 111-56. (l977a)

"The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time-Series Models:'
In

Latent Variables

and

A.S. Goldberger. Amsterdam, New York, Oxford: North-holland,

1977. Pp. 365-83.

Granger,

in Socio—Economic ModeZ.s. Edited by D .J. Aigner

(1977b)

C.W.J. "Investigating

Causal

Relations by Econometric Models and

Cross-Spectral Methods," Econometrica, XXXVII (July 1969), 424-38.
Griliches, Lvi. "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and
Development

to Productivity Growth," Bell Journal of Economies,

X (Spring 1979), 92—116.

Griliches, Zvi. "Research Expenditures and Growth Accounting,t' in B.R.

Williams (ed.), Science and Technology in Economic Growth, London:
MaciIillan, 1973, pp. 59—95.

and J. Schmookler. "Inventing and Maximizing," Arnericwi Economic

Review, LIII (September l963) 725-29.
1-iosoya, Yuzo. "On the Granger Condition for Non-Causality," Econoraetr'ica,

XLV (October 1977), 1735-36.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr, and Edward C. Prescott. "Investment Under Uncertainty,"
Econometrica, XXXIX (September 1971), 659-81.

Marschak, Jacob, and W.H. Andrews, Jr. "Random Simultaneous Equations and
the Theory of Production," Econometrica, XII (July-October 1944),
143—205.

Meese, Richard. "Dynamic Factor Demand Schedules for Labor and Capital

Under Rational Expectations," Journal of Econometrics, XIV
(1980), 141—58.

Nelson, Richard R. (ed.). The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity:
Economic and Social Factors. (National Bureau of Economic Research:
Universities-National Bureau Conference Series Nc. 13.) Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1962.

Fakes, Ari1 and Zvl. Griliches. "Patents and R&D at the Firm Level: A
First Look," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No.
561, 1980a.

_____________________________

"Patents and

Report," Economics Letters, 5,

R&D

at the Firm

377—381, 1980b.

Level: A First

Pakes, Ariél and M.A. Schankerman, "

An

Exploration Into the Determinants

of Research Intensity," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper, No. 438, 1980.
Rosenberg, Nathan. "Science, Invention and Economic Growth,' Economic
Journal,

LGO(IV, March 1974, 90—108.

Sargent, Thomas J. "Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules under
Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI
(December 1978), 1009-44.

• Macroeconomic Theory. New York and London: Academic Press, 1979.
•

and Christopher

A. Sims. "Business Cycle Modeling without Pretending

to Have Too Much A Priori Economic Theory." In New Methods in Business
Cycle Re8earch: Proceedings from a Conference. Edited by Christopher A.
Sims. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1977.
Pp. 45—109.

Scherer, Frederic M. "Corporate Inventive Output, Profits, and Growth,"

Journal of Political Economy, LXXIII (June 1965), 290-97. (l965a)
"Firm Size, Market Structure, Opportunity, and the Output of
Patented Inventions," American Economic Review, LV (December 1965),
1097-125. (1965b)

Schmookler, Jacob. Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1966.

• and Oswald H. Brownlee. "Determinants of Inventive Activity,"
American Economic

Review, LII

(May

1962), 165-76.

Sims, Christopher A. "Money, Income, and Causality,' American
Review,

Economic

LXII (September 1972), 540-52.

"Exogeneity and Causal Ordering in Macroeconomic Models." In

New

Methods in business Cycle Research: Proceedings from a

Conference.

Edited by Christopher A. Sims. Minneapolis: Federal

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 197. Pp. 25-43.

+

+

Taylor,

C.T., and Z.A. Silberston. The Economic Impact of the Patent

System. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press1 1973.
U.S.D.C. Patent and Trademark Office. General Information Concerning

Patents. (003-004-00555-6.) Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government

Printing Office, 1978.
U.S.D.C.

Patent and Trademark Office, Office of Technology and Assessment.

Reports 2—9. Washington, 1973-1979.
von k-{ippel, Eric. "Appropriability of Innovation Benefit as a Predictor of
the

Functional Locus of Innovation,"

Wilson, Robert

Rc'arcth Policy forthcoming.

Woodrow. 'The Sale of Technology Through Licensing."

Unpublished

Ph.D. thesis, Yale University, 1975.

Wold, herman O.A. "On Prediction in Stationary Time Series," Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, XIX (1948), 558-67.

