                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SHOULD PRIVATE PENSIONS BE INDEXED?



                        Martin   Feldstejn



                      Working Paper No. 181




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                          October 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's project on
Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #787
                                                     October 1981




                       Should Private Pensions be Indeçed?


                                    ABSTRACT


          The analysis in this paper was motivated by the apparent puzzle that,
despite substantial uncertainty about future inflation rates, private pensions
are almost universally unindexed. Moreover, although a variable annuity
invested in short—term money market instruments provides a good inflation hedge,
almost all private pensions provide a fixed annuity.

          The results of the analysis indicate that the existence of unindexed
pensions and fixed annuities is not at all surprising. Even without Social
Security, it may be optimal to have a completely unindexed private pension and
i•t; is generally not optimal to have a completely indexed pension.

          The availability of an optimal (or greater than optimal) amount of
Social Security generally reduces the desired degree of indexing and, under a
variety of conditions, makes it optimal to have no indexing at all in the
private pension.

          Because unexpected changes in the price level do not alter the value
of Social Security pensions, the existence of inflation uncertainty makes a
Social Security pension optimal when it would not otherwise be and an increase
in inflation uncertainty is likely to increase the optimal reliance on Social
Security. But despite these conclusions, the analysis shows that including some
Social Security in an overall pension program is necessarily optimal only when
both money market instruments and Social Security have rates of return that are
known with certainty. When the real yield on money market instruments is uncer-
tain, the optimal pension arrangement may be a partially indexed private pension
even though Social Security is risk—free and has a return that is higher than
the expected rate on the money market instrunents. Similarly, when Social
Security is risky, the optimal arrangement may be to exclude Social Security and
to use a partially indexed private pension. In all cases, an individual who has
a low enough degree of risk aversion will prefer no Social Security and a
completely unindexed private pension.




                                               Martin Feldstein
                                               National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                               (617) 868—3905
                           Should Private Pensions be Indexed?

                                   Martin Feldstein*


               In recent years, the rapid and   unexpected   increases in the price level

have significantly eroded the value of retirees' private pension benefits. An

employee who retired in 1970 with a pension equal to 50 percent of the average

manufacturing wage received a monthly check for $289. The 113 percent increase

in the level of consumer prices in the subsequent decade reduced the real value

of that pension benefit by 53 percent to only 24 percent of the average 1970

manufacturing wage. Although some firms have voluntarily increased retirees'

benefits, these adjustments have almost always been far less than the rise in

the price level.

            Since retirees obviously care about their real incomes, it is a puzzle

that, after more than a decade of rapid inflation, private pensions are still

fixed in nominal terms. Why have employers and employees until now not nego-

tiated pension benefits that are indexed or partly indexed to the price level?

Alternatively, why have employee pensions not taken the form of variable

annuities based on floating rate instruments whose nominal yield varies in the

short—run with the rate of inflation (Bodie, 1980a,b)?- Does current

behavior represent a mistake by employees and unions that makes it appropriate

*
   Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President, National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is part of the NBER Study of Public and Private
Pensions. I am grateful to participants in the study for comments on an earlier
version of this paper.

   The   key   issue is the employee's risk of uncertain inflation. It      would not
really   be indexing if, instead of a constant nominal annual benefit, the benefit
rises at a rate that is fixed at the time of retirement. Although the increase
in benefits might be related to the expected rate of inflation, the employee
would continue to bear the entire risk of unexpected changes in inflation. I
shall reserve the term "indexing" for mechanisms that reduce the uncertainty of
real benefits by linking benefits either to the price level or to the yield on
short—term money market instruments.

081981—A
                                          —2—




in   some sense to modify the laws governing pensions to require such indexing?

           The   present paper shows that the existing arrangement with purely
nominal private pensions may in fact be optimal in the presence of the indexed
system of Social Security retirement pensions. Of course,      since an individual

who   relies on a nominal pension is in effect making a risky investment, there
will be unexpected losses and gains. The recent losses by retirees should be
seen as just such an unfortunate ex post outcome and not as an indication that
private pensions are either incompatible with inflation or should be indexed.
Because protection against inflation risk can only be obtained at the cost of
accepting a lower expected rate of     return,1 the potential retiree will generally

choose   to be less than fully protected against inflation, i.e., will choose a
partially indexed pension. Moreover, Social Security      retirement benefits pro-

vide   a fully indexed pension that replaces a substantial fraction of previous
peak earnings for most current retirees.2 The combination      of Social Security

and a private pension thus provides a total pension arrangement that is substan-
tially indexed even if the private pension is fixed in nominal terms. For most



1 Pesando (1981) discusses a very different sense in which it is expensive to
maintain the real value of pension benefits: keeping the same initial pension
benefit and then raising benefits in proportion to the price level clearly
increases the expected value of benefits in all subsequent years. My emphasis
is on reducing the variance around any expected real stream of benefits. A
lower real variance requires investing in assets with a lower expected return
and thus increases the cost (i.e., the initial value of assets) required to pro-
vide any expected stream of real benefits.
 2  An employee who has   had   median earnings for all of his working life now
 retires at age 65 with   a Social Security pension that replaces more than 1.o per-
 cent of his peak pretax earnings. If he is married and his wife does not claim
 benefits on the basis of her own income, his benefit will be increased to more
 than 60 percent of his peak pretax earnings. Since these benefits are not sub-
 ject to income or payroll tax, they replace more than 15 percent of after tax
            Since Social Security is indexed by the Consumer Price Index, it is
 earnings.                                                               of retirees'
 probably overindexed with respect to a true variable—weight measure
 cost of living.
                                           —3—




employees, the extent of indexing in the combined pension may be such that no
indexing of the private pension would be desired.'

             The analysis in this paper makes these ideas more precise and proves

specific conclusions. Although the models employed are clearly a simplification

of    reality, I believe that   they capture the essential features of the problem.

The   first section of the paper analyzes an economy without Social Security in
which all retirement consumption is financed by a private pension. In section
2, Social Security is     introduced and the analysis examines the optimal mix of

Social Security and private pensions as well as the optimal indexing of private
pensions. The third section extends this analysis to a Social Security program
with uncertain benefits.2 There is then a brief concluding section.

1. Optimal Pension Indexing without      Social Security

            The   simplest framework within which   to   analyze the problem of   pension

indexing is a two—period two—asset model. Employees work in the first period

and contribute an amount C to a retirement pension. In the second period of

their life, employees are retired and then receive a pension with real (but

generally   uncertain) value P.


   For employees with very high earnings, Social Security benefits are low rela-
tive to private pension benefits and the degree of overall indexing of the corn—
bined pension is therefore correspondingly low. Although such employees may
prefer to have some indexing of their pension benefits, the legal rules for tax
deductible ("qualified") pensions presumably prevents "discriminating" among
different classes of employees. Moreover, high income employees tend to have
additional portfolio assets and     liabilities with
                                                  which to achieve the overall
desired degree of indexing (although generally with less favorable tax
treatment). For some lower wage employees the opposite is true; the combined
pension provides too niich indexing. I return to these below.

2 All  of the analysis ignores other forms of individual wealth. The vast
majority of retirees depend almost completely on the combination of social
security and other pension income. Additional assets generally consist of only
an owner—occupied home and a small amount of liquid precautionary balances.
                                      _14 —



         In   a "defined contribution" type of pension plan, employee: inve:t

their pension contributions in a portfolio of bonds and corporate stock. '1hen

they retire, they receive an annuity based on the value of these assets. Since

the value of bonds and their interest payments are fixed in nominal terms, the

real rate of return of the bond portion varies inversely with changes in both

the price level and the rate of inflation. Although the real value of corporate

stock should be unaffected by changes in the price level, changes in the

expected rate of inflation do cause changes in real share values.' Thus the

real value of a defined contribution pension invested in any combination of

bonds and stocks is uncertain.

          In the more common "defined benefit" type of pension, the employer

invests the contrfbutions and promises the employee benefits that depend on the

employee's final year's earnings and that then remain fixed in nominal terms.2

In the simplest interpretation of the defined benefit plan, the retired employee

has a fixed nominal annuity that is analogous to a bond. Because the firm can

invest the pension funds in a mix of bonds that exactly matches the benefit obli-

gation, the firm provides this bond yield to the retiree. Although firms may

in fact invest pension assets in a mix of stocks and bonds, the equity owners of

the firm receive the excess return (if any) generated in this way in exchange

 for accepting the extra risk of a non—hedged investment.

           ore generally, however, the employee in a defined benefit plan may

 receive benefits that depend on the performance of the pension fund. This is


 1 See, e.g., Feldstein (l980a, 1980b), Hendershott and Ru (1979) and Summers (1981a).

 2 The nature of the obligation and of the investment is actually more complicated
 in practice. The employer is technically only obligated to provide for the
 "vestedt' benefits that are based on existing service. But to prevent a rapid
 increase in pension costs as employees approach retirement, employers often anti-
 cipate future expected pension obligations. Some firms, however, do not fully
 fund even their vested obligations but substitute an implicit corporate promise.
 See Feldstein (1981).
                                        —5—



true   not only because a low enough value of fund assets can reduce benefits

below the promised level but also because successful pension performance can

lead   to increases in the promised level of benefits and ad hoc "voluntary"
increases in benefits to retirees.' In what follows, I do not distinguish bet-
ween defined benefit and defined contribution plans.
         Although virtually all private pensions are unindexed, this is not
necessary. Zvi Bodie (1980a,b) has recently shown that assets invested in a
sequence of three—month Treasury bills provide a very good inflation hedge.2
Thus, individuals in a defined contribution plan can achieve an essentially
risk—free real return by investing in bills and an employer who manages a
defined benefit plan can offer an essentially indexed pension without additional
risk to shareholders by investing in such bills.
            I shall denote the real return on bills as the random variable rb with
mean b and variance cb. If this type of investment provides a perfect index
asset, there is no correlation between rb and the inflation rate. In some of the
analysis that follows, I shall make the stronger assumption that rb is a
constant (ub = 0). Bodie's empirical analysis showed that the return on the




     See Bulow (1981), Miller and Scholes (1981) and Pesando (1981) on the benefi-
cial interest of employees in the pension fund.
2 More specifically, Bodie showed that to minimize the variance of the real
return on assets, i.e., to come as close as possible to a risk—free price—
indexed investment, the assets should be invested in Treasury bills since their
nominal yield varies directly with inflation. Although the close correlation of
the nominal yield on bills and inflation has characterized the past two decades,
the same relation did not hold in earlier years (Summers, 1981; Mishkin, 1981);
in Bodie's defense, however, it may reasonably   be   argued that the Federal
Reserve Policy in the decade before 1953 makes  this period irrelevant and that
the next decade was one of such price stability that nothing can reasonably be
inferred about the relation between inflation and short—term interest rates.
Bodie shows also that the historical variance may be slightly reduced by
including commodity futures as well. Bodie's optinn.im assumes that short sales
by pensions are not permitted.
                                              —6—


minimum—real—variance portfolio has averaged approximately zero (i.e.,
                                                                                        =   0).

and the annual standard deviation was approximately one percentage point (b=O.OU.

In the    important special case of       =
                                              bb    =   o   "bills" are a perfect real store

of   value   and investment in bills provides an indexed pension.

              Similarly,   I shall denote the real yield on the completely unindexed
pension by the random variable r with mean                  and variance au. This yield can
be interpreted as the yield that is implicit in setting the level of the nominal
annuity of a strict defined benefit plan, or as the ex post yield on the mix of
debt   and equity in a defined contribution plan, or as the ex post yield on a

performance—related        defined benefit plan.
              The real   value of the employee's pension in retirement is given by


 (1.11)                              P = U (l+r) + (C—U) (l+rb)


where C is the pension contribution, U is the amount of the contribution that

 purchases an unindexed pension (of either the defined contribution or defined

 benefit     type) and C—U is the "indexed" portion         represented   by an investment in
 bills. The      employee's problem in designing a pension is thus similar to a port-

 folio allocation problem, i.e., selecting the value of U that maximizes the
 employee's expected utility of retirement consumption E [v(p)] subject to the
 constraint implied by equation 1.1.1 I shall assume throughout the analysis
 that short—sales of either asset are not permitted; thus,                C>U    0.




 1 In principle, the employee decides the size of the pension contribution and
 the form of investment simultaneously. The present analysis takes the size of
 contribution as given.
                                               —1—



                If the returns (ru and rb) are normally         distributed   (or if the

individual's utility function can be approximated by a quadratic function),

the individual's preferences can be represented graphically by a set of indif-

ference curves in terms of the mean and standard deviation of the
                                                                                 portfolio's
terminal value (Tobin, 1958).         Figure   1   combines these indifference curves with
the opportunity locus in the important case in which investment in "bills" pro-
vides a fully indexed pension with zero mean return.
                Consider first the line connecting the origin with point U. The            origin
represents a pension fund invested exclusively in bills (and is therefore marked
with the letter b). Since there is no uncertainty about the real return on
these assets, the standard deviation of the pension benefit is zero. The pen-
sion benefit is therefore C, the initial contribution. Point U represents the
pension that results when the pension is completely unindexed. Since the
standard deviation of the return per dollar contributed to the unindexed pension
is       auu, the standard deviation of the pension benefit is                Equation 1.1
implies that,      for any U, the expected pension benefit is E(P) = C — U +
                                                                                      u(i+)    =

C    +         The expected benefit associated       with the   completely unindexed pension

is thus C +      Uj.   Any   point on the straight line between the origin and U repre-
sents a feasible pension allocation.

               The indifference curve tangent to the bU line at E represents pre—

ferences that lead to a partially        indexed    pension; any move toward more complete

indexing causes a reduction in expected pension benefits that outweighs the

reduction in risk.

               Different preferences would lead to different degrees of pension

indexing. A reduction in risk aversion implies flatter indifference curves
                                       —8—




                                  Figure     1



               Opinal Pension Indexing when Bills are Riskiess




 Mean


                                                         //
Pension                                                       '4.
Benefits

                                                     /
                                                 /
                                             / /
                                             1


                                   2



                           / ,
                      //
           C
                                         iiauu                           U?at
                                                                              uu
                                                                    Standard Deviation
                                                                       of Pension
                                                                        Benefits
                                                   -.9 —




(i.e.,   more nearly parallel to the horizontal axis) and can imply no tangency

along the bU line. In this case, the optimal pension will correspond to point U

with no indexing at all.' Increases in risk aversion shifts the optimum to a

more fully indexed pension but, except for the case of "infinitely" risk averse

individuals, the optimum will not involve a fully indexed pension.2 Thus the

optimal pension will not be fully indexed and may be either partially indexed or

not indexed at all.

           To make these ideas more precise, consider an individual whose pre-

ferences can be represented by a constant absolute risk aversion utility func-

tion, v(P) =   —          with   risk aversion paramenter a > 0 (Arrow, 1971). Since


the amount of the pension contribution that is unindexed is U, the value of the

pension is the random amount P =     C    +     rU.        Thus,



(1.2)                 E [v(P)] = E   [-   __-_ e]
                                           1         —cx(C+r u)
                                              cx
                                                             UI

and, if the return r is normally distributed,

                                                                   222
                                                                   a J uu
(1.3)              E [v(p)] = - —IL- e


Maximizing E ['i()] with respect to U implies the optimal unindexed share of the

pension is


1     pensions could sell bills short and invest in bonds, the true optimum
would be on the extension of line bU with greater yield and greater risk.
2
   Intuitively, an individual who has assumed no risk will always be willing to
accept a small amount of risk in order to raise the mean return.
                                              —10--




(i.)                             =    _______
                                        c&o


For   any   finite value of the risk aversion parameter,       > 0 and the   pension is
less than completely indexed. Moreover, if the risk aversion and the variance
are low enough relative to the expected return, the entire pension fund will be
               *
unindexed (U       C). 1
              Returning   to figure 1, we can consider the effect of an increase in

inflation uncertainty on the optimal extent of pension indexing. An increase in

inflation uncertainty (on the assumption that bills permit complete indexing) is

equivalent to an increase in the variance of the unindexed pension and therefore

a shift in locus of feasible pensions from bU to bU' •         At   every point along bU'

the tradeoff between risk and return is less favorable; a greater increase in

real risk must be accepted for each increase in expected real return. Moreover,

at the degree of indexing that was optimal with the lower level of inflation

uncertainty (i.e., at point E' on bU' that corresponds to point Eon bU), the

individual has the same expected return but more risk.          It seems likely there-

fore that with more initial risk and a less favorable risk—return tradeoff, the

individual would choose to index the pension more completely. This is shown in

 figure 1 where the new      optimum at E2 lies closer than E' to the complete
 indexing point. In the constant absolute risk aversion case of equation l.1& it

 is also clear that an increase in             causes U to fall and the optimal degree

 of indexing to rise.2


 1 Note that a result like l.4 can be obtained with constant proportional risk
 aversion in continuous time models; see Bodie (1979).

 2 It is of course possible that an increase in inflation uncertainty could
 reduce the degree of indexing, i.e., that the indifference curve would be
 tangent to bU' at a point between E', and U' • This would imply that risk aver-
 sion decreased as risk increased for given yield, surely an unlikely preference.
                                            —11—


            This shift in the degree of pension indexing shows two of the adverse

consequences associated with an increase in inflation uncertainty. First, in

order to reduce the added risk, individuals shift their pensions to a more

completely indexed form with lower expected yield. Second, even with a greater

degree of indexing, the individual may       have   a greater risk (as shown in figure 1).

The lower indifference curve at E2 reflects both of these adverse consequences.

           The analysis based on figure 1 and       equation 1.2   assumed the possibi-

lity of a perfectly indexed pension that provides a perfect store of value but

no real return.2- More generally, a pension based on a variable annuity invested

in   money market instruments ("bills") would provide a random return with mean
               2                   2
     variance %b and covariance       with the return on an unindexed pension fund.
With rb uncertain,    it follows   from equation 1.1 that the   variance of the pension

value is (c—u)
                 22        22                2
                  a bb +    uu + 2U(C—u) a    ub    The minimum variance does not
correspond to a   pension invested only in bills but to one in which the unindexed

fraction is


                                              2      2
(1.5)                           U =          %b°ub
                                        2
                                       Gbb
                                             + a2
                                                  uu 2ab
           The real returns on an unindexed pension and on bills may be

correlated either positively or negatively. If the correlation is negative




1 Since a perfect index asset does not exist, such a perfect index pension
would have to be a real liability of the corporation and its shareholders. For
accepting such risk, shareholders would have to be compensated and the return to
employees might therefore be negative. The analysis based on figure 1 and
equation 1.2 can be interpreted as an approximation to either the opportunity
that shareholders offer to employees or the opportunity made available by the
market.
                                        —12—



(e.g., because a higher real short—term interest rate is associated with a
higher   nominal long rate and therefore with a fall in bond prices or in the real

value of a fixed nominal annuity) 0ub < 0 and U is between zero and C, implying

that the minimum variance pension is only partially indexed.     This case   is shown
by the bU curve in figure 2; the point marked U indicates the minimum variance
mix.
            Even   if the correlation between the real yields on bills and on an
unindexed pension is positive, the minimum variance pension is only partly
indexed if °ub < ebb, i.e., if the regression coefficient of the return on the
unindexed pension on the return on bills is less than one. WtTlen this is not
true, i.e., when eub ebb, the minimum variance pension is invested in bills
only.1 If eub =       %b' the investment opportunity locus looks like bU' in figure
2 with the minimum variance at point b. If, however, a2ub > ebb, the invest-
ment opportunity locus looks like bU" in figure 2 with an unconstrained minimum
variance point that corresponds to a short position in the unindexed pension.
                                                                        2       2
            As the indifference curves in figure 2 indicate, whenever a bb      a ub

the optimum pension will never be invested completely in the security that pro-
vides the greatest indexing. This is obvious when the minimum variance real
                                          2      2                               —
return   requires only partial indexing (a ub < a bb); only the portion of the bti

locus between U and U is efficient since a more completely indexed pension would

have both a lower expected return and greater variance. But even when the uncon-

              variance pension is invested in bills only (a2Ub = ebb), the
structed minimum

optimum pension is at least partly unindexed because at point b a small increase in

1 If the constraint that prohibits short positions were relaxed, the minimum
variance pension might involve a negative amount of the unindexed pension.
Bodie's calculation that the minimum variance portfolio contains only bills is
actually a constrained minimum with the short sale of bonds prohibited. Bodie's
calculation also assumes 11b = 0.
                                    —13—


                                  Figure 2


           Optimal Pension Indexing when Bills are Riskj




                                                     U
 Mean
Pension
                                                           U,
Benefits



                                                                U!,




                              I
                              $




                                               Standard Deviation
                                                  of Pension
                                                   Benefits
                                                               —l4—




yield         can be obtained with essentially no increase in risk.1 Only in the case

where the bills—only pension represents a constrained minimum
                                                                                                     variance
     2           2
(a ub >          ° bb   might an indifference curve be tangent to the opportunity locus at

b.           Of course, in all    three     cases individuals with low enough risk aversion will

prefer to have no indexing at all.

                     These ideas can again be made more precise by considering the special

case of a constant absolute risk aversion utility function. It follows from

equations 1.1 and 1.2 that

                                                                   e—aP
(i.6)                         E [v(p)] = E E—                 __

                                            = E [—            L.   e_aE(c_          (1+rb) +   U(1+ru)l


                                             =    -                exp    {         [(c-U)(l+i)      +    u(i+1

                                                  +
                                                      12a
                                                      —            [(c—u)
                                                                               22bb + u22
                                                                                        a uu     +
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                     2U(Cu)a ub'
                                                      2


 MaxizingE[P)l with respect to U implies:


                                            —         +   a ci abb            —
                                                                                  aub]
 (i. i)                    U* =
                                        a [a              +     bb
                                                                      —   2a

                      Since the value of U that miniraizes                        the    real variance is U =

                                                                   it is clear from equation 1.7 that the
 c(a2bb —                         + a2bb —       2a2ub'


 1 At U = 0, da/di = 0.                 To see this, note that the variance of the pension is

         2                                                           and therefore da2/dU = 2 [—(c—u) a2bb
             = [(c—u)2 a2bb +     U2 + 2U(C—U) aubi
                  + (c—2u) ub1• When 0ub = abb, da2/dU =                                  0 at U =   0.
     +

     Since dii/dU =           - 1.tb)   >   0,   da/dll =       0.
                                             —15—


optinal pension will always have less bills (and therefore greater variance) than

the ninirmim    variance   investment. When   variations   in the real yields on bills

and the unindexed pension are negatively correlated (a2Ub <          0),   the minimum

variance     U > 0 and therefore U > 0.      Moreover, for a sufficiently low degree of

risk aversion, U A and the pension is completely unindexed. Similarly, if
 2       2
bb = aUb, U = 0 but U > 0 and, for low enough a, U '            C.   Thus even when

the unconstrained minimum variance pension requires investing in bills only,

the optimal pension will be partly unindexed and may be completely unindexed.
           2     2
Only when °bb < aub by enough to offset the yield differential ( —

will   the pension be invested exclusively in bills but, in that case also, the

bills only portfolio does not achieve the minimum variance.

             The   results of this section can be summarized briefly. Even when a
perfectly     indexed pension can be obtained by investing pension funds in money

market instruments ("bills"), individuals will always prefer a less than completely

indexed pension. When bills are a risky asset, the minimum variance pension may

be achieved by     investing   in bills only or by a partly indexed pension, depending

on the regression coefficient between the unindexed pension yield and the bill

yield. Individuals will, however, always prefer a pension that has more real

risk than the minimum variance pension. In both cases, the individual who has a

sufficiently low degree of risk aversion will want a pension that is invested

exclusively in the higher yielding asset and that makes no attempt to reduce

the    risk of inflation.

2.    Pension   Indexing   with   Riskless Social Security
             As Paul Saniuelson (1958) has shown, a pay—as—you—go Social Security
pension pays a real return on tax "contributions" equal to the real growth rate
                                            —'c—



of   labor income. This is easily shown in the context of the present two—period

model. P.ssuine   that   there are N1 workers in the current generation (denoted by

the subscript i) and that each worker earns a real wage of w1. If the Social

Security program imposes a tax at rate t,          the   total contribution of these

workers   is T1 =   tw1N1.      These funds are immediately paid out as benefits to the
current retirees (i.e., the previous generation of workers). The next genera-
tion of N2 workers will earn w2N2 and pay a total tax of T2 = tv2N2 if the tax
rate remains unchanged. These tax revenues will then be paid out as Social
Security benefits to the current employees, B1 = tw2N2.
            The relation between the taxes paid by the current generation of
workers (T1) and the benefits that they subsequently receive (B1) is thus:

                           B             tw N
(2.1)                    ______       _____________ = (1 + y) (1 + n)
                           T1            tw1N1
                                                         = (1 + g)


where y is the growth rate of real wages per employee, n is the growth rate of
the labor force, and g is the growth rate of total labor income. Thus, even
though Social Security contributions are not invested, participants earn a real
return on their contributions in a growing econonr. In the U.S. econou during
the past 30 years, total employee compensation has grown at an average annual
 rate of about 3 percent.1
           The important feature about the Social Security program in the present
 context is that its pay—as—you—go character makes it automatically indexed. The

 1 The rate of return on Social Security contributions during this period was
 substantially greater because the tax rate Ct) was increased substantially (from
 0.020 in 1950 to 0.133 in 1981). Social Security taxes are also levied only on
 a portion of payroll income and not on the entire employee compensation.
                                         —11—


 real tax revenue available to pay    benefits   may   vary with productivity   and with
 changes in population growth and    labor   force participation, but it does not
 depend   on the price level. As   a result, the United States and other countries
 with
        pay—as—you—go Social Security pensions promise benefits that     are fully
 indexed to inflation.1 In this paper, I shall take the
                                                        pay—as—you_go (i.e.,
 unfunded) character of Social Security as given2 and ask how the
                                                                        existence of
 such Social Secuity benefits influence the
                                                 optimal indexing of private pensions.
 To   begin, I shall assume that there is no uncertainty about the rate of growth
of earnings (g) and therefore that Social Security can provide an indexed
                                                                          pen-
sion with a fixed rate of return, g. I shall examine the optimal mix of
                                                                                  Social
Security and a private pension in this case and then the effect of an
arbitrarily fixed amount of Social Security on the optimal indexing of          the pri-
vate pension. The    fourth section extends the analysis to the more general
situation   in which uncertainty about real growth
                                                        of earnings implies uncertainty
about   the real return on Social Security.

          The simplest case to consider is the one in which bills provide a
                                                                            per-
fect store of value with no uncertainty and a
                                                    zero real return. Social Security
with expected return g and no uncertainty then clearly dominates arr investment
in bills. The individual prefers a combination of Social Security and a com-
pletely unindexed private pension, with the preferred combination reflecting the


   Before 1972, the U.S. Social Security system was not formally indexed. The
law was changed occasionally to adjust the benefits of retirees but real bene-
fits did fluctuate around a generally constant ratio of benefits to real
However, it was only in the late 1960's that inflation                   wages.
                                                       began to appear as a
serious and persistent problem for retirees.

2 The alternative would be to accuialate a Social Security
                                                           fund and use its
earnings to pay benefits. The working generation could
                                                       guarantee the real value
of benefits to retirees, varying the tax     rate
                                             to obtain the necessary funds.
                                            —18—




individual's risk aversion, the expected returns on an unindexed pension and on
Social Security and the variance of the real yield on the
                                                           unindexed pension. It
is worth emphasizing that in this important case the optimal private pension is
completely unindexed. Private pensions may be indexed only because of depar-
tures from the assumptions of this case: uncertain returns on bills or on
Social Security or a suboptimal amount of Social            Security.

            This   case is illustrated in figure 3. Point           13   corresponds to a pri-

vate pension invested only in bonds         and no Social Security. Point b corresponds

toa fully indexed private pension invested only in bills and no Social
Security. Point corresponds to Social Security only, with no private pension.
It    is clear that point       dominates   point    and   that,   while ar    point in the

                                       and 0   is   feasible, only points on the U       line
triangle connecting points B,

are efficient. The indifference curve is drawn so that the optimal pension

 (at E1) is one—half Social Security and one—half an unindexed private pension.

             For   an individual with   a constant absolute risk aversion utility func-


 tion,   the optimal amount of the unindexed private pension is


                            =      1JU1S
 (2.2)




 where      is the yield on Social Security tax contributions. The optimal amount

 to be contributed to Social Security is then C —




                                                                      is fixed and
  1  i continue to assume that the total amount of retirement savings
  divided between Social Security and         the
                                          private pension.
                                     —19—



                                   Figure 3

 Optimal Pension Indexing with Social Security and Riskiess Bills




                                                  U
 Mean
Pension
Benefits


                                         U,
                              E1




                             / /
        S
                       / /
                 / /
             /
        b'


        b

                                              Standard Deviation
                                                 of Pension
                                                  Benefits
                                     —20—


          Before leaving this case, it is interesting to note the effect of

inflation uncertainty on the optimal amount of Social Security.   With constant

absolute risk aversion, the effect is unambiguous. An increase in inflation
                                      2                           *
                                         and therefore depresses U in equation
uncertainty implies a higher value of

2.2. More inflation uncertainty implies greater reliance on unfunded Social

Security and less on the funded private pension.   Note that this is true even

though a completely indexed private pension could be achieved by investing the

pension assets  in bills. With a more general utility function the effect of an
increase in inflation uncertainty is formally ambiguous but
                                                            is likely to
increase reliance on Social Security. When inflation uncertainty increases, the
tradeoff between risk and return becomes less favorable to bonds while the
amount of uncertainty at the initial level of Social Security
                                                              becomes greater.
With greater initial levels of risk and a lower cost of reducing risk, the indi-
vidual is likely to want to reduce risk by increasing reliance on Social    Security.1

           Until now, the analysis has assumed that the amount of Social

 Security is set optimally. If the size of the Social Security pension is
 instead set exogenously at a level that is less than optimal, individuals may


 1 This substitution of a low yield unfunded Social Security pension for real
 capital formation in a funded private pension is another of the adverse
 consequences of increased inflation uncertainty.        of the growth of Social
    Someone zho was trying to develop a positive  theory
                                           behavior   required  a rise in relative
 Security benefits might note that optimal        increased  and  that this is
 benefits as inflation and inflation uncertainty
 indeed what has happened in recent years. A worker with median earnings who
 retired at age 65 received benefits equal to about one—third of peak earnings
 until 1912. A change in the benefit formaila then caused the ratio to rise
                                            with an implied steady state value of
 rapidly to more than 50 percent (in 1980)          student of Social Security
 more than 140 percent. A more historically minded
  might explain the unprecedented rise by the electoral politics of 1972 and the
  unintended effects of inappropriate indexing formmilae.
                                                    —21 —




want to ir.dex partially their private pension. In figure 3, the kinked line

connecting points b' and U'            represents the efficent frontier when the amount of
the Social Security contribution is constrained to equal one—third of C.                         If the
private      pension (i.e., the amount c—s) is completely indexed, the value of the
pension will be c(i       +   ii/3).    This   is   shown     as point ' , one third of the way
between     b and S. If the private pension is completely unindexed, the expected

value of the pension is (C—S)(i+)+S(i+p5) and its standard deviation is

(C_S)c. This is shown as point U'. If the indifference curve is tangent to

the line segment b'U', the optimal private pension is partially indexed. But

since the segment b'U' is steeper than SU, the indifference curve need not be

tangent between b' and U'. In figure 3, the relevant indifference curve touches

the line at the kink point UTwhere the private portfolio is not indexed at all.

Although it may seem surprising that a reduction in the indexed Social Security

pension     does not always induce an increased indexation of the private pension,
this merely reflects the fact that the private fully indexed pension has a lower
yield than the Social Security pension.
              If   there is no riskiess private asset, the analysis of the optimal

mix   of   Social Security and the private pension               assets and   of the impact of

changes     in the exogenously set level of            Social Security is more complex. In

figure     4, the bU curve represents the purely private pension with different
combinations of bills and         an indexed pensions. If           the value of a pure Social
Security     pension corresponds to point                   any point on any line between        and
the &      locus   is feasible.   However, only the points n 51U are efficient; all

other      feasible points have lower means for the same variance. But if the value
of   a pure Social Security pension corresponds to point S2 the line connecting

2 and U (not drawn) is inefficient. The efficient set                     of   feasible pensions
                                 —22—


                               Figure 1


      Optimal Pension Indexing with Social Security and Risky Bills




                                                                      U
 Mean
Pension                                 E1
Benefits



                                             x
           Si




           S2
                                    b




                                                 Standard Deviation
                                                    of Pension
                                                     Benefits
                                           —23—


correspond   to combinations of Social Security and     a   partly indexed   pension (if
the   optimum occurs on the straight segment 52X) or to a partly       indexed   pension
with no Social Security if the optimum lies on the segment XU of the private
pension curve. In either case, the private pension will not be invested only in
bills and will in fact contain less in bills than the minimum variance pension
fund. Of course, with low risk aversion the indifference curves may not be
tangent at any feasible point, implying that the optimum is a completely unin—
dexed private pension.
            Constraining the amount of Social Security to be less than the opti-
mal amount has     the   same general effect when bills are risky as it   does   when they
provide   a perfect index asset. The optimal pensions may involve increased

indexing or, if the individual is not very risk averse, no change in the origi-

nal degree   of indexing. In particular, even with the amount of Social Security
reduced, a completely unindexed pension may be      optimal.     This is illustrated in
figure 14
            In   the   case in which the value of the pure Social Security pension
would be S1, the optimum pension (at E1) consists of an equal mix of Social

Security and the completely      unindexed pension invested in bonds. Now constrain
the   amount of Social Security to be one—third of the total pension contribution:

S     C/3. This implies that if the private pension is completely unindexed,

the total expected pension value is s(i+) +        U(l+)     =
                                                                 (l+5/3+2/3)c     and

the   corresponding standard deviation is 2C/3; this combination is shown
at point U'. Similarly, if the private part of the pension is completely
indexed, the mean and standard deviation of the total pension value is shown at
point b'. The new opportunity locus is constructed in this way for all points
between b' and U'. The new optimum private pensions could involve partial
                                          —214—


indexing   (i.e., correspond to some point on theb'U' locus), but since the slope

of the new locus is steeper than the slope of the S U line, the optimum may

occur   at a corner solution at point U' as shown in figure 14•

3. Optimal Indexing with Uncertain Social Security
         Although unexpected changes in the price level do not alter the real
value of a Social Security pension, unexpected changes in the growth of the real
wage rate or in the growth of the labor force are a source of potential uncer-
tainty in Social Security benefits that was ignored      in the previous section.'

The   present section assumes that Social Security provides an uncertain pension.
Because    the general case in which both bills and bonds are also uncertain assets

is complex to analyze and not particularly informative, I focus on the case in

which bills provide     a perfect index   asset with zero real return and no variance.

             One   example of this situation is shown in figure 5.   As usual, point

  represents a completely indexed private pension, point U a completely unin—
dexed private pension, and point S no private pension but reliance only on
Social Security. The shape of the SU curve, particularly the fact that the
minimum variance point does not correspond to 5, implies that variations in the
yield on Social Security and on bonds are either independent, negatively corre-
lated or correlated in a weak positive way.2 Since this restriction seems to me
to be rather mild, I shall not deal explicitly with the alternative case; the
results are easily derived by a simple modification of figure 5.
             Points along the U curve represent combinations of Social Security
and a completely unindexed private pension. Points on the & line represent


- I say "potential" uncertainty because the Social Security program may guaran-
tee real benefits and allow the tax rate on employees to vary. The present U.S.
legislative debate about the choice between raising taxes and reducing benefits
is testing whether the "uncertainty" is "potential" or "actual".
2 The formal condition is that the regression of the unindexed pension yield on
the Social Security yield be less than one.
                                      —25—


                                  Figure 5



           pima1 Pension   Indexing   with Uncertain Social Security




                                                          U
 Mean
Pension
Benefits




                                             S




       b

                                                  Standard Deviation
                                                     of Pension
                                                      Benefits
                                                —26-



combinations of Social Security and a completely            indexed    private pension.

Fianily, points on the line between b and the point            of   tangency with   the   US


curve   (at   x)    represent combinations of Social Security and a partially indexed

private plan.
              Since the efficient frontier consists of the line bX and the segment

of the curve between X and U, several possible pension arrangements can immi—

diately   be excluded as never optimal for any utility function. First, it is

never optimal to rely exclusively on either Social Security (point )                 or   on a

completely indexed private pension (point b). Further, it is never optimal to

use a combination of just Social Security and a fully indexed private pension

(points on line ) since a higher mean can be obtained with the same variance

by using a less than fully indexed private pension.

              An individual with sufficiently low risk aversion will prefer to have

only a private pension and             one that is not indexed at all. For such an indivi-
 dual, there will be no tangency on the b X U             locus but the highest feasible

 indifference curve will touch point U. With more risk aversion, a tangency will

 occur along    the XU curve where the individual has a combination of Social
 Security     and a completely unindexed private pension. Only with sufficiently
 great risk aversion will the indifference curve tangency occur along the bX
 line where the individual combines Social Security with a partially indexed pri-
 vate pension.
                   Figure   6 presents   a modified form of figure 5   in which no ray from the

 origin (i.e., from point b) is tangent to the curve generated by combinations of

 Social Security and           the   unindexed private pension. Economically, this occurs
                                  —27—




                             Figure      6




       Optinal Pension Indexing   with   Uncertain Social Security




 Mean
Pension
Benefits




                                                 U




                                                 S

           b
                                                      Standard Deviation
                                                         of Pension
                                                          Benefits
when tze yield on an unindexed pension is sufficiently high relative to its

risk. In this case, the efficient set is just the straight line 6I3.          It is

never cptimal in this case to have any Social Security and       the   optimal private

pension is either unindexed (as shown by the highest feasible indifference

curve touching the U line at U)      or,   for a more risk averse individual, by a

partly   indexed   private pension (with the indifference curve tangent on the &i

line).

4.   Conclusion
           The analysis in this paper was     motivated   by the apparent puzzle that,

despite substantial uncertainty about future inflation rates, private pensions

are almost universally unindexed. Moreover, although a variable annuity

invested in short—term money     market instruments   provides a good inflation hedge,

almost all   private   pensions provide a fixed annuity.

            The results of the analysis indicate that the existence of unindexed

pensions and fixed annuities is not at all       surprising.   Even without Social

Security, it may be optimal to have a completely unindexed private pension and

it is generally not optimal to have a completely indexed pension.

             The availability of an optimal (or greater than optimal) amount of

Social Security generally reduces the desired degree of indexing and, under a

variety   of conditions, makes it optimal to have no indexing at all in the
private pension.
             Because   unexpected changes in the price level do not alter the value

of Social Security pensions,      the existence of inflation uncertainty makes a
Social Security pension optimal when it       would not otherwise be and an increase

in   inflation uncertainty is likely to increase the optimal reliance on Social
Security. But despite these conclusions, the analysis shows that including some
Social Security in an overall pension program is necessarily optimal only when
both money market instruments and Social Security have rates of return that are
known with certainty. When the real yield on money market instruments is uncer-
tain,   the optimal pension arrangement may be a partially indexed private pension

even    though Social Security   is risk—free and has   a return that is higher than
the expected rate on the ney market instruments. Similarly, when Social
Security is risky, the optimal arrangement may be to exclude Social Security and
to use a partially indexed private pension. In all cases, an individual who has
a low enough degree of   risk    aversion will prefer no Social Security and a
coniplet ely unindexed private pension.
                                       —30—


                                  Bibliography


Arrow, Kenneth (1971) Essays in The Theory of Risk Bearing, Chicago: Markham
     Publishing Co., 1971.

Bodie, Zvi, (1979), "Inflation Risk and Capital Market Equilibrium," NBEF
     Working Paper No. 373.

Bodie, Zvi (1980a) "An Innovation for Stable Real Retirement Income," Journal
     of Portfolio Management, Fall.

Bodie, Zvi (1980b), "Purchasing—Power Annuities: Financial Innovation for
     Stable Real Retirement Income in an Inflationary Environment," NBER
     Working Paper No. 442.

Bodie, Zvi (1981), "Investment Strater in an Inflationary Environment," ffBER
     Working Paper No. 701, forthcoming in B.M. Friedman (ed.), The Changing
     Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing U.S. Capital Formation.

Bulow, Jerenty (1981) "Tax Aspects of Corporate Pension Funding," paper given at
     the !'BER Conference on Private and Public Pensions, July 13—14, 1981.

Feldstein, Martin (1980a) "Inflation and the Stock Market," American Economic
     Review 70, 839—47.

________________, (1980b) "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Stock Market," Journal
     of Monetary Economics 6, 309—31.

Feldstein, Martin (1981) "Private Pensions as Corporate Debt", NBER Working
      Paper No. 703, forthcoming in B.M. Friedman, (ed.), The Changing Roles of
      Debt   and Equity in Financing U.S. Capital Formation.
Hendershott, Patric and S.C. Hu (1979) "Inflation and the      Benefits of Owner—
      Occupied Housing, NBER Working Paper No. 383.

Miller, Merton H. and Myron Scholes, "Pension Funding and Corporate Valuation,"
     University of Chicago, 1981.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1981) "Monetary Policy and Short—Term Interest Rates: An
     Efficient Markets—Rational Expectations Approach," NBER Working Paper
     No. 693.

Pesando, James (1981), "Employee Valuation of Pension Claims and the Impact of
     Indexing Initiatives," paper given at the NBER Conference on Private and
     Public Pensions, July 13—14, 1981.
                                     —31—



Summers, Lawrence (1981a) "Inflation, the Stock Market, and Owner Occupied
      Housing," American Economic Review 71, 29—3)4.

_________________ (198Th) "The Non—Adjustment of Nominal Interest Rates:   A
      Study of the Fisher Effect," NBER Conference Paper, forthcoming.

Samuelson, Paul A. (1958) "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest With or
      Without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Econonnj 66
      I6782.

Tobin, James E. (1958) "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Toward Risk," Review
      of Economic Studies 23, 65—86.
