NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TIME—SERIES EVIDENCE OF THE EFFECT OF THE
MINIMUM WAGE ON YOUTH EMPLOYMENT
AND UNEMPLOYMENT

Charles Brown

Curtis

Gilroy

Andrew Kohen
Working Paper No. '790

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
October 1981

Charles Brown and Andrew Kohen are Associate Professors of Economics
at the University of Maryland and James Madison University,
respectively. Curtis Gilroy is a Senior Economist with the Minimum
Wage Study Commission. The opinions expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official
position of the institutions with which they are affiliated. We
benefited from comments of Jacob Mincer and Finis Welch on an
earlier version of the paper, and from the assistance of John
Stinson in obtaining the data. Ann Levin and Nancy Zeitler pro—
vided helpful research assistance. The research reported here is
part of the NBER'S research program in Labor Studies.

NBER Working Paper #790
October 1981

Time Series Evidence of the Effect of the Minimum Wage
on Youth Employment and Unemployment

ABS TRACT

While previous time series studies have quite consistently found that
the minimum wage reduces teenage employment, the extent of this reduction

is much less certain. Moreover, because few previous studies report results
of more than one specification, the causes of differences in estimated

impacts are not well understood. Less consensus is evident on the effect
of the minimum wage on teenage unemployment, or its relative impact on
black and white teenagers.
The purpose of this paper is both to update earlier work and to analyze
the sensitivity of estimated minimum wage effects to alternative specifi-

cation choices. In addition to providing estimates of the effect of minimum
wage increases on aggregate employment and unemployment rates of teenagers,

we explore several related issues: the relative importance of changing
the level and coverage of the minimum wage; the timing of responses to a

change in the minimum; effects on part—time and full—time work; effects
on young adults (age 20—24).

Charles Brown
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

Curtis Gilroy
U.S. Army Research Institute
5001 Eisenhower Avenue
Alexandria, VA 22333

Andrew Kohen
Department of Economics
James Madison University
Harrisonburg, VA 22807

(301) 454—4182

(202)

(703) 433—6605

274—8104

In the last ten years, roughly twenty time-series studies of the effects of

minimum wages on the employment and unemployment of teenagers (16- to 19-yearolds) have appeared. For teenagers as a group, most studies found that a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage would reduce teenage employment by one to
three percent. The range of estimates of the effect of such an increase on the
unemployment rate was considerably wider -- from essentially zero to over three

percent (Brown, Gilroy and Kohen, 1981). Our survey revealed no support for the
popular view that black teenagers suffer larger employment losses than their
white counterparts, although there is some evidence that unemployment effects
of the minimum wage are larger for blacks than for whites. The few studies which
focused on 20-24 year olds found that the minimum wage reduced employment and
increased unemployment for this group, but by lesser amounts than for teenagers.
In most of the research, the period studied ended in the late 1960s or
early 1970s, so that the more recent experience (the 1974 and 1977 Amendments to
the Fair Labor Standards Act) was not included. As one might expect, the studies
differ in their choice of functional forms, lag structures, and independent
variables. Surprisingly, however, there is very little discussion of how these
differences affect the estimated minimum wage effects.
The purpose of this paper is to update existing estimates of the effects of
minimum wages on employment and unemployment rates of youth, and to compare the
results of different specifications. Section I briefly describes the theoretical
framework in which the minimum wage has been analyzed. Section II discusses an
operational model for the estimation of employment and unemployment effects of
changes in the minimum wage and presents a summary of estimates of the major
studies, while Section III describes the data sources and estimation procedures
together with the results of our empirical analysis. Section IV provides some

-2—

empirical extensions to the basic analysis. Section V summarizes the major findings and provides concluding remarks.

I.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
The conventional neoclassical theory posits a decline in the level of em-

ployment in response to an increase in (or introduction of) a statutory minimum
wage. At the above-equilibrium wage, employers respond to the higher cost of
labor by using less of it, and an excess supply of labor forms as fewer jos are

rationed among more workers. Of course, the basis of comparison is what would
otherwise have occurred; in a situation where employment was expanding, the
minimum wage would simply limit the increase in employment.
Two alternatives to this conventional competitive model are possible: the

familiar textbook example of a monopsonist who may actually hire more labor in
response to a skillfully set minimum (Stigler, 1946), and the case of an em-

ployer who is "shocked" into increasing productivity when faced with a higher
wage bill as a result of the minimum wage.' The validity of these models is difficult to assess directly however. To the extent that their predictions of the
employment effect differ from that of the standard model, they can be tested
with the same estimating equations. That is, only the researcher's prior expectation about the direction of the employment effect would differ.2
Recent theoretical work on the employment effects associated with the

minimum wage has centered on two basic extensions of the standard competitive
model: (1) the explicit inclusion of both the covered and uncovered sectors,
and (2) a more careful treatment of the effects of the minimum wage on measured
unemployment.

Recognizing the existence of two types of jobs

--

those which are covered

by the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and those which are

-3-

not -- a
mandated minimum wage increase would be expected to reduce employment in
the covered sector. Workers who are unable to find jobs in this sector
are faced
with several alternatives: (1) accept employment in the uncovered sector,
perhaps
while searching for covered
employment; (2) remain unemployed with the hope of

obtaining a job in the covered sector; or (3) withdraw from the labor force. To
the extent that the first alternative is

chosen, the wage in the uncovered sector

would fall, and the resultant employment increase
ment loss in the covered sector. There is

would help mitigate the employ-

a possibility, too, that wages in the

uncovered sector may actually rise, if workers in the uncovered sector choose to

search for jobs in the covered sector at the higher FLSA-determined wage.
The net result depends

upon the elasticities of demand for labor in the

covered and uncovered sectors, the rate of withdrawal from the labor force, and
the extent to which displaced workers in the covered sector remain unemployed
in hopes of finding work there. The relative magnitudes of these several factors
clearly is an empirical matter, and the net outcome of their interaction cannot
be predicted by theory alone.

The second refinement of the basic model is a movement away from the view
that workers displaced by the imposition of a (higher) minimum wage, together
with those who may be attracted to the labor market to search for work at the
higher wage, comprise the pool of unemployed. Because some of these persons become discouraged with job prospects and leave the labor force, they are excluded
from the official unemployment count. Mincer

(1976) has formally modelled this

latter choice, assuming that those who are officially unemployed regard the

ability of finding a covered job as more attractive than either uncovered sector
employment or nonmarket alternatives. In this model, the
for covered-sector work while
sidered.

possibility of searching

remaining employed in an uncovered job is not con-

-4-

II. PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Time-series studies which attempt to estimate the effect of minimum wages
on the labor force status of youth have relied upon single equation models of
the type

Y

f (MW, D, X1. .

•Xn)

where the dependent variable Y is a measure of labor force status. Independent
variables include MW as a measure of the minimum wage, D as a business cycle
variable, and X1... X, which represent a host of other presumably exogenous ex-

planatory factors.
To measure the "employment effect" of the minimum wage, the ratio of em-

ployment to population is used most often as the dependent variable. "Unemployment effects" are usually measured as the effect of the minimum wage on the
proportion of the labor force (or of the population) unemployed. Unemployment
equations were characteristic of the earlier studies; the more recent research
has estimated the effects of the minimum wage on the employment-population and

labor force-population ratios, and has derived the unemployment effects from
these.

The key variable, minimum wage, has generally been

measured by the ratio of

the nominal legal minimum wage to average hourly earnings weighted by coverage,

as devised by Kaitz (1970). Ratios of minimum wage rates to average hourly earnings were calculated for each industry, weighted by the proportion of workers
covered. These were combined into an index in which the weight for each industry
ratio is the number of persons employed in the industry as a

proportion of total

employment (Gavett, 1970). Specifically, the index takes the form

E.

.

[MW

c]J

-5-.

where
E

=

nonagricultural

employment

MW =

basic

AHE =

average hourly earnings of nonsupervisory workers

C

=

minimum wage rate

proportion

of nonsupervisory workers covered by the basic
minimum wage rate

MW* =

minimum wage rate for newly covered workers

C =

proportion

of nonsupervisory employees covered by the minimum wage applicable to newly covered workers

i

=

major industry division

t

=

total

private nonagricultural economy

Most studies which use this index use teenage employment ratios as weights.

This formulation allows the index to reflect changes in coverage as well as
in the level of the minimum wage, and further, embodies the idea that the impact
of a given minimum would be greater the higher is that minimum relative to
market-determined wages. Most studies have incorporated Kaitz's measure or some
variant of it in their regression equations, combining the coverage and level
of the minimum in a single variable.

All studies incorporate a business cycle variable as a measure of the overall demand for labor, for which many proxies have been used. Additional variables often included are those to control for youth's participation in the armed
forces and in employment and training programs, school enrollment, and potential
labor supply. Most studies have included a time trend variable as well.

The findings of those studies which attempt to measure the employment/unemployment effects of a minimum wage on

teenagers (16-19 years) are reported

in Table 1. In order to enhance the comparability of these studies, their re—
suits are displayed in terms of elasticities for employment and percentage point

-6-

increases for the unemployment rate.3

To further enhance comparability of results, several types of aggregation4
were necessary: (1) combining separate estimates for 16-17 and 18-19 year olds
when estimates for the 16-19 group were not presented; (2) for different racesex groups when results for teenagers as a whole were not reported; and (3) separate estimates for enrolled and non-enrolled individuals.5

The unemployment effects in Table 1 represent the change in the unemployment rate due to a 10 percent change in the minimum wage. For example, an entry
of 0.50 would indicate that a minimum wage increase of 10 percent is estimated
to raise the unemployment rate from, say, 6.0 to 6.5 percent. Just as the employment elasticities were aggregated as described above, so the labor force
elasticities were similarly weighted using labor force shares.

On balance, the effects of a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage are
estimated to result in about a 1-3 percent reduction in total teenage employment (Table 1). All studies find a negative employment effect for all teenagers

together. Since it was necessary to compute many of the overall effects" from
the disaggregated age-sex-race equations, it is not possible to conduct tests
to determine whether they are statistically significant. The coefficients from
these disaggregated equations were mostly negative, with about half being statistically significant.

Although the research is consistent in finding some employment reduction
associated with minimum wage increases, the estimated effects on unemployment
appear to be considerably more varied. Of particular note are the diverse unemployment effects estimated by Adie (1971) and Moore (1971) on the one hand,
and Lovell (1973) on the other in response to a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage.

Table 1 does demonstrate that there are many different specifications re—

- 7-.

presented in these studies. Indeed, the only generalization one can make about
all the studies is that each includes some measure of changing economic conditions as a control variable. It is difficult to assess how the differences in
model specifications affect the results since most authors do not report how
their findings changed as a result of changes in variables, functional form,

etc. Lovell (1973) is an exception to this and he found that inclusion of one
variable (youth's share of population) had important consequences for the estimated unemployment effects. Table 1 bears this out. Two of the four largest
estimates appear in studies which exclude the population share variable (Adie,
1971 and 1973) while the four smaller estimates are found in studies which include it (Kaitz, 1970; Lovell, 1972 and 1973; Freeman, 1979).6
The issue of which "control" variables ought to be included in the estimating equations has not been fully resolved. There is general agreement that
other determinants of demand for teenagers should be held constant in estimating
the effect of the minimum wage on employment, labor force participation, and
unemployment. There is less agreement not only on the appropriateness of including supply side variables (Adie-Gallaway, 1973; Fisher, 1973; Lovell, 1973;
Goldfarb, 1974), but on precisely which ones and the form they should take if
included (Wachter-Kim, 1979).

The simple supply-demand model described above is sometimes used to argue
for the exclusion of supply-determining variables from both employment and unemployment equations. The model suggests that employment is demand-determined in
the presence of a minimum wage (i.e., how much excess supply is present has no
effect on employment), so that supply-side variables do not belong in the estimating equation. Moreover, because supply would equal demand in the absence of
the minimum wage, increases in the supply of teenagers which increase teenage
unemployment are really "minimum wage" effects as well, and hence are mistakenly

-8-

attributed to the supply-side variables if they are included in the estimation.
In our view, this position loses much of its persuasiveness once the overly

restrictive assumptions of the simplest supply-demand model are relaxed. For
example, the view that employment of teenagers is demand-determined

be cor-

rect for the half of teenagers who earn the minimum wage, but is hard to accept
for the remaining half who earn more than the minimum. Their employment (and
hence the employment of teenagers as a group) must depend on the relative sup-

ply as well as the demand for teenage labor. (Even if the demand-determination
argument were correct, including truly exogenous

supply-side variables would

not bias the minimum wage coefficient in the employment equation, though they
might somewhat reduce the precision with which it can be estimated. )1
Including supply-determining variables in equations explaining teenage un-

employment also seems warranted. Contrary to the apparent message of the simplest supply-demand model, some teenagers

would be unemployed in the absence of

the minimum wage, as is demonstrated by the non-zero

unemployment rate of teen-

agers who ordinarily earn more than the minimum. Hence, the extent of unemploy-

ment not caused by the minimum wage must be held constant, and including variables which reflect relative supplies is necessary. This does, perhaps, intro-

duce some ambiguity into estimates of the effect of the minimum wage on teenage
if the minimum
unemployment -- how much teenage unemployment would be reduced
wage were repealed. However,

the relevant policy issue is the effect of marginal

changes in the minimum wage, and holding the relative supply of teenagers constant is certainly necessary to make that evaluation.8

III. RESULTS
Like the studies listed in Table 1, our basic sources of data were the pub-

lished and unpublished monthly series from the Current Population Survey (CPS).

—9—

As did nearly all of those studies,

we used quarterly averages of the monthly

observations. The variables we constructed from these data were:
EM/P:

the ratio of civilian employment to civilian
population,9
for teenagers (16 to 19 years of age)

LF/P:

the ratio of civilian labor force to civilian
population,
for teenagers

UR:

the ratio of civilian unemployment to civilian labor force,
for teenagers

YK:

the "Kaitz" index discussed in Section II, using teenage
employment as weights10

UPR:

the ratio of civilian unemployment to civilian labor force,
for males aged 25-54

AF/P:

the ratio of teenagers in the armed forces to total teenage
population

EN/P:

the ratio of teenagers enrolled in school to teenage
civilian population, from the October supplement to the CPS.
The October values were assigned to the fourth quarter of
the survey year and the three following quarters in the
next calendar year.

TR/P:

the ratio of enrollments in federal
training and employment
programs of those aged 16-21 to civilian population aged 1621. The numerator was calculated from (sometimes
incomplet
unpublished data for 19 separate programs; considerable
mating was involved. The denominator was approximated by the
population 16—19 plus two-fifths of the population 20—24.

SY:

the fraction of those aged 16-19 who are 16-17

POP:

the ratio of teenage civilian population to total civilian
population

POPA:

the ratio of civilian population 20-24 to total civilian
population

PCWEL:

price-deflated welfare" (Aid to Families with Dependent
Children, Food Stamp, and Commodity Distribution programs)
benefits per woman of child-bearing age (16-44)

1:

a linear time trend

TSQ:

I squared

Q2,Q3,Q4: dummy variables for the second, third and fourth quarters

-10-

Effects on Teenage Employment
Table 2 presents our estimates of the effects of minimum wages on teenage
employment, using various specifications of the estimating equation. The four
columns reflect differences in the functional form of the equation --

linear

or

double-log -- and the estimation procedure -- GLS (which takes into account ser-

ial correlation in the disturbance terms) or OLS. Because the OLS Durbin—Watson
(DW) statistics consistently showed appreciable serial correlation (a typical DW

statistic being 1.0 or less), the GLS equations should be given greater weight;
the OLS equations are included in part because correction for serial correlation in the literature is rare.1' The rows of Table 2 differ in the control
variables included in addition to the minimum wage index in explaining the employment/population ratio.

one which
Line 1 of Table 2 reports estimates from our "basic" equation -controls for season of the year, trend (as well as a quadratic time trend),
cyclical factors (measured by the prime-age adult unemployment rate), and four
supply-side variables (SY, AF/P, TRIP, and POP), in addition to the minimum

wage index YK. The coefficients from these regressions have been converted to
the same measure used in Table 1: the percent change in employment resulting
from a 10 percent change in the minimum wage.
Apart from the "GLS linear" estimates, the versions of the "basic" equation

imply a one percent reduction in teenage employment as a result of a 10 percent
increase in the minimum wage index. The GLS linear

estimate --

which uses the

linear specification often found in the literature but which corrects for firstorder serial correlation --

is

only about one half as large.

Lines 2-6 report results of individually deleting five variables which are
often omitted from the studies in Table 1 --

the

quadratic time-trend term, and

the four supply-side variables. These alterations have relatively little effect

-11-

on the estimates --

implying

roughly one percent employment reductions in re-

sponse to a 10 percent increase in the minimum

wage index. Once again the GLS

linear procedure produces

consistently smaller estimates, but these estimates,
too, are rather insensitive to the
inclusion or exclusion of these "marginal"
variables.
Lines 7-9 report the results of

individually adding variables to the esti-

mating equation. In line 7, POPA, the
20-24 is added. One would

population share of young adults aged

expect that young adults are relatively substitut-

able for teenagers, so that an increased availability of
young adults would
tend to reduce teenage employment.
However, the estimated coefficient of POPA
(not shown in Table 2) was
Consistently and significantly positive. In any case,
its inclusion raises the estimated
impact of the minimum wage by three to six
tenths of a percentage point.

We also considered the
an important determinant of

Possibility that expansions in welfare programs were

teenage employment. Presumably, availability of wel-

fare benefits would act as a deterrent to employment by

agers. We measured the impact of welfare

welfare-eligible teen-

programs (PCWEL) by the price-deflated

value of benefits under the Aid to Families with Dependent
Children, Food Stamp,
and Commodity Distribution programs, per woman in the child-bearing
years. An

important methodological issue is whether to use a benefits per case (or
per
recipient) or a benefits per capita
measure. We opted for the latter, on the
grounds that much of the "welfare

explosion" of the 1960s took the form of a

greater fraction of eligible families

receiving benefits -- a phenomenon which

the benefits per capita measure captures, and the benefits
per case (or per re-

cipient) does not. Indeed, from

1967-73, the price—deflated value of AFDC bene-

fits per case declined. In any event, increased real welfare benefits were
as-

sociated with eater teenage employment, a result for which we have no
ready

-12-

explanation. Including the welfare variable raises the estimated effect of the
minimum wage index by 0.6 point in the logarithmic equations,

but has almost

no effect in the linear versions.12
Finally, the enrollment/population ratio is added as a control variable
(line 9). It was not included in the ubasicti equation because of some misgivings
about the possibility that it is determined by the minimum wage and/or the teenage employment or unemployment rates, and hence is not a pure "exogenous" vari-

able. Its inclusion reduces the estimated minimum wage impact in the OLS equations, but has little effect in the GLS equations.

The minimum wage index YK used in lines 1-9 can be thought of as the product of the relative level of the minimum wage (compared with average hourly
earnings) times the fraction of teenagers who are subject to minimum wage provisions. (This interpretation neglects the "weighted-average"

variable.) While this seems a plausible way of combining

nature of the

relative level and

coverage into a single index, it does not permit the estimation of the relative
importance of changes in level and coverage alone, and may combine them incorectly (Fisher, 1973, p. 516; Gramlich, 1976, p. 434).

The logarithmic form of the equation is particularly convenient for relaxing the assumed strictly multiplicative

constrained relationship between level

and coverage. The logarithm of YK can be decomposed into the sum of the logarithms of relative level and coverage:

ln(YK) = ln(minimum wage/average hourly earnings) +

Our coverage variable is

YC =

(E1/E)(C

+

C)

ln(coverage

ratio)

-13-

The result of entering ln(YC) in addition to ln(YK) is shown in lines 10

and 11. The effect of the relative minimum wage is then the coefficient of
ln(YK), while the effect of coverage is the coefficient of ln(YK) p]us the co-

efficient of ln(YC). The t-statistic of ln(YC) tests the hypothesis that the
effects of ln(YK) and ln(YC) are equal --

i.e.,

that the restriction in the

Kaitz index is correct. It can be seen that the estimated effect of the relative level of the minimum wage is about twice as large as in the constrained
version (compare line 10 with line 1, and line 11 with line 9). But the effect
of a 10 percent change in coverage is much smaller than in the constrained version (e.g. ,

in

the GLS version of line 10, coverage effect =

-1.76

+

1.41 = -0.35

compared with the constrained estimate [from line 1] of -0.89).

With the separate coverage variable included there are two hypotheses which
can be tested: that coverage and level effects are equal, and that coverage effects are zero. Using the t-statistic for ln(YC) to test the first hypothesis
leads to its rejection (at the .01 level) only for the OLS equation in line 10.
The t-statistic for the hypothesis that coverage does not matter (i.e. ,

that

the sum of the coeffcients of ln(YK) and ln(YC) are zero) can be calculated
from the variance-covarjance matrix of the estimated coefficients. Even the
largest of the calculated t-statistics (1.41, for the OLS equation in line 10)
is to small to reject the "no effect" hypothesis at conventional levels.

These results suggest a disturbing ambiguity in our conclusions regarding
coverage and relative level effects. Like most other researchers (Moore, 1971;
Lovell, 1973; Gramlich, 1976; Wachter-Kim, 1979; for contrary results, see
Al-Salam, Quester and Welch, 1979), we find relatively weak coverage effects.
This suggests that the relative level of the minimum wage is more important,
and coverage less important, than intimated by the constrained equations which
are typically estimated. However, we cannot reject the hypothesis that this

-14-

result is due to chance alone; indeed we cannot estimate the importance of
coverage with precision.

13

The equations in Table 2 relate teenage employment to the current value of
the minimum wage index, thus ignoring questions of the timing of responses to
minimum wage increases. Several of the previous studies adopted distributed lag
specifications for the minimum wage variable, thus assuming that the effects
of a minimum wage increase occur gradually over time. As Welch'4 has observed,
however, the a priori case for a lagged response is debatable High "normal"

turnover rates among teenagers allow employers to achieve desired reductions
in employment by refrainin9 from hiring new people for a short period of time.
Moreover, minimum wage increases are ordinarily announced in advance, so that
responses could as easily precede as follow a new minimum.
Unlike earlier studies, which replaced YK with a distributed lag on YK, we
included a (quadratic, unconstrained) distributed lag in addition to the current-quarter value, using the "basic" specification. With a 4-quarter lag, the

sum of current and lagged effects were similar to the current-quarter estimates
in Table 2, while an 8-quarter lag reduced this sum to essentially zero. Neither
4- or 8-quarter lags were statistically significant.

We also considered the pre-announcement issue by adding a dummy variable
for periods when an increase in the minimum wage had been enacted but had not

yet gone into effect. The YK coefficients were almost unaffected; the dummy
variable reduced employment by 1 (GLS) to 2 (OLS) percent but was not significant in the GLS specifications.'8 Adding lagged values of both YK and the dummy
did not clarify matters: the results for YK were similar to those in the previous paragraph, while the current and lagged effects of the pre-announcement
dummy were larger than in the current-quarter specification. Overall, we regard

the pre-announcement effects as only suggestive; a theory of how firms should

-15-

react to such announcements, and a "variable" which reflects that theory more
carefully than our dummy variable, are clearly needed.

One experiment was conducted which did lead to unambiguous results. As was
true of all studies in Table 1, we neglected the impact of the student certification program in constructing our Kaitz index. To test the importance of
this omission, we recomputed the Kaitz index by treating certified student
employment as subject to a minimum wage of 85 percent of the basic minimum.
The recomputed version of YK differed from the original version negligibly,
and produced results almost identical (for the "basic" specification) to those
in Table 2.

Labor Force and Unemployment Rate Effects

Estimates of the effect of a 10 percent increase on the teenage labor force
(those employed or looking for work) are presented in Table 3. These are based
on equations identical to those in Table 2, except that the labor force parti-

cipation rate (LF/P) replaces the employment/population ratio (EM/P) as the
dependent variable.

The results of the various specifications can be summarized quite succintly. In lines 1-9, where coverage and the level of the minimum are constrained to have similar effects, a 10 percent increase in the minimum leads
to roughly a one percent reduction in the teenage labor force. In lines 10 and
11, the effects of a 10 percent increase in the level of the minimum are somewhat larger (1.5 to 2 percent reduction), while coverage has a smaller effect
(0.4 to 0.9 percent decrease). (Recall that, in lines 10 and II, the "coverage"

effect is the sum of the YK and YC effects.) We found to our surprise, that this
withdrawal did not take the form of similar increases in the official "discouraged-worker" count (not shown in Table 3).

-16-

If an increase in the minimum wage reduces employment and the labor force
by the same percentage, as is suggested by

Tables 2 and 4, then the effect on

unemployment would be zero. While the estimated effects on the teenage unemployment rate (Table 4) are not exactly zero, they are smaller than most reported
in Table 1. To interpret Table 4, consider the last entry in line 1, which corresponds to a GLS estimate with a logarithmic estimating equation using the
"basic" set of explanatory variables and the unemployment rate (or its logarithm) as the dependent variable. The 0.05 means that a 10 percent increase in

the minimum wage is estimated to increase the teenage unemployment rate by .05
percentage point (e.g., from, say,

9.0 to 9.05 percent). Even the largest esti-

mates suggest that a 10 percent increase in the minimum would increase teenage
unemployment by only about one tenth of one percentage point. Caution is in
order, however, in interpreting these unemployment
estimated with great precision, as reflected
theless, even taking a "high" estimate

effects. None of them is

in the low t-statistiCs. Never-

and going to the upper end of the 95

percent confidence interval, the estimates are still generally less than threetenths of a percentage point.

Most, though not all, previous studies have found appreciable labor force
withdrawal in response to increases in the minimum wage, so that many of those
"disemployed" are not found among the "unemployed." The relative strength of
the labor force withdrawal effect, however, is somewhat surprising, being es-

sentially the same size (in percentage terms) as the employment effect. It
should be noted, however, that several previous

studies have obtained similar

results (Kaitz, 1970; Lovell, 1972 and 1973; Mattila, 1978; Freeman, 1979), and

that our finding is quite robust in light of the specification experiments reported.
--

We also separated the sample into two subperiods

1954-69, roughly that

-17-

used in the early studies in Table 1, and the reamining 1970-79 period. Results

for the early subperiod looked very much like those in Table 2: employment and
labor force effects of about one

percent, and virtually no unemployment effect.

In the later period, employment effects

were somewhat larger (centering on

—1.4 percent), labor force withdrawal smaller (-0.6 percent), and thus unemployment effects which were much larger (0.6 percentage points). These results
broadly reinforce our earlier findings, except for the statistically significant unemployment effects in the recent period.

IV. EXTENSIONS OF THE BASIC ANALYSIS
The purpose of this Section is to present additional time-series evidence

on the effects of the minimum wage on employment and

unemployment of young per-

sons. Several refinements and extensions of the results in Section III are described below.

A.

Estimated Effects of the Minimum Wage on Teenagers,

Race and Sex

Many previous studies attempted to estimate employment and unemployment
effects of the minimum wage on teenagers separately by race and sex. Indeed,
in many cases the emphasis on these disaggregated results was so strong that

no "adding up" of these results was provided to determine the effect on teenagers as a group. For the sake of comparison, this section presents our estimates
of minimum wage effects on teenage labor force status stratified first by race
and then by sex.

Table 5 contains estimates of the effects of a 10 percent increase in the
minimum wage on the employment of white, nonwhite, male and female teenagers
over the 1954-79 period. The first three lines are estimates derived from our
"basic" specification. 16

-18-

None of these variables is race- or sex-specific, apart from the fraction

of teenagers who are 16_17.1 In general, the estimated effects for all whites,
all males, and all females are similar to those estimated in Section III for
teenagers as a whole -- a 10 percent increase in the minimum reducing teenage

employment by roughly one percent. Effects for

nonwhites are quite different;

the point estimates suggesting that increases in the minimum wage actually increase their employment. However, none of the nonwhite effects are estimated
with any precision. Estimates of the magnitude shown here could occur due to
chance alone if the "true" effect were zero; moreover, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the white-nonwhite difference is due to chance alone.18
The third, sixth, and ninth lines of Table 5 present estimates of the effect of increases in the minimum wage on aggregate teenage employment, with
the estimate calculated as a weighted average of the disaggregated results.
The results were generally similar to the "directly-estimated" total effects,
presented in Table 2, suggesting no systematic

difference in the two ways of

deriving aggregate estimates.

The effects of a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage on labor force
participation and unemployment are also presented in Table 5. For whites, males
and females, labor force participation declines

in response to the minimum wage

in about the same proportion that employment declines, so that unemployment
rates are roughtly unaffected. Labor force participation

by nonwhites also de-

clines. Coupled with the estimated increase in their employment, this implies
a decline in black unemployment in respose to the minimum wage. The labor force
effects and the GLS estimates of the unemployment rate effects are not statistically significant, however. This suggests that, once again, the effects on
nonwhites are not estimated with adequate precision with these data.
Welch (1976, pp. 121-122) has noted that population and labor force data

- 19-

for nonwhites are subject to considerable sampling error, due to the relatively
small samples of nonwhite teenagers in the Current Population Survey (CPS).
Since the size of the CPS sample has grown over time, weighting the observations
by the estimated number of nonwhite teenagers actually surveyed seemed desirable. This would place greater weight on the more recent observations, which
are presumably subject to smaller sampling errors. Having done this, we found
the resulting estimates were only slightly closer to the white teenage results.
While it is often asserted that blacks are more adversely affected than
whites by the minimum wage, previous studies offer quite mixed results on the
issue. We find no support for the assertion, because of an inability to estimate
accurately the effects on nonwhites. In any case, while we do not claim to have
disproven the view that nonwhites are more adversely affected than whites, we
would conclude that such an assertion must rest on theoretical rather than
empirical grounds.

B.

Effects on Full-time Equivalent Employment
As we have noted elsewhere (Brown, Gilroy and Kohen, 1981), most studies of

employment effects of the minimum wage focus on the number of people employed,
neglecting variations in hours worked per week by those who remain employed. The
handful of studies which have examined the hours-of-work issue have produced
conflicting results.

One way of addressing the hours-of-work issue is to consider the effect of
the minimum wage on the fraction of those employed who work part time. An alternative approach, which is pursued here, is to convert part-time workers into
full—time equivalent (FTE) employment. Assuming that the average part-time
worker1s workweek is roughly one-half that of the average full-time worker,
FTE employment is defined as the number of full-time workers plus one—half that

-20-

of part-time workers. We then estimated the effect of the minimum wage on FTE
employment. If the minimum wage increases the fraction of those employed who
are part-time workers, its (negative) effect on FTE employment should be larger
than its effect on number of workers employed.

The findings are summarized in Table 6, which presents estimates based on
the Ibasicu specification and that specfication with the enrollment/population
ratio as an added independent variable. Since data on full-time and part-time
employment of teenagers are available only since 1963, the FTE equations must
be based on that shorter sample period. To keep the comparison between the
standard number employed and FTE employment measures as exact as possible, we

reestimated the previous employment equations based on the 1963-1979 sample
period. Thus, line 1 of Table 6 reproduces the results of estimating the 'basic11
equation using the standard measure across the full (1954-79) sample. Line 2
presents the results of estimating the same equation on the shorter (1963-79)
sample, and line 3 presents the estimated effect of the minimum wage on FTE
employment over the 1963-79 period. Comparing lines 2 and 3, it is apparent
that the effect of the minimum wage on FTE employment is somewhat larger than
its effect on the standard employment measure. Lines 4-6 present analogous

results, with the enrollment/population ratio also held constant. Again,
the effects in line 6 are a bit larger than those in line 5. Overall, Table 6
suggests that the effect of a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage is larger
for FTE employment than for employment measured by

number of workers. The dif-

ference is on the order of 0.4 percentage point, though the precise number is
quite sensitive to the specification

choice.

More generally, we found that the estimates were quite sensitive to the
choice of independent variables when a linear specification was used, but more
robust for the logarithmic form. While precise

numerical values are elusive,

-21-

the direction of the results is not: the minimum wage increases the fraction
of employed teenagers who work part time, so that FTE employment declines more
than number of teenagers employed in response to an increase in the minimum
wage.

C.

Effects on Employment Status of Young Adults

All of the results presented thus far have been refinements of an analysis
of the effects of the minimum wage on teenagers. While minimum-wage work is
considerably less common among young adults aged 20-24 than among teenagers
(about 15 percent of young adults worked at or below the minimum wage in
1980, compared with 45 percent of teenagers), one might still anticipate nontrivial effects on this "next-youngest" group.
In order to maximize comparability of results for young adults and teenagers, the estimated equations for employment/population ratios, labor force/
population ratios, and unemployment rates for young adults were as similar as
possible to the earlier teenage equations. Apart from the obvious differences
(EM/P, LF/P, UR, AF/P, EN/P and POP are based on young adult rather than teenage values), the only changes in these equations were:

(1) Because TR/P and YK are unavailable for young adults, TR/P now refers
to the fraction of all (labor-force age) persons in training programs, and TK and TC are the minimum wage index and coverage index
using total employment to weight the individual-industry figures;
(2) The variable, SY, which reflected age composition within the teenage
group, is deleted;
C3) In line 6 of Table 7, instead of adding the population share of young
adults, the population share of teenagers (POPT) is added to the
equation (because the population share of young adults is already included in the "basic" specification).

Estimates of the effect of a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage index

-22-

on young adult employment are presented in Table 7. The "basic" equations all
yield estimates of approximately 0.25 percent reduction in young-adult employment (roughly one fourth of the corresponding teenage impact). The estimates
are generally not "significant" by

conventional standards; i.e., such effects

might occur due to chance alone. The remaining estimates in Table 7 center on
the -0.25 estimate, but range from -.10 to -.60. The relatively large standard
errors of the coverage index, TC, in lines 9 and 10 suggest that it is no
easier to disentangle coverage and level effects

for young adults than it was

for teenagers.

Estimated effects of a 10 percent increase on young adult labor force participation are also presented in Table 7. The "basic" equations suggest virtually

no labor force withdrawal among young

adults in response to the minimum wage;

the other equations suggest both increases

and reductions, but these are rarely

more than 0.1 percent in either direction, and are never significant.
Reduced employment and little change in labor force participation imply
increased unemployment in response to a minimum wage increase, and that is indeed what is displayed in Table 7. The "basic" specification suggests an in-

from
crease in the young adult unemployment rate of 0.23 percent point (e.g. ,
9.0 to 9.23 percent) in response to a 10 percent

increase in the minimum wage.

This estimate is reasonably precise, in that (1) the t-statistics suggest little
likelihood that this result is due to chance alone, and (2) alternative speci-

fications produce fairly similar estimates (with

most in the 0.20 to 0.24

range).

Compared with the results for teenagers as a group in Section III, the
employment effects are smaller (as we would expect due to the lower incidence
of minimum wage workers among young adults). We do, however, find unemployment

effects as well for young adults, which was not the case for teenagers.

-23-

V.

CONCLUSION

Previous empirical studies had estimated that a 10 percent increase in the
minimum wage (or in the fraction of workers subject to it) would reduce teenage
employment by one to three percent. Our own work, which uses a more up-to-date
and longer sample period than most of these studies, suggests that one percent
is a reasonable "single-number" estimate of the employment effect.

Our estimates clustered in a one half to one and one half percent range.
The lowest numbers were based on GLS estimates and a linear relationship between teenage employment and the minimum wage index. The apparent sensitivity
of the estimates to the OLS-GLS choice with the linear functional form is itself interesting; most previous studies report OLS estimates, while, in our
data at least, serial correlation of the residuals is quite evident. The highest estimates come from double-logarithmic equations with the young adult population share or real welfare benefits added as explanatory variables. However,

both of these variables were "wrong-signed" when added, so the revision in
the minimum wage estimate they produce is debatable.

We also experimented with allowing the relative level and coverage of the
minimum wage to have different effects on teenage employment. Like most previous
studies which made similar attempts, we found "coverage" effects to be rela-

tively weaker than "level" effects. However, the coverage effects were estimated
with little precision, so the restriction that level and coverage have equal
effects could not confidently be rejected. None of the previous studies had
reported attempts to test that restriction.

We also explored the issue of the timing of responses to minimum wage
increases. Previous studies had assumed either a same-quarter or a short four—
through eight—quarter lagged response. None of the studies which included
lagged variables discussed the effect of that choice. One might expect that

-24-

omitting the lagged terms would lead to umissinghi part of the minimum wage ef-

fect. However, no evidence was found to support that hypothesis. We did, however, find some evidence that part of the effect of an increase in the minimum

wage is felt after the change is legislated but before it goes into effect.
Earlier studies had generally found that teenagers, on balance, withdrew
from the labor force in response to increases in the minimum wage. Our results

are consistent with this response. Indeed, we

found sufficient labor force with-

drawal so that employment and labor force were reduced in near-equal proportions; as a result, the unemployment effects of the minimum wage were estimated
to be practically zero. We find the importance of labor force withdrawal in our
estimates surprisingly large (given our employment-effect

estimates), but have

no ready explanation for it. Our estimate compares with a zero to one percent
estimate from most of the more recent studies, and a two to three percent esti-

mate from earlier studies which had not incorporated the experience of the
1970s.

We did, however, find significant unemployment

effects (of about 0.6 per-

centage point) when we considered only the most recent (1970-79) period. Since
we had no a priori reason to expect

differences between the 1970s and the ear-

lier period, we would not emphasize this result

to the exclusion of the full-

sample estimates.

In terms of the several refinements and extensions of the teenage results,

we find little evidence that the effect of the minimum wage on the employment
of white, male or female teens differed appreciably from the one percent estimate. Estimates for nonwhite teenagers are lower

(indeed, the estimated effects

were positive), but the standard errors of these estimates are large. A fair
to
summary might be that effects seem to differ little by sex, but it is hard

say anything very definite

about differences by race on the basis of the evi-

—25-

dence presented. A similar conclusion would apply to estimated unemployment effects.

We also considered the effect of the minimum wage on full-time equivalent
teenage employment and found that it declines somewhat more than the standard
measure of numbers employed in response to the minimum, suggesting a movement
from full-time toward part-time work in response to an increase in the minimum
wage.

Finally, we examined the effect of a minimum wage increase on young adult
(aged 20-24) labor force status. We found employment effects that tended to be
negative -- a 0.25 percent reduction in young adult employment in response to a

10 percent increase in the minimum -- though these estimates are often not
statistically significant. One would have expected smaller effects for young
adults than for teenagers, if only because fewer young adults are directly
affected by changes in the minimum. We did find statistically significant unemployment effects (the increase in the minimum wage raising young adult unemployment rates by roughly 0.25 percentage points).

Overall, our results suggest a modest role for the minimum wage in explaining teenage labor market problems. A ten percent increase in the minimum wage
will reduce teenage employment, probably by one percent. It may increase teenage unemployment, but certainly not by the two to three percentage points reported in some earlier papers on the subject.

-26-

NOTE S

'Surveys of employers find reports of such responses from some (not all) firms,

but there is no evidence on what fraction of increases in the minimum can be
offset in this way. See U.S. Department of Labor (1959, pp. 28, 59, 107, 142,
206, 241-242) and Converse, et al. (1981, pp. 269-278).

21n the only published avowed attempt to examine monopsony

and shock effects

empirically, West and McKee (1980) concluded that neither effect was demonstrable in the real world, at least in the extant literature.

To measure employment effects, Table 1 presents the percent change in employment due to a 10 percent change in the minimum wage;

i.e. ,

10 times the employ-

ment elasticity of the minimum wage q(E). For studies which regressed the
logarithm of an employment measure (the employment/population ratio [E/P], for

example) on the logarithm of minimum wage (Wm)

the coefficient of the minimum

wage variable is simply (E). For studies which use a linear rather than a
double-logarithmic specification, ri(E) equals the regression

coefficient times

Wm/(E/'P)i where the bar indicates the mean value over the sample period.

The unemployment effects are the effect of a 10 percent change in the minimum wage on the unemployment rate. For the studies which estimate separate employment and labor force equations in logarithmic form using the employment!
population ratio (E!P) and labor force participation rate (LIP) as dependent
variables, the minimum wage coefficients are the employment and labor force
elasticities q(E) and q(L). Where the equations are linear, the regression co-

efficients must be multiplied byWm/(E!P) and Wm/(L!P)

respectively, to derive

(E) and q(L). The impact (x) of a change in the minimum wage on the unemploy

-27-

ment rate can then be derived as follows:

u = 1 -

-

(E/L) = the unemployment
rE_-_ELL1_ E rL E1

U[ L2Jt[1
-

x =

_____ = (1-u)
m m

rate

rL

-

E1

j(lu)L-[ Ti

(q(L) -

= the

impact on the unemployment rate
(in percentage points) of a one
percent change in the minimum wage.

Thus, if the minimum wage increased by 10 percent (IWm/Wm =

.10),

u ex-

pressed as a decimal is .lOx, and the change in the unemployment rate expressed
as a percent is lOx. For studies in which the dependent variable is the unemployment rate expressed in percentage points, x is calculated as the regression
coefficient for the minimum wage multiplied by

Wm

4Some studies focused only on certain subsets of teenagers, and hence could not
be included in Table 1. For a more detailed version of Table 1, see Brown,
Gilroy and Kohen (1981).

5For any two groups, elasticities were aggregated according to the formula
+

E2)

=

q(E1)

+

(1

-

) ri(E2)

where

=

E1/(E1

+

E2)

6The population share variable in the employment equations received less attention, although roughly half of the studies included it. On statistical grounds,
one might expect larger (negative) minimum wage effects if this variable were
omitted from an employment equation. The population share and minimum wage
variables are apparently positively correlated, and the population share tends
(when included) to have a negative effect on employment/population ratios.

7Note that virtually all of the studies in Table 1 estimate employment equations

-28-

whose dependent variable is the employment-to-population ratio. Thus, even
studies which appear not to introduce supply side variables in the list of independent variables have effectively included such factors in the dependent
variable. If employment of teenagers is really demand determined, the proper

dependent variable would be employment, not the employment-to-population ratio.

8The above argument might suggest an interaction of the

minimum wage with rela-

tive teenage population in determining teenage unemployment.

Given the diffi-

culty in estimating even first-order effects precisely, the interactive approach
has not been pursued. Note, however, that equations

which use the logarithm of

the unemployment rate as the dependent variable implicitly impose a multiplicative interaction between relative supply and the minimum wage.

9Data used in this study refer to the noninstitutional population.

10Data for the minimum wage and coverage components of the

index were obtained

from Minimum Wage and Maximum Hours and the Employment Standards Administration,
U.S. Department of Labor. Industry employment and earnings are available from
the BLS 790 survey of establishments published in Employment and Earnings,
United States, 1909-1978 and Employment and Earnings Supplement.

Because estab-

lishment payroll data do not contain information by age, the teenage weights
were derived from CPS estimates.

appropriate for the
"A first-order serial correlation correction is not exactly
problem, even if the omitted factors which determine EM/P follow the appropriate

pattern,

because the rotation sequence in the Current Population Survey induces

a rather complicated pattern of correlations

between the sampling errors. House-

-29-

holds selected for participation in the Current Population Survey are interviewed
for four months, dropped from the survey for eight months, and then interviewed
for an additional four months before leaving the sample permanently. Under this
4-8-4 rotation scheme, 75 percent of the sample in a given month is in the next
month's sample, and 50 percent is surveyed in the same month a year later.
However, given the likelihood that the errors in our estimating equation
are not due to sampling variation alone, the results of the correction for
serial correlation are of interest. Because few of the previous studies have
undertaken any such correction, the probability that their results could be due
to chance alone may have been understated.

'2Betsey and Dunson (1981, Table 4) report broadly similar findings, using AFDC
benefits per recipient to measure the effects of welfare programs.

13Gramlich has criticized the Kaitz index on different grounds, arguing that
a simple theoretical model implies that the logarithm of employment should be a
linear function of coverage times the logarithm of the relative minimum wage.
Unfortunately, his "relative minimum wage" is the ratio of the minimum wage to
the (unobserved) "equilibrium" wage, so that operationalizing his point is difficult. Indeed, Gramlich opts for dummy variables to reflect coverage, and reports little success in identifying coverage effects. While we share the concern
on this issue, we have not been able to develop an alternative minimum wage
"variable" which reflects his point. One version we considered was simply including coverage multiplied by the logarithm of the relative minimum wage as an
explanatory variable. However, since the relative minimum is less than one, its
logarithm is negative, so that coverage and level effects are constrained to
have opposite effects.

-30-

'41n his comments on an earlier version of this paper, presented at the American
Economic Association meetings, September 1980.

'5Boschen and Grossman (1981, p. 30) find that next year's minimum wage reduces
teenage employment but next year's minimum wage coverage increases it. Both effects are "significant."

'6The equations underlying Table 5 were also estimated with the (race- or sexspecific) enrollment/population ratio as an independent variable, and the results were very similar to those in Table 5.

'7Race- and sex-specific variables for the armed forces and training variables
were unavailable; replacing the teenage population share with a race-specific
share (as was done in several earlier studies) did not appreciably change the
results.

18The standard error for the difference in minimum wage effects, a, is given by
2

2

2

a =cYW+aN2raWaN
where aW and aN are the standard errors for the white and nonwhite effects, and
r the correlation between the errors in these two effects. Moreover, r is approximately equal to the correlation between the two equations' disturbances.
(This would hold exactly if the independent variables in the white and nonwhite
equations were identical; only SY differs by race.) The differences between white
and nonwhite effects were not significant in the GLS equations (1.11 (linear)
and 1.45 (logarithmic), though they were barely significant
(1.96 and 2.06)).

in the OLS equations

10

variable(s)

Note:

(

)

N

—

'l

II

3.65 2.53

-

0

41
14

0'.4

—

—
I

a'

-

-.00

-

1
41

..4

5-

-4

rOs

-2.96

SI

41.0
14U
II $

41
14 5..'

('1
I—

.52

—

41
sI

'-I
II

5-

-.25

—

,

.-4

5-

m
t-.
a'
.-

1—

a'
.4

ri

—.

-

—1.20

4

'_
.,
-l
._1

fl
t0'

—

—.66

.1

-4

,

Os

so
4'-

.—.

-

XI

Si

AF

P1

C3

Ill

LIN

T

-

H3C
C3

AL

LIN

U/L

F/P
L/P

ASS

ASS

-

Cl

113

LOG
AL

U/L

ASS

-

C4

112

LOG

F

ES

-

P1

III
CS

UN

U/P

ASS

-

M4
CS

LOG
AL

U/L

ASS

-

H3C
CS
P1

LIN

UIP

ABS

Xl

—

AF

C2
P1

III

AL

LIN

F/P

ASS

-

AF

-

NI
C2

LIN
AL

F/P

AS

1954— 1954— 1954— 1954— 1954— 1954— 1954- 1954— 1954—
1968 1968 1970 1968 1968 1965
1968 1968 1974

—.01

-.98

...I

'4

OS

1-.

—%

denotes variables included in other reported equations.

flinimum wage
Business cycle
Youth population share
Armed forces
School enroll.ent
Training and employmentprograms
-'
Time trend

Variables included

Functional form
Lag structure

Dependent

Disaggregation

Period studied

Equation specification

rate

in teenage employment

change

Change in teenage unemployment
(in percentage points)

Percent change

effect of a
in the minimum wage

Estimated

o
I—

—.

.45

—2.31

05-514 14
.1)11
.CUU
41 0 0

0 0' 0'
4.4 -4

p

0
SO
r-. r—

——

—

—

AF

-

CS

114

AL

LOG

F

AS

—

-

AF

-

III
C3

AL

LW

E/P
L/P

ABS

1948- 1954—
1975 1969

-

—.94

-4

s-I

.0
U

0'
-.

SO

(Al)
(Si)
(X2)

-

C2

Ml

LOG

E/A

1954—
1968

-

—1.18

.0
U
.-I

'a
4—
a'
5-

.10

—.84

'4

sI

._I

S—
41

a—

.00

—2.46

5)
I-s

4',

41

0

—4
'—5

0

S2
X2

-

P1

C3

lii

LOG
X-1

E/P
LIP

ASS

-

A2
S2

-

C3

112

LIN
AL

E/P
L/P

AS

-

P1

Cl

113

UN

F/P
U/L

A

1963— 1947— 1948—
1972
1976 1977

.15

-.65

00

0

a'

I'4—

-a' -s

Time-Series Studies by Major Characteristics

TABLE 1

Al
-

P2

C3

113

LOG

(1/P

F/P

ASS

19621978

.51

—2.52

1)

41$

U

'I—

144-.
5) os

''
I a'

—

—

—

-

—

M5C
C6

LOG
X+L

F/A

—

—

Al'

—

C3

Hi

AL

UN

F/P

H

1948— 1954—
1979 1979

—

—1.5 —1.39

410

'40

I
410
14

5-

00

01'1)
oe
s-so

.0

IC

5—

—

0'

00

-

0'

—

—

-

—

Ml
CS

LOG

F

1954—
1978

—

—1.21

1)

41
41

.0

—

00

—

—

-

C5
Pt

M4

LOG

E

1954—
1979

—

—2.13

-

14
00

V.4—'
)0—la'00

$

14

.0
'4

-

S2
X2

C3
P1

X-1

LOG

LIP

F/P

ABS

1963—
1978

-

-.52

00

a'

p0

(A)

-32-

Key to Table 1

Di saggregation

A = age
R = race
S = sex
Dependent variables
E = teenage employment
U = teenage unemployment
L = teenage labor force
P = teenage population
A = adult or total population
Functional forms
LIN = linear
LOG = double logarithmic
Lag structure
X-1 = minimum wage lagged one period
AL = Almon lag
X+1 = minimum wage in current period together with next year's value

Minimum
Ml
M2
M3
M4
M5

C

wage variable
= youth coverage x minimum wage/average hourly wage
= total coverage x minimum wage/average hourly wage
= minimum wage/average hourly wage
= minimum wage/price index
= nominal minimum wage
= coverage as a separate variable

Business cycle

Ci
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6

= total unemployment rate
= adult unemployment rate
= prime-age male unemployment rate
= total employment
= real output or output index
= money stock and its growth rate

Youth population share
P1 = teenage population/total (or adult) population
P2 = youth (16-24) population/total population
Armed forces

AF = armed forces/population (teenagers)
A2 = separate equation for armed forces employment
School enrollment

Si = enrollment/population (teenagers)
S2 = separate equation for enrolled, not enrolled
Training and Employment Pograms
Xl = dummy variables for years with substantial enrollments
X2 = enrollment in specific programs/population
Time

T = linear
IT =

time trend

time and time squared

-33—

TABLE 2

Estimated Effect of a 10 Percent Increase in the Minimum Wage
on Teenage Employment (in percent)

Specification
1.

Basic3

2. Basic -

TSQ

Basic - AF/P

5. Basic - TR/P
6.

7.

8.

Basic -

GLS'
Linear

-1.02

-0.45

-1. 06

(3.08)

(0.99)

(3. 25)

-0.97
(2.56)

-0.48
(1.01)

-1.06
(3. 02)

-0.93
(1.99)

-0.72
(1.91)

-0.27

-0.79
(2.16)

—0.69
(1.34)

-0.82
(2.55)

-0.36
(0.79)

-0. 97

-0.84
(1.87)

YK

-1.02
(3.10)

-0.51
(1.12)

-1.06
(3.25)

-0.91

YK

-1.03

-0.44
(0.96)

-1.13
(3.40)

-0.84

(3.12)

-1.35
(4.53)

-0.77
(1.82)

-1.63

-1.41
(3.82)

-1.11

-0.66
(1.59)

-1.60
(5.96)

-1.47

-0.38

-0.83

(0.83)

(2.51)

-0.82
(1.82)

YK

3. Basic - SY
4.

OLS1
Linear

Effect of

POP

Basic + PUPA

Basic + PCWEL

YK
YK
YK

YK
YK

(3.89)
9.

Basic + EN/P

10. Basic + YC

11. Basic + YC + EN/P

YK

-0.75
(2.10)

(0.55)

OLS1
Logarithmic2

(3. 15)

(5. 80)

YK

-2. 37

YC

(3.99)
1.84
(2.60)

YK

-1.85
(2.86)

YC

1.36
(1.83)

GLS'
Logarithmic2
-0.89
(1.92)

(2.03)
(1.80)

(4.34)

-1.76
(2.32)
1.41
(1.40)
-1.50
(1.98)
1.10
(1.10)

1OLS = ordinary least squares; GLS =
generalized least squares (serial correlation correction by Cochrane-Orcott method).
21n logarithmic equations, EM/P, UPR, POP, POPA, PCWEL, YK and YC are entered
logarithmically, other variables linearly.

3"Basic specification includes Q2, Q3, Q4, TIME, TSQ, UPR, SY, AF/P, TR/P,
POP, and YK as independent variables.
t-statistics in parentheses below coefficients.

-34-

TABLE 3

Estimated Effect of a 10 Percent Increase in the Minimum Wage
on Teenage Labor Force (in percent)

Specification
1.

2.

3.

Effect of

Basic3

Basic - TSQ
Basic - SY

YK
YK

YK

OLS1
Logarithmic2

GLS1
Logarithmic2

-0.99

-1.01

(3.42)

(2.39)

(3.10)

-1.28
(2.82)

-0.98
(2.84)

-1.04
(2.34)

(2.90)

-1.35
(2.92)

-0.82

-0.86
(1.95)

-0.80
(2.32)

-1.18
(2.43)

-0.81
(1.96)

-0.85

-1.12

(2.76)

(2.55)

-0.99
(2.42)
-0.98
(2.37)
-1.25
(3.53)
-1.12
(3.51)
-0.83
(2.03)

-1.00
(3.10)

—1.20

OLS1
Linear

GLS'
Linear

-1.02

(2.54)
4.

Basic - AF/P

YK

-0.81
(2.78)

5.

Basic - TR/P

YK

6.

Basic - POP

YK

7.

Basic + POPA

YK

8.

Basic + PCWEL

YK

9.

Basic + EN/P

YK

10. Basic + YC

YK
YC

11. Basic + YC + EN/P

YK
YC

See Notes to Table 2.

—1.03

(3.45)
-1.04
(3.46)
-1.34
(5.04)
-1.13
(4.54)
-0.67
(2.09)

(3.22)
-1.56
(5.59)
-1.54
(5.83)
-0.74
(2.30)
-2.28
(3.87)

(2.74)
-1.27
(2.77)
-1.58
(4.51)
-1.61
(5.06)
-1.18
(2.66)
-1.97
(2.62)

(2.56)
-1.67
(2.62)

(1.17)
-1.55
(2.06)

(1.68)

(0.65)

1.79

1.23

1.14

0.64

-35-

TABLE 4

Estimated Effect of a 10 Percent Increase in the Minimum Wage
on Teenage Unemployment Rates (in percentage points)

Specification

Effect of

1.

Basic3

2.

Basic - TSQ

OLS1
Linear

GLS'
Linear

OLS'
Logarithmic2

GLS'
Logarithmic2

(0.12)

(0.23)

(0.45)

(0.44)

-0.02

-0.03

(0.15)

(0.22)

0.05
(0.45)

0.05
(0.48)

-0.10

-0.14
(0.96)

-0.01

-0.03

(0.08)

(0.28)

(0.09)

-0.03
(0.24)

0.07
(0.65)

0.05
(0.55)

-0.02

-0.03

0.05

(0.11)

(0.25)

(0.46)

0.04
(0.42)

-0.01
(0.09)

-0.03
(0.25)

0.07

0.05

(0.59)

(0.48)

-0.02

-0.03
(0.25)

0.07
(0.56)

0.06
(0.57)

-0.02
(0.16)

-0.03
(0.28)

0.07
(0.57)

0.06
(0.57)

0.07
(0.51)

0.06
(0.44)

0.07
(0.62)

0.06
(0.59)

0.05
(0.24)
0.00
(0.00)

0.04
(0.22)
0.00
(0.02)

0.13

0.11
(0.48)
-0.06
(0.23)

YK

3. Basic - SY

YK
YK

(0.70)

4. Basic - AF/P
5. Basic - TR/P
6.

7.

Basic -

POP

Basic + PUPA

YK

YK
YK
YK

-0.01

(0.14)
8.

Basic + PCWEL

YK

9.

Basic + EN/P

YK

10. Basic + YC

YK
YC

11. Basic +

YC

+ EN/P

YK

(0.53)
YC

See Notes to Table 2.

-0.07
(0.25)

TABLE
5

-0.48
(0.91)
-1.17
0.12
(1.01)
-0.81
(2.88)
0.02

-0.34
(0.50)
-1.01
0.03
(0.23)
-0.56
(1.81)
-0.04

0.03
(0.24)
-0.61
(2.33)
-0.04

White

Nonwhite

Total

White

Nonwhite

Total

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Female

(3.25)
-0.50

0.02

(0.22)

Male

0.12
(1.18)
-0.74

Total

Female

Total

-1.49

(0.82)

Male

-1.62

(0.23)
-0.96

0.16
Total

-0.02
(0.15)
-0.03
(0.14)
-0.02

-1.10
(2.86)
-0.79
(2.05)
-0.96

-1.26
(3.22)

-1.01
(2.59)
-0.41
(0.72)
-0.94

Total2

3.

-1.10
(2.32)

-0.04
(0.35)
-0.04
(0.22)
-0.04

-1.27
(2.53)
-0.90
(1.77)
-1.11

0.23
(0.20)
0.09
(0.54)
0.17

-1.29
(3.48)
-1.02
(2.63)
-1.17

0.03

(0.44)

0.00
(0.04)
0.01

-1.67
(3.45)
-1.34
(2.63)
-1.52

-0.87
(1.49)
-1.21
-1.11
(2.59)
-1.23
-0.31
(0.05)
-0.60

-0.82
(1.82)
-0.95

Female

Nonwhite

2.

(2.14)

0.17
(0.27)
-1.23

0.69
(0.84)
-0.38

0.61
(0.85)
-0.93

t-statistics in parentheses.

variables in Note 3, Table 2.
'The basic specification is used and includes those explanatory
coeffiof the white and nonwhite (or male and female)
211Total effects are employment-share weighted averages
effects estimated directly, nor to each other.
cients. These are not identical to the "total

Unemployment
Rates

Labor Force

Employment

-1.48
(3.08)

Male

-1.08

-1.38
(3.53)

-0.49
(0.94)

-1.09
(2.60)

-1.32
(3.67)

GLS

-0.83
(1.64)

-1.06
(2.67)

Group

GLS

OLS

GLS

White

OLS

Logarithmic
GLS

Linear

by Sex
OLS

OLS

Logarithmic

1.

Group

Linear

by Race

on Teenage Employment and Labor Force
Estimated Effects of a 10 Percent Increase in the Minimum Wage
Race and Sex'
(in percent) and Unemployment Rates (in percentage points) by

-36-

-37—

TABLE 6

Estimated Effects of a 10 Percent Increase in the Minimum Wage
on Employment and Full—time Equivalent Employment of
Teenagers
(in percent)

Specifi cation

Sample
Period

Basic'

1954-79

Basic'
Basic'

Basic + EN/P
Basic + EN/P
Basic + EN/P

1963-79

1963-79
1954-79

1963—79
1963-79

'See Note 3, Table 2.

t-statjstics in parentheses

Measure of
Employment
EM/P

EM/P
FTE/P

EM/P
EM/P

FTE!P

Lin ear

Logan thmic
OLS
GLS

OLS

GLS

-1.02
(3.08)

-0.45
(0.99)

-1.06

-1.42
(3.29)

-0.61

-1.74
(3.73)

-1.49

-2.26
(4.22)

-0.82
(1.09)

-2.74

-2.08
(2.85)

-0.74

-0.38
(0.83)

-0.83
(2.51)

-0.82

(2.10)

-0.48
(0.89)

-0.21
(0.33)

-0.82
(1.43)

-0.69
(1.05)

-0.94

-0.51

-1.38

-1.11

(1.43)

(0.69)

(2.36)

(1.47)

(0.99)

(3.25)

(4.91)

-0.89
(1.92)
(2.45)

(1.82)

-38-

TABLE 7

Generalized Least Squares Estimates of the Effects of a 10 Percent Increase in
the Minimum Wage on Young Adult Employment and Labor Force (in percent)
and Unemployment Rates (in percentage points)

Employment
Linear Logarithmic

Specification

0.06
(0.34)

-0.00
(0.01)

0.23

023

(3.68)

(2.97)

-0.02
(0.08)

-0.11

0.22
(0.99)

0.23
(3.79)

0.23

(0.40)

0.13
(0.57)

-0.31

-0.37
(1.69)

-0.10
(0.49)

—0.11

0.13

-0.23
(1.17)

-0.28

0.02

(1.69)

(0.09)

-0.11

-0.22
(1.29)

0.07
(0.40)

-0.00
(0.03)

(1.43)

-0.30
(1.25)

-0.35

-0.03

0.21

(1.69)

(0.15)

-0.14
(0.75)

-0.21

-0.26
(1.59)

0.08
(0.44)

-0.19

0.09

(1.00)

Basic - TSQ
Basic - AF/P

(1.49)

Basic - TR/P
Basic - POP

(0.50)

Basic + POPT

Basic + PCWEL

(1.03)

-0.16
(0.78)

Basic + EN/P
Basic + TC

TK
TC

Basic + EN/P + TC

Unemployment Rates
Linear Logarithmic

—0.26
(1.58)

-0.20

Basic'

Labor Force
Linear Logarithmic

TK
TC

(1.05)

(0.53)

(3.06)

(0.57)

(2.22)

0.20
(2.74)

—0.02
(0.16)

0.23
(3.69)

0.23
(2.99)

0.16

0.17
(1.60)

(2.63)

0.08
(0.93

0.01

0.23

(0.08)

(3.72)

0.23
(2.98)

0.04
(0.28)

0.23
(3.57)

0.23
(2.85)

-0.37
(1.62)
0.41

-0.06

-0.14

(0.29)

(1.38)

(0.70)

(0.43)

-0.21)
(0.89)
0.13
(0.22)

0.02

0.24

(0.10)
0.09
(0.15)

0.36
(1.39)
0.13
(1.14)

0.38
(1.39)

dummies, linear and quadratic
'The basic specification includes seasonal (quarter)
the ratio of armed forces to poputime trends, the prime-age male unemployment rate,
lation for young adults, the ratio of training enrollments (all ages) to population,
and over), and the minimum wage index 1K.
the young adult/total population (aged 16
t-statistiCs in parentheses.

-39-

REFERENCES

Abowd, John and Killingsworth, Mark. "Structural Models of Minimum Wage Effects:
Analysis of Wage and Coverage Policies." Report of the Minimum Wage Study
Commission, Volume V (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office), 1981.
Adie, Douglas. "Teen—Age Unemployment and Real Federal Minimum Wages." Journal
of Political Economy, March-April 1973.

"The Lag in Effect of Minimum Wages on Teenage Unemployment."
Proceedings of the Industrial Relations Research Association, 1971.

____________

Al-Salam, Nabeel, Quester, Aline and Welch, Finis. "Some Determinants of the
Level and Racial Composition of Teenage Employment." In S. Rottenberg,
ed., The Economics of Legal Minimum Wages (Washington, D.C.: American
Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research), 1981.
Betsey, Charles L. and Dunson, Bruce. "Federal Minimum Wage Laws and the Employment of Minority Youth." American Economic Review (Proceedings), May
1981.
Boschen, John and Grossman, Herschel. "The Federal Minimum Wage, Inflation, and
Employment." NBER Working Paper No. 652, April 1981.
Brown, Charles, Gilroy, Curtis, and Kohen, Andrew. "Effect of the Minimum Wage
on Youth Employment and Unemployment." Report of the Minimum Wage Study
Commission, Volume V (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office), 1981.
Converse, Muriel, et al. "The Minimum Wage: An Employer Survey." Report of the
Minimum Wage Study Commission, Volume VI (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office), 1981.
Freeman, Richard. "Economic Determinants of Geographic and Individual Variation
in the Labor Market Position of Young Persons." Presented at NBER Conference on Youth Unemployment, March 1979. Forthcoming in R. Freeman and D.
Wise, eds. , Youth Unemployment: Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences.
Gavett, Thomas. Introduction to Youth Unemployment and Minimum Wages. Bulletin
1657, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1970.
Gramlich, Edward. "Impact of Minimum Wages on Other Wages, Employment and Family
Incomes." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1976.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. "Minimum Wages and the Demand for Labor." NBER Working
Paper No. 656, April 1981.
Hashimoto, Masanori and Mincer, Jacob. "Employment and Unemployment Effects of
Minimum Wages." Unpublished paper. National Bureau of Economic Research,
1970.

Kaitz, Hyman. "Experience of the Past: The National Minimum." In Youth
ment and Minimum Wages. Bulletin 1657, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 1970.

-40-

Kelly, Terence. "Youth Employment Opportunities and the Minimum Wage: An Econometric Model of Occupational Choice." Unpublished paper, The Urban Institute, 1975.

"Two Policy Questions Regarding the Minimum Wage." Unpublished
paper, The Urban Institute, 1976.

_____________

Lovell, Michael. "The Minimum Wage, Teenage Unemployment, and the Business
Cycle." Western Economic Journal, December 1972.

_____________

"The Minimum Wage Reconsidered." Western Economic Journal,

December 1973.

Mattila, J. Peter. "Youth Labor Markets, Enrollments, and Minimum Wages."
ceedings of the Industrial Relations Research Association, 1978.
"The Impact of Minimum Wages on Teenage Schooling and on the
Part-time/ll-time Employment of Youth." In S. Rottenberg, ed. , The
Economics of jj Minimum Wages (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research), 1981.
Mincer, Jacob. "Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages." Journal of Political

August 1976.
Moore, Thomas. "The Effect of Minimum Wages on Teenage Unemployment Rates."
July-August 1971.
Journal of Political
Ragan, James. "Minimum Wages and the Youth Labor Market." Review of Economics
and Statistics, May 1977.
Employment of
____________ "The Effect of a Legal Minimum Wage on the Pay and
Teenage Students and Nonstudents." In S. Rottenberg, ed., The Economics of
Legal Minimum Wages (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for
Public Policy Research), 1981.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment and Earnings,
United States, 1909-1978 (Washington, D.C.: Government PTting Office),
1979.

________________________
Revised
ing Office), 1979.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment and Earnings

Establishment

Data (Washington, D.C.: Government Print-

and
Standards Administration. Minimum
_______________________ Employment
Maximum Hours Standards Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (Washington,
D.C.: Governmei

inting Offi, various isis.

Division. Studies
_______________________ Wage and Hour and Public Contracts
II: Effects in Sel-

Part
of the Economic Effects of the $1 Minimum
ected Low-Wage Industries and Localities, January 1959.

Wachter, Michael and Kim, C. "Time Series Changes in Youth Joblessness." Presented at NBER Conference on Youth Unemployment, May 1979. Forthcoming in
jomfl: Its Nature, Causes, and
R. Freeman and 0. Wise, eds. , Youth
Consequences.

-41-

Welch, Finis. "Minimum Wage Legislation in the United States." In Orley Ashenfelter and James Blum, eds. , Evaluating the Labor Market Effects of Social
Programs, Princeton University Press, SpETal Report Series, No. 120, 1976.

___________

"Minimum Wage Legislation in the United States." Economic Inquiry,

September 1974.

____________ "Minimum Wage Legislation in the United States: Reply." Economic
Inquiry, January 1977.
West, E.G. and McKee, Michael. "Monopsony and 'Shock' Arguments for Minimum
Wages." Southern Economic Journal, January 1980.

