                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             I NTERGENERATIcJ NAL AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE




                         Rudiger Dornbusch


                       Working Faper No. 792




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge MA 02138

                          October 1981




Financial support was provided by a grant from the National Science
Foundation. I wish to acknowledge helpful comments from Eliana
Cardoso, Alberto Giovanninj, Jean Tirole and David Hsieh. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #792
                                                      October 1981




                     Intergenerational and International Trade



                                     ABS TRACT



     The paper sets out an overlapping generations model in an open economy

context. In the absence of productive capital a real consol is the vehicle

for intertemporal consumption smoothing. The presence of a longterm asset

implies that the anticipated future path of the economy, through the term

structure of interest, affects current generations.

     The model is applied to issues in the closed and open economy. These

include the effects of debt issue on asset prices and welfare, the effect

of present or anticipated future income growth, permanent or transitory.

En the open economy context we investigate the welfare and current account

effects of income changes on debt issue. The role of international dif-

ferences in risk aversion is studied.




                                        Professor Rudiger Dornbusch
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Room E52—357
                                        Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                        Cambridge, MA 02139

                                        (617) 253—3648
                                                            Revised, October 1981




                        INTERGENERATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE*



                                        Rudiger Dornbusch

                             Massachusetts Institute of Technology



            Interest in intertemporal economics of consumption and investment

    under perfect foresight has grown both in the area of macroeconomics and in

    the literature on international trade.
                                              Particularly in the open economy
    there has been an interest in
                                    reviewing received current account theory to
    bring it more in line with modern investment
                                                   theory and life—cycle saving
    behavior. This has been the focus of
                                            recent work by Furstenberg (1980) and
    Sachs (1981). It has been central to the restateujent of the Metzler effect

    in Obstfeld (1981) and Svensson and
                                          Razin (1981), and to papers by Kareken
    and Wallace (1981) and Hsieh (1981) on money in open economy consumption

    loan models.

           The present paper is in the tradition of that literature. It sets

 out a simple overlapping Samuelson—Diamond
                                                model in an open economy context.
The model abstracts from production and focusses on differences in
                                                                   incomes,
public debt and tastes as the determinants
                                            of international lending. The
presence of a longterm debt——real consols——lends
                                                      an intertemporal structure
to the model which makes it
                               possible to investigate the effects of present
and anticipated future disturbances.
                                           Thus even though the model is one
without productive capital and
                                    though people only receive incomes in their
first period of life the longterm debt ties current generations to
                                                                   events
in the future. In this
                           respect the analysis links up with the discussion of

*
 Financial support was provided by a grant from the National Science Foundation.
I wish to acknowledge helpful
                              comments from Eliana Cardoso, Alberto
Jean Tirole and David Hsieh.                                        Giovannini,
the volatility of asset prices [see Lucas (1978), Fischer (1981) and

Grossman and Shiller (1981)], although in a much simpler context.

       The intergenerational model turns out to be a very sturdy work-horse

for open economy issues: debt issue must worsen the current account and

deteriorate steady state welfare for the issuing country.   Current,

permanent income growth raises welfare and deteriorates the longrun trade

balance. Of particular interest are results regarding future events or

transitory disturbances. Here we show that a transitory rise has the same

effect on the current account as a permanent change, although asset prices

change more than in the permanent case if the coefficient of risk aversion
                                                              they are intro-
is larger than unity. International taste differences, once

duced, imply that disturbances that change interest rates affect differentiallY

saving and current accounts in the two countries.   Interestingly this effect

does not reverse some of the results noted above.

       Parts 1 and 2 set out the basic intergenerational model of consumption

and saving for the closed economy. In part 3 the open economy equilibrium is

introduced and some comparative static results are derived.   Part 4 concludes

with a discussion of international taste differences.



 1. Saving and Consumptiofl

        Consumers receive a given wage income in the first period of their life

 and save to provide resources for consumption during their second period

 retirement. This is, of course, the standard overlapping generations setting.

 We assume that there is no time preference.   Accordingly the consumer's

 problem is to maxime the life—time utility function:


            U =           + V(c2)   ;   V'>O,V" O
 (1)              V(c1)
                                          —3—




 subject    to the lifetime budget constraint:



 (2)
               c1+qc2=w

 where q =   l/(l+r)   is the relative price of future goods in terms of current

 goods or the present value of second period consumption and w is first period

 disposable income.

        Utility maximisation subject to the budget constraint gives rise to

 demand functions for consumption in both periods and to a saving function:



 (3)                                             =
               c1 = c1 (q,w) ,
                               c2    c2(q,w) , s     s(q,w)


       The utility function in (1) implies unit income elasticities of demand

for Consumption in both periods.       The effect of interest rate changes on

current consumptions and saving however, as is well known, is ambiguous. A

rise in interest rates raises real income of the currently young, since their

terms of trade as net lenders are improved, and thereby raises consumption in

both periods. But the substitution effect of higher interest rates shifts

Consumption toward the future as the relative price of future
                                                                  consumption, q,
declines. The net effect depends on the extent of concavity of the utility

function.

       In Figure 1 we show the lifetime indifference curve U which is

homothetic and by the assumption of no time preference symmetric around at

450 line. Initial equilibrium obtains at point A with the ray OR indicating

relative consumption in the two periods. Assuming now the case of constant

relative risk aversion the elasticity of current consumption and of saving
                                  —3a—

C2




         f<1



                          R
                          0
                              0



 0
C2




                                         U
                                             0



     0          0                  w             Cl
               C1


               FIGURE 1
                                       —4—




  with respect to the relative price are given by: 1



  (3)         lnc1/alnq = —a(l—l/0)                    ,OE —V"c/V'   0
                                       ,
                                             aEqc/w

 and




 (3)!        lns/lnq      (1—a) (1—1/0) E



 where 0 is the coefficient of risk
                                    aversion, a is the average propensity to

 consume in the second period or to save and      is the saving elasticity with
 respect to the relative price. The sign of         depends on the coefficient
 of risk aversion but we already note that there is an upper bound of (1—a)
                                                                            as
 risk aversion approaches infinity. This property will be important for some

 comparative static applications.

        In Figure 1 a rise in the interest rate rotates the budget line upward

and leads to a new optimal point in the
                                            range above and to the left of the

ray OR in the segment A'B extended. With a unit coefficient of risk aversion

the new equilibirum is at B, vertically above A. If risk aversion is larger

than unity current consumption will lie in the range A'B, and if it is less

than unity it will lie to the northwest of B. Since the coefficient of risk

aversion is a measure of the concavity of the utility function there is a

simple interpretation of these results. With a high coefficient of relative

risk aversion there are strong diminishing returns and the lifetime consump-

tion smoothing objective dominates over substitution. Conversely, when the

coefficient of risk aversion is small the elasticity of substitution between



1The first order
                 Condition is qV'(c1)=v'(c). Differentiating the first order
condition and the budget constraint a11owsto solve for the demand functions.
                                      —5—




present and future consumption, 1/0, is large and lifetime consumption

smoothing is dominated by substitution effects.



2. Debt and the Closed Economy Equilibrium

         The conventional overlapping generations model is stated in terms of

a public debt that is rolled over every period. We prefer here a formulation

that links the current and all future states of the economy. This is

achieved by assuming that the debt is a consol. There is a given stock of

consols outstanding, b in number, each paying one unit of real output per

period, indefinitely. The value of consols outstanding, ph, will depend on

all present and future short term interest rates. It is this emphasis on

the term structure of interest that we want to exploit in our formulation.

         The consumer's budget constraint is restated in (5) in terms of the

borrowing and lending on consols rather than the short term interest rate

as in (2). In the first peirod of life the individual receives a wage income,

consumes and purchases a value of consols equal to:




(5)           pb = w _c1(w,q)


where b is the number of bonds purchased. Second period consumption is

financed by the coupon payment on bond holdings plus the resale value of the

bonds:



(6)
              c2   b(l + p1)


periods are related by the equation:
                                         —6—




 (7)           Pt =   (l   +



 so that the current price of a consol is the present value of next years

 coupon plus the resale value.

          We assume that the coupon payments on the debt are financed by taxes

 levied on the young. With a stationary population and a debt service equal

 to b, disposable income of the young is w =       per   capita, where   is the

given income endowment.


Equilibrium

          Closed economy equilibrium requires that the market for current goods

clear. The supply of output is given by the income endowment and this has

to equal consumption by the young and old:



(8)              =
                     c(w,q)    + (l+p)


In (8) that consumption of the young depends on the short term interest rate,

       and disposable income w. Consumption of the second generation depends

on the prevailing price of consols. It is apparent from (8) that the solution

to market equilibrium involves not only the current short term interest rate

but also the long term interest rate implicit in the consol price.

         Using the definition of saving, sw—b—c1, as well as (7), we can

rewrite the equilibrium condition in a manner that focusses on present and

future asset prices:



(8)'          s (w,p/(l+p÷1)) =
                                           —7--




       A relatively simple case arises if disposable income and debt are

expected to be constant indefinitely. In that case (8)' defines implicitly

a difference equation in the consol price.


A Special Case

       For the case of logarithmic utility functions V(c), or unit relative

risk aversion, the solution to (8)' is:2




            Pt =   w/2b

Consol prices are proportional to current disposable income and inversely

proportional to the current debt outstanding. The future is of no consequence

because consumption and saving of the currently young does not respond to the

rate of interest while the old consume all their wealth.3

       Equation (9) implies that the long term interest rate is always

positive in this consumption loan model. The short term interest rate is

determined by the relative values of real income and debt in adjacent periods.

Using (7) and (9) we have:



            r =
                    2+(w/b)   t+l—(w/) t
(10)
             t
                      (w/)


The short term interest rate,         can be negative provided the present

income/debt ratio is sufficiently large relative to the future income/debt ratio.



2For the logarithmic case c1qc2 and s = w—c1 =      w/2.

3Fischer (1981) has discussed this case in a stochastic setting in interpreting
some results of Lucas (1978).
                                      —8—




 The More General Case

           In general (8)' is a non—linear difference equation which, for the case

 of constant relative risk aversion, is given by:4



 (11)           t+l =   [P'°(w1 -             —l




 There is no assurance of the stability of the adjustment process for any

 arbitrary initial conditions. The matter is complicated by the fact that,

 unlike in physical systems, the prices cannot be treated as predetermined

 state variables. Accordingly, as is already familiar from models of perfect

 foresight, there is a multiplicity of paths. Some of these may fail to converge

 to a stationary solution.

         We sidestep these problems by assuming that a unique steady state does

exist and that, for given b and w that remain constant, the economy immediately

jumps to the steady state. Accordingly, there will be an equilibrium price of

Consols:




(11)'          p =   p(w/   ; 0)




The equilibrium price depends on the ratio of disposable income to debt

outstanding, w/b, as well as on the degree of risk aversion. The higher the

degree of risk aversion the lower the equilibrium asset price.

         In this more general case the equilibrium price of consols depends again

on real income and on debt outstanding. The proportional
                                                               change (across steac



4From the first order condition qV'(c1) =
                                             V'(c2)    and V(c.) =
                                                                     --- c0 we have
c1 =    c2q0   and, using the budget constraint, s =   w[q/(q+q0)].      Substitution
of the saving function in (8)' yields (11).
                                        —9—



states) induced by permanent changes in income or debt is:




(12)
              =     =        ;          (l—q) (l—)



       The term 1—$ is a positive fraction. Accordingly, whether the

coefficient of risk aversion is larger or smaller than unity, a rise in

income raises equilibrium asset prices or lowers interest rates while a rise

in debt outstanding reduces asset prices.5


Welfare

       The effect of permanent disturbances on steady state welfare are

derived by differentiating the lifetime utility function in (1), using the

budget constraint and the first order conditions:



(13)        dUly' (c1) =
                           dc1 + qdc2
                        = dw —
                                 c2dq


The change in lifetime utility, measured in terms of current goods, is equal

to the present value of the change in consumption. By the budget constraint

this is equal to the change in disposable income, dw, plus the income effect of

a change in the relative price of future goods, —c2dq.

       Using (12) in (13) it can be shown that an increase in debt outstand-

ing must reduce steady state welfare. The reduction in disposable income

due to debt service more than outweighs the increase in welfare due to higher

interest rates. Of course, the decline in welfare of the young has a counter-

part in the increased welfare of the old who receive the windfall distribution

of bonds.




5The term (l—q) is a positive fraction and hence with 1/0 larger than unity
is negative and the denominator of (12) is positive. When 1/B is less than unity
it is readily seen that (i—q)(l--aX1—li) is a product of positive fractions and
thus is positive and less than unity.
                                      —10.-



  The Term Structure of Interest

         So far we have assumed a flat path of output and debt over time. We

  now investigate the impact of a future, transitory increase in output on the

  structure of interest rates over time. We will show that an anticipated, one—

  period increase in income that occurs next period will raise the current short

 term rate, lower the short term rate next period and lower the long term

  interest rate or raise the consol price today.

        We start with interest rate determination in the period where income

 transitorily rises. Figure 2 shows the saving function as well as the value

 of bonds outstanding. Point A is the initial
                                                steady state equilibrium. We take
 the case where saving responds positively to the rate of interest as shown

 by the schedule ss drawn for the given income endowment.     The downward slop-
 ing schedule b/r shows the value of consols as a function of the interest

 rate assumed to be constant in perpetuity. At A saving by the young equals

 the value of consols and thus the goods market (or the capital market) clears.

        The schedule labelled b[l+l/r1/(l+r        shows the value of consols as
 a function of the short term rate r+1 given a subsequent return of the

 interest rate to the steady state level r. It must cross point A and lie

 to the left of the b/r schedule for r+1<r since the latter schedule corresponds

to a flat term structure while the former only considers a transitory deviation

of interest rate from the level r. Now consider the increase in income that

raises saving as shown by the rightward shift of ss to s's'. The excess supply

of goods or excess demand for bonds leads to a decline in the interest rate to

point A'. Equilibrium saving rises and the value of consols outstanding

increases. It is readily shown that, the fall in interest rates notwithstand-

ing, welfare must rise for the generation that experiences the increase in
        6
income.


6The interest rate results hold independently of the
                                                     slope of the saving schedule.
If the saving schedule is negatively sloped, it will be steeper than the schedule
depicting the value of consols. This is ensured by the fact that (l—q)(l--ç3) is
at most a positive fraction. Therefore,
                                         next period's interest rate must fall
and the present rate must rise.
                    —lOa—




r, r+1




                                 S




     r




                                         =pb



                      2
                      St
                                     [1+1/1


         0                  pb                S




         Figure 2
                                       —11—



       Consider next the effects of the transitory income increase in the

period preceding the actual occurrence. The anticipation of the transitory

future decline in interest rates raises at all levels of the current short

rate, r. the value of consols and therefore creates an excess demand for

goods. In the present period the equilibrium interest rate must, therefore,

rise. The rise in current interest rates, by (3) implies that the young

experience an improvement in their terms of trade and thus share in the

benefits of the future rise in income. In fact they buy their consols cheap

and sell them high and their lifetime utility increase arises from this

capital gain.

       The welfare of the currently old is also affected by next periods rise

in output. The change in asset prices in adjacent periods, from (8)', is

given by:



(14)




In Figure 2, we already saw that asset prices in period t+l increases. There-

fore, current asset prices rise or fall depending on the extent of risk

aversion. If risk aversion is large or saving responds negatively to the

interest rate then the current asset price will fall and the currently old

lose as a consequence of future income growth. Conversely, if risk aversion

is less than unity asset prices in the present period rise and thus make

the currently old share in the future income growth.

       The results have an easy interpretation in terms of the importance of

the consumption smoothing objective. If the currently young have a strong

preference for consumption smoothing than the excess demand for goods, and the

ensueing rise in interest rates, reduces saving. Therefore, interest rates
                                       —12—



rise presently more than in the future. The young gain not only by selling

future consols high, but also by buying them cheap today.    The only way all

generation can gain is for each of them to delay consumption, but that only

occurs if consumption smoothing is dominated by substitution in response to

changes in the interest rate.

        What can be said about the term structure of interest rates if an

output disturbance is anticiapted with more than a period lead? We can

directly use (14) to infer that for the case of risk aversion larger than one

asset price rise in every period.     Moreover, since q3/(l—) is, in this case,

the product of two fractions it is the case that asset prices rise less the

more distant the period from the time of the disturbance. Thus consol prices
                                                             7
gradually rise peaking in the year where output increases.



3. The Open Econo
        We now assume two countries identical in respect to tastes and population,

but with potentially different incomes and debt outstanding.     We are interested

in determining the equilibrium asset price in the world as well as patterns of

 lending. Throughout we look at the case of one good and one asset. A bar

 denotes stocks outstanding so that b* is the existing stock of foreign—issued

 consols.



 Equilibrium in the Open Economy

         Equilibrium in the world goods market requires the balance of world

 income (+i*) and world consumption by the two generations in each country:



                   =
 (15)
                       c1 + c + (b-ib*) (l+p)


 An alternative interpretation, focussing on external indebtedness, b—b, is



 7Fischer (1979) has sho similar results in a model of money, inflation
 and capital formation.
                                                —13—




 derived by rewriting the equation in the form:



 (15)'            s(q,w)—p = pb*_s*(q,w*)



 In this form we focus on the capital market. The excess of home saving over

 the value of out debt outstanding equals net external assets.



                                     Table 1

                                 Current Accounts


                                         Home          Foreign          Net

           Young                            s            s              s+s
           Old                          -pb

           Net                          s—pb           s*_pb*                 0




                                    Table 2

                                 Trade Balances

                                        Home           Foreign          Net

            Young
                                        —c1            *c*
            Old                         —(l+p)b        _(1+p)b*         —(1+p)(b+b*)
            Net                         s—pb+(—b)      s*_pb*+(b*_b*)             0




         Each generation's balance of payments as well as national aggregate

balances are shown in Tables 1 and 2. In each country the old run a trade

deficit. Their trade deficit is matched in part by service income on their
                                     —14—




holdings of debt in part by a capital inflow equal to their sale of debt.

The young in each country have a trade balance and current account surplus,

purchasing debt from the old. The home aggregate current, in the steady

state, is balanced. Every period the old sell to the young and unchanging

amount of debt. The home aggregate trade balance is in surplus or deficit

as the home country is a net external lender or borrower, b—bO.

        For later reference we define the net rate of capital outflow or the

aggregate current account surplus of the home country as K:




(16)         K = s(q,w) — pb



The current account equals the excess of saving or lending by the young

generation over bond sales——the excess of consumption over income from debt

for the older generation——by the old. Here b denotes the actual bond hold-

ings and sales of the old generation.


Some Comparative Statics

        In this section we study the effects of permanent, current changes in

income and in debt on equilibrium interest rates, the current account and

welfare. We start with the case of a permanent rise in home income.

        From the goods market equilibrium condition in (15)' we find that a

rise in home income raises the equilibrium price of goods or lowers the

 interest rate just as it does in the closed economy:



                           W
 (17)              1—s

 The result is readily understood in terms of Figure 3. The righthand panel
                                     —15—




 shows the case where saving is inversely related to the interest rate. Since

 the saving elasticity now is a positive fraction the aggregate saving

 schedule, s+s*, is steeper than the schedule p(b+b*) which shows the value

 of bonds outstanding. (This schedule with p=l/r has, of course, a unit

 elasticity.) A rise in income raises home and world saving and must lower

 the equilibrium interest rate. In this case the interest rate will fall

 more than if the saving schedule were positively sloped.

        Figure 3 also shows the current account effect of the increase in home

 income. In the lefthand panel we show the foreign value of bonds held, pb*,

as well as the foreign saving schedule. Initial steady state equilibrium

prevails at A with saving abroad equal to the value of bonds sold by the old

generation. The lower the equilibrium interest rate r' raises the value of

foreign bond sales by the old beyond the increase in saving by the young.

Thus the foreign country runs a current account deficit, pb*_s* and the home

country shows a corresponding surplus. With positively sloped saving functions,

the foreign country would likewise run a current account deficit.

       Using the definition of the current account in (16), we can calculate

the magnitude of the improvement:



(18)
            dwdw
                 g    b dw ——a(1—)
                                x


The result in (18) is of interest because it shows that the magnitude of the

current account change depends only on relative size and on the average

propensity to save and not directly on the degree of risk aversion.8 The

larger the home country the smaller the current account effect of income growth.


8The degree of risk aversion does, though, affect the average propensity to save.
See footnote on page 9 above.
                                     —15a—




r                            r


         A
r0


                                             At
r'
                  pb*                             p(b+b)
             S*

                                                  p(b+b*)
     0              s*,pb        0




                        FIGURE 3
                                           —16—




 Conversely, the higher the propensity to save the higher the current balance

 effect.

           The current account surplus of the home country is only transitory,

 leading to an increased home net lending position and, therefore, to a steady

 state deterioration in the home country's trade balance. Here is an interest-

 ing result in that higher income induces a steady state deterioration in the

 trade balance. The trade balance deterioration reflects the fact that the

 initial current account surplus has increased home debt holdings and with

 that has raised income relative to output. Since in the new steady state

aggregate disposable income is equal to expenditure, expenditure exceeds

output and thus there is a trade deficit financed by income from net external

assets.

          Consider now the welfare effect of higher home income. The higher

bond prices imply increased welfare for the old since they realize higher

prices for the bonds they sell. Furthermore, abroad steady state welfare

declines since the fall in interest rates worsens the terms of trade of the

young who are net lenders. At home the higher income raises
                                                               welfare, but this
is dampened by the adverse rise in the relative price of future goods. The

net effect, however, is a welfare improvement.
                                                  Accordingly, the possibility
of Edgeworth—like damnifying growth does not arise in this model.

       The analysis of changes in debt is straightforward. From (15)' we

calculate the effect of home debt issue on steady state asset prices as:


              A =      (a±p)
(18)                                  db
                     p (b+b*) ('_$)
                                   —17—




Thus, home debt issue must lead to a decline in asset prices or a rise in the

equilibrium interest rate. This in turn implies that steady state welfare

abroad must rise. This is the case since lifetime utility as shown in (13)

rises if asset prices decline, the young being net lenders. In the home

country debt issue, just as in the closed economy, exerts offsetting effects

through the reduction in disposable income due to higher taxes and the change

in interest rates. Just as in the closed economy case, it can be shown that

the net effect is a reduction in lifetime uLility both for the currently

young and in the steady state.

       The effect of home debt issue on the long run trade balance and

external indebtedness can be definitely established: Home debt issue reduces

net external assets, b—b, and therefore, leads to an improvement in the long

run trade balance. This result is to be expected since abroad real income

increases via the rise in interest rates thereby leading, through substitution

and income effects, to higher second period consumption. With bond prices

falling c = (1+p)b* implies that foreign bond holdings increase. The long
run trade balance improvement for the home country thus reflects the counter-

part of the differential foreign increase in real income and welfare.


Future Income Increases

       We studied for the closed economy the case of currently anticipated,

future income growth. In that case the equilibrium present interest rate

rises while it falls once the increase in income occurs. Exactly the same

result will, of course, arise in the world economy. The only question is

whether future income disturbances have effects on today's current account.

       From the definition of the current account in (16), the relation in

(14) for price changes in adjacent periods (equally valid in the open economy
                                         —18--




 with identical consumers) and from (15)' we have:



  (19)
                             q
               dKt = _Kt
                           _l_

 As we noted above, in the steady state the current account is zero and,

 therefore, a presently anticipated disturbance will have no impact on the

 current account. The reason for the absence of a current account effect is

 the complete symmetry of this one—good, one—asset model, with identical

 consumers who in the steady state have zero capital flows.    To have an

 impact on the current account disturbances must affect the two countries' met

 saving differentially. This is the case of current disturbances but it does

not arise for future disturbances.



4. International Taste Differences

         The analysis so far assumed internationally identical tastes. There

are two obvious directions in which to extend the model:      Differences in
rates of time preference or differences in the degree of risk aversion. e

consider here the possibility that risk aversion differs. Specifically, we

assume that the coefficients of risk aversion are on different sides of

unity so that the saving response to changes in interest rates differs

between countries.

         The earlier analysis of price changes induced by changes in income or

debt remains unchanged, except that now the relevant aggregate saving

elasticity is:



(19)             x$ +   (1-x)*
                                           —19—




which reaches as a maximum the value of a positive
                                                        fraction. The interest—

ing question now concerns current accounts.       Does a rise in income still

improve the home country's current account even if home saving responds

negatively to the interest rate? Does a home debt issue still deteriorate the
                                                  positively to the rate of interest?
current account even if home saving responds

The answer in both cases turns out to be affirmative.

       Consider first the home country current account as it is affected by

a current rise in home income:




(20)        dK                 _____
                    = a(l—x)
                w



From the equation it is apparent that the difference in tastes ($*

affects the magnitude but not the sign of the current account. The home

country's current account will be larger relative to the common preference

case, if    >   $*,   that is if home saving responds positively, and more than

abroad, to the fall in interest rates. Conversely, in the case of debt issue

 the current account will deteriorate less if the home country responds more

positively to the rise in interest rates.
                                                           direction of the current
        While in the case of current disturbances the
                                                       this is not the case for
 account is unaffected by differences in tastes,

 future disturbances. For example, a rise in future income has no effect on

 the current account when tastes are identical. Now, with differences in
                                                                          will
 tastes, there will be an effect. The current account of the home country

 improve or worsen as q*       $. We   remember that future income increases raise

 the current short term interest rate. If the home country has a relatively
                                          —20—




  stronger, positive saving response to the interest rate, the home
                                                                    current
 account will improve already in the
                                       present period. Conversely, if the
 home country has the relatively smaller saving
                                                response the current
 account presently deteriorates although, of course, in the second
                                                                   period
 there is an improvement.




 5. Concluding Remarks

        The intergeneratjon exchange model sets a minimal framework
                                                                    for
addressing intertemporal issues in trade theory. The introduction of
                                                                      long
term debt, and hence the term
                              structure of interest, makes current accounts
depend not only on relative
                               present incomes but also on future events. The
model is a minimal framework
                             and for that reason cannot go much further.
But it is immediately obvious
                              that extensions to a multiple
                                                            commodity setting
open up interesting questions as does the
                                            Possibility of stretching the life
cycle or making labor supply
                             endogenous. Another range of questions is con-
cerned with taxation of international
                                      lending and with an optimal external
debt. These issues are left for further work.
