NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGES, RELATIVE PRICES AND THE CHOICE BETWEEN
FIXED AND FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES

Richard C. Marston

Working Paper No. 193

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
October 1981

This paper was written while the author was a visiting
professor at
the Ecole Superieure des Sciences
Econorniques et Commerciales. The
author would like to thank Willem
Buiter, Bernard Dumas, Nancy
Marion, Jacques Melitz, Marcus
Miller, Stephen Turnovsky, Charles
Wyplosz and participants in the Warwick University Summer Workshop
on Open Economy Macroeconomics and the NBER Summer Institute on
International Economics for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
Financial support from a German Marshall Fund Fellowship and
a NSF
grant (SES8oo64iI) is gratefully acknowledged. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 11793

October 1981

WAGES, RELZTIVE PRICES AND IHE CHOICE BPJIWEEN
FIXED AND FlEXIBlE EXCHANGE RATES

ABSTRACT

This paper reexamines the choice between fixed and flexible rates to
take into account wage indexation and flexible prices. The ircdel
employed is of a snail open econany
faced by nonetary and aggregate
demand disturbances originating at haie and abroad. Aggregate
behavior in this node], varies depending upon whether wages aresupply
set in
one-period labor contracts or are indexed to current changes in the

general price level.

'I central conclusions eITerge from the analysis. First, for all dis-

turbances the difference in output variation between fixed and flexible
rates is dependent upon the degree of wage indexation, being proportional to one minus the degree of wage indexation in the domastic
economy. Thus the nore highly indexed the economy, the less difference
the choice of exchange rate regine makes to output variation.
Secondly,
the effect of foreign disturbances on the dorrestic econonv depends
as

much on foreign wage and price behavior

as dorrestic. If the rest of
the world is fully indexed, flexible rates
insulate the darestic
country carletely fran foreign nonetaxy disturbances. If the rest
of the world is nore highly indexed than the daiestic country, then

for high price elasticities at least, a flexible rate darrns the output variation associated with foreign
demand disturbances.

Richard C. Marston

Wharton School

University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
(2l5)—243—7626

1

How much difference a flexible

exchange rate makes to the economic

performance of a country depends

significantly on wage behavior. If wages are
sufficiently sensitive to exchange
rates, flexible rates will exhibit much the
same variability of output as a fixed exchange rate regime.
Foreign wage
behavior is also of key
importance, since high wage flexibility abroad can
insulate the domestic country from some foreign disturbances
regardless of
domestic wage behavior, while for other economic disturbances
it is the
relative degree of wage flexibility that determines the
desirability of
flexible rates. This
paper reexamines the choice between fixed and flexible

rates taking into account both domestic and foreign
wage behavior.
Wage behavior is Important to the
because it determines to what

choice between exchange rate regimes

extent a change in the exchange rate also

changes the relative prices of

foreign and domestic goods. It is primarily
through changes In relative prices
that exchange rates affect domestic output
and employment. Traditional treatments of fixed and flexible
exchange rates,

of which Mundefl'g Canadian

Journal study (1963) is the best known, assumed

that any change in the exchange rate resulted in an equal
change in relative

prices because both wages and domestic
wages are responsive to changes in the
prices respond indirectly to

prices were assumed constant. When
general price level, however, domestic

changes in exchange rates, with correspondingly

less effect on relative prices. In such circumstances,

as shown earlier by

Sachs (1980), changes in exchange rates lead to relatively small

changes in

real output and employment.

This paper examines the choice

between exchange rate regimes for a small

country faced by monetary and aggregate demand disturbances originating
at
home and abroad. For domestic
disturbances, the paper uses aggregate demand
and supply curves to
provide a geometric analysis of how these disturbances

2

affect output and prices in both exchange rate regimes. The aggregate demand
and supply curves permit a simple interpretation of the original Mundell

results and the modification which those results undergo when wages and prices

respond to exchanges rates. The supply curve is derived from a wage
indexation model similar to that used by Flood and Marion (1980) and others.
Full wage indexation corresponds to the fixed real wage case examined earlier

by Sachs (1980). For the case of partial indexation, the relative performance
of fixed and flexible rates is shown to vary directly with the degree of wage
indexat ion.

Foreign disturbances affect the domestic economy through a variety of
channels, so the first step in the analysis of these disturbances is the

specification of a model of a foreign economy to determine how
and other variables respond to each disturbance.

foreign output

Foreign monetary and

aggregate demand disturbances are studied first within this model, then their

effects are traced through the domestic model. The results depend crucially
on wage indexation, but here both domestic and foreign levels of indexation

are important. For foreign monetary disturbances, the paper shows that the
insulative properties of a flexible regime depend less upon domestic than on

foreign indexation. And for foreign demand disturbances, the choice between
fixed and flexible rates is dependent upon the relative degrees of indexation
at home and abroad.

The first section of the paper describes the behavior of the domestic

country, including its response to domestic disturbances. The second section
of the paper introduces a foreign model for the analysis of foreign
disturbances.

3

I.

DOMESTIC BEHAVIOR

The domestic country trades with the foreign country,
representing the
rest of the world, but is assumed to be too small to affect the latter.

This

assumption allows the analysis of foreign

disturbances to be conducted in two

stages involving the respective countries.1

The model of each country

consists of three equations,

aggregate demand and supply equations for the
good produced in that country, and

A.

(1)

The Domestic Model

=

g(

(la)

(2)

an equation describing financial behavior.

= c(p
(2a)

—

+

P) +

g — g(r

—

(EIt÷1

—

I)) +

g0 +

ItaPt+(1_a)(pf÷X)
—

tlt
= (1 —

(2b)

W' =

(2c)

W =

where c = (1 —

—

c.b(I

c')L

t_1EPt

=

t_iEI)

_c(W

+ ln(1 —

+ b(I —

c?)/ct

—

—

c')

+
c0

+ cln(1 —
—

c')

c'i

t_1EI)

and c0 =

(1 —

c')i

1The foreign disturbances are first studied within
the foreign model,
then their effects are traced through the domestic model.
This
approach,
which Flood and Marion (1980) term an extended small
country analysis, is
preferable to a symmetric two
country analysis for studying exchange rate
policy for a single country. Not only is it easier to understand (because
the
analysis can proceed in two stages), but it accords better with the
situation
faced by most countries which
cannot significantly affect foreign
conditions. In Marston (1981) a similar
two—stage analysis is used to study
an exchange—rate union between the
domestic
country and one of two foreign
regions.

4

it 0

Mt —It =(pt +Yt —I)—k.r
+k
t

(3)

r

(3a)

r =

(3b)

M =+m

—

+

t

t

LIST OF VARIABLES
All variables are in logarithms (except interest rates).
f

Y1

domestic, foreign outputs

' P:

prices of domestic, foreign output

exchange rate (domestic currency price of foreign currency)

r, r:

domestic, foreign interest rates

It:

general price level of the domestic country

tE Jt÷i:

expected value of a variable at t+i,
available at t

L:

units of labor

Wt:

domestic nominal wage

Wt':

contract wage

Mt, M:

domestic, foreign money supplies

u, u:

domestic monetary, aggregate demand disturbances

u, u:

foreign monetary, aggregate demand disturbances

based on information

Equation (i) describes aggregate demand for the domestic good as a
function of the relative prices of foreign and domestic goods, foreign output

5

(which affects export demand), the real interest rate, and a stochastic

disturbance with a mean of zero and serially uncorrelated. A rise in the
foreign price relative to the domestic price (a fall in the terms of trade) is
assumed to increase aggregate demand as is a rise in foreign output,2 while a
rise in the real interest rate is assumed to reduce aggregate demand.3 In the

case of perfect substitution between foreign and domestic goods, where
g.

becomes infinite in size, this aggregate demand equation reduces to the
familiar purchasing power parity relationship.

Supply behavior is based on a labor contract lag of one period with the

partial or complete indexation of wages to current prices. The supply
equation (2) takes a more complicated form than in a closed economy because
there are two prices involved in supply decisions, the price of domestic
output

and the general price level (It), the latter a weighted average of

domestic and foreign prices. (See equation la). Output is responsive to
nominal wages relative to the price of domestic output, but nominal wages may
be at least partially indexed to current changes in the general price level.
With indexation, supply is a function of two price prediction errors. (See
equation 2).

This supply equation is derived from a Cobb—Douglas production function
(2a), a labor market equilibrium condition (2b) determining the contract wage,

and a wage indexation equation (2c). The contract wage, reflecting
expectations at t—1, is based on labor demand (derived from the production

2The Marshall—Lamer condition is assumed to hold, so the price
elasticity, g, must be positive.
3tEIt+l —

I

is the expected change in the general price level based on

information available at time t. The expectation tEIt+i is assumed to be
formed rationally from the rest of the model.

6

function) arid an inelastic labor supply (L).k

The actual wage, W, will

differ from the contract wage if the indexation parameter, b, is different
from zero; this parameter is assumed to vary between zero (no indexation) and

one (full indexation).5 With no indexation, only domestic price prediction
errors matter, but with full indexation, price prediction errors in the

general price index also matter. With full
increases in 1' and

Indexation, in fact, equal

leave supply unaffected. When indexation is less than

complete, however, equal increases in P and 1• increase supply since the real
wages faced by producers fall.
The domestic country has two financial assets, money and a bond bearing

interest rate r. In equation (3), the demand for money is expressed as a
function of real income, with

money balances and income being deflated by the

general price level, as well as the domestic interest rate.6 As in the

4The desired labor supply is inelastic, but once the contract is
signed the amount of labor supplied is determined
by the demand for labor as
in Gray (1976). The desired labor
supply, alternatively, might be sensitive
to nominal wages relative to the general price level. None of the results
below would be affected by this change in
specification, since current output
would be a function of the same price prediction errors as in (2). When labor
supply is variable, however, an alternative objective function measuring
deviations of output from desired
output is no longer equivalent to our
objective function. (See Section I—B below).
5For studies of wage indexation behavior, see Fischer (1977), Gray
(1976), Modigliani. and Padoa—Schioppa (1978), and as previously mentioned,
Sacha (1980) and Flood and Marion (1980).
The study by Flood and Marion also
analysed the choice between fixed and flexible exchange rates in the presence
of domestic and foreign disturbances, but in a model where purchasing
power
parity holds. Their analysis assumed that the indexation parameter is an
endogenous variable set at its optimal value in each exchange rate regime.
Here we will assume that because of institutional
or legal constraints, the
degree of indexation remains the same when the
exchange rate regime changes.
Thus the analysis will show how the choice of exchange rate regime differs
between countries with different types of wage and price behavior.
6The income elasticity of the demand for money is assumed to be
equal to
one. If it is not equal to one, a change in the general price level, and
therefore the exchange rate, will have an effect on the net demand for
money
propotioil to one minus this elasticity. In that case, the well—kno
(continued)

7

earlier Mundell analysis, the domestic bond is assumed to be a perfect

substitute for the foreign bond, so the expected returns on the two bonds are

equal. (See equation 3a).
The behavior of the money supply

depends upon the exchange rate regime.

Under flexible rates, the money supply is assumed to be exogenously determined

as in equation (3b). The current money supply is equal to a base level plus a
random term, where the latter has a mean of zero and is serially uncorrelated
as well as uncorrelated with the demand disturbance.
under fixed rates is determined

The supply of money

endogenously by exchange market intervention;

that is, Mt adjusts to keep X fixed.

The equations of the domestic model, (1) —

(3),

determine three

variables: domestic output, the price of that output, and the exchange rate,
as functions of the domestic disturbances. In
disturbances are to be considered, so for

this section, only domestic

convenience we assume that the

foreign output, price, and interest rate are constant. To facilitate
comparison between the two exchange rate

regimes, equations (1) and (2) are

first solved for Y and P as functions of X and the aggregate demand
d

disturbance, u. The resulting expressions, equations (4) and (5) below,
describe demand and supply behavior in both exchange rate regimes:7

b'
_____
/

1

d

(g
+ga)c(1_b)
P
rD
1

(x—x)

Munde]j. result that under flexible rates fiscal
policy is ineffective in
raising output breaks down even without taking into account the expectations
effect considered below. Henderson (1981) discusses this issue.

are the solutions for Y and P when the disturbances in equations
(1) and (2) are equal to zero. Similarly, X is the solution for X when the
disturbances in all three equations, (1) —
(3), are equal to zero.

8
—
u p
Pt —P=—+

(g + ga + cb(1 —

(5)

(6)

D

(x

D1

= - (i + c(1 a.b))

-

a))

D1' =

g

+ ga + c(1 — ab) > 0

D =

(1.

+ k1)D1 + c(1 —

t

—x)

+

b)(g +

—

i)

> 0

Under fixed rates, X is kept equal to X. Under flexible rates, X can be
expressed as in equation (6) as a function of both domestic

disturbances,, u and u, by solving all three equations, (1) — (3), for' the
reduced form.

B.

Domestic Disturbances

The two domestic disturbances in the model, u and u, need further
discussion. Following Mundell (1963) and other studies of internal—external
balance, we might view these factors as deliberate instruments of fiscal and

monetary policies, respectively. Given the stochastic assumptions adopted in
this paper, these policies would have to be unanticipated and temporary.8 We
prefer to view the factors as economic disturbances, however, and to regard

the task of policy to minimize the effects of these disturbances. The choice
between fixed and flexible rates is based on which regime minimizes the

he disturbances have an expected value of zero and are serially
uncorrelated. For an analysis of fiscal policy in a stochastic framework
similar to this paper's, see Marion (1981) where the distinctions between
unanticipated and anticipated, as well as temporary and permanent policies are
spelled out clearly. Eaton and Turnovsky (1981) similarly examine different
types of monetary policy in an interesting analysis showing how imperfect
substitutability between assets alters the effectiveness of monetary policy.

9

effects of the disturbances on domestic output. More specifically, we examine
the effects of the disturbances on the variance of output in each regime.9
The reader, however, may easily reinterpret the results to determine the

relative effectiveness of policies under fixed and flexiblerates.
We begin by examining the effects of the disturbances in the case where
there is no wage indexation in the domestic economy, then we consider the
effects of indexation. - When there is no wage indexation, the effects of both

disturbances correspond closely to those reported in Mundell's study (1963).
A monetary disturbance, representing an increase in the money supply

(u > 0), has no effect on output under fixed exchange rates but simply
results in an offsetting capital flow. In a flexible regime, in contrast, a
monetary expansion leads to a depreciation of the domestic currency and to an

increase in output as well as in the domestic price)0 Thus, as in Mundell's
study, domestic monetary disturbances cause variations in output only under
flexible exchanges rates.

An aggregate demand disturbance, in contrast, leads to greater changes in

output under fixed rates. An increase in aggregate demand raises both
domestic output and the domestic price. Under flexible rates, the increase in
domestic transactions leads to an appreciation of the domestic currency which

9Following Gray (1976) we might measure domestic output relative to
"desired" output, rather than expected output, where the former is defined as
that output which would prevail in a frictionless economy without contract
lags. As long as labor supply is inelastic, these two objectives are
equivalent since desired output, like expected output, is unaffected by the
disturbances.
10The monetary disturbance affects output and the domestic price only
through the exchange rate, as equations (4) and (5) indicate. The exchange

rate depreciates, X — X > 0, so output and the domestic price both increase
under flexible rates.

10

dampens or modifies the overall increase in aggregate demand." Thus there is
less output variation as well as price variation under flexible rates.

When indexation is complete (b =

1),

however, these familiar results

break down. To understand why this is true, notice that the effect of the
exchange rate on domestic output is dependent on the degree of indexation in

the domestic economy. As equation (4) indicates, the effect is proportional
to c(1 —

b),

with full indexation (b = 1) preventing the exchange rate from

affecting domestic output at all. For that reason, the difference in output
variation between the two regimes must be proportional to c(1 —

b).

And with

full indexation, each disturbance must have an identical effect on output in

the two regimes. These results can be illustrated by examining Figures 1 and 2
showing how aggregate demand and supply adjust to the disturbances when
indexation is complete.

First consider the monetary disturbance. Under flexible rates, the
resulting depreciation leads to an outward shift in the aggregate demand
function (to point B in Figure 1) because of the sensitivity of aggregate

demand to relative prices and the real interest rate. When wages are fully
indexed to the general price level, however, there is a corresponding leftward

shift inaggregate supply (to point C) because the depreciation leads to a
rise in the nominal wage. The price of domestic output accordingly rises

"Under flexible rates, the direct (positive) impact of u on

Y in

equation (4) is modified by the fall in X (which reduces Ye). Output
nonetheless increases even under flexible rates. In contrast, Mundell's study
of fixed and flexible rates showed that output did not increase at all in
response to a demand disturbance (in his study, an increase in government
spending); given his assumption that exchange rate expectations were static,
only a constant output was consistent with money market equilibrium. In this
study, an appreciation of the exchange rate leads to a change iii the expected
exchange rate and therefore to a change in the domestic interest rate, so
output can increase despite a constant money supply.

lOa

Pt
\

d

/
/
/

//

/
/
\
\

\\

/S
t
FIGURE 1. DOMESTIC MONETARY DISTURBANCE

11

further; in fact, the price of domestic output and the exchange rate increase
by the same amount, with the constant terms of trade ensuring that output

remains fixed at its original level.'2 Under fixed rates, in contrast, no
depreciation occurs, so the aggregate supply and demand curves remain at point

A. With full indexation of wages, therefore, the monetary disturbance leaves
output unaffected in both regimes. The two regimes differ with respect to
price behavior, however, since prices increase only under flexible rates.
The aggregate demand disturbance does change real output in both

regimes. Under fixed rates, the demand disturbance shifts equilibrium to
point A' in Figure 2. Under flexible rates, the increase in demand leads to
an appreciation of the franc and to a smaller increase in aggregate demand

than under fixed rates (to point B'). With complete indexation of wages,
however, the appreciation of the exchange rate also raises aggregate supply by

lowering real wages faced by producers. Point C' is reached where the change
in output is the same as under fixed rates.'3 Thus, as in the case of a
monetary disturbance, full indexation results in the same variance of output

under fixed and flexible regimes. In both cases, indexation ensures that the

12Sachs (1980) and Flood and Marion (1980) also discuss this case of full
indexation. In the model specified by Sachs, a constant terms of trade
ensures that the disturbance has no net effect on aggregate demand. In the
present model, aggregate demand is also a function of expectations through the
real interest rate. But because the expected change in the exchange rate is
equal to the expected change in the domestic price as well as in the general
price level, the real interest rate also remains constant.

3Whether P changes more under fixed or flexible rates when b =

1

cannot

be established without additional restrictions on the parameters. P
increases under fixed rates, but declines under flexible rates (as long as
< c(1 — a)). The change in P is greater (in absolute value) under fixed
rates if 2(1 +

k1)

> [1 + c(1 —

a)].

This inequality can be reversed if

output is sufficiently responsive to the real wage (as reflected in c). (Both
of these inequalities are easily derived from equations (5) —

(6)).

ha

Pt

\

\
d

\

/

/

/
/
/

,

\
Yt

FIGURE 2. DOMESTIC AGGREGATE DEMAND DISTURBANCE

12

shift in aggregate demand due to the exchange rate is matched by an offsetting

shift in aggregate supply, so that the exchange rate has no net effect on
domestic output.

In the absence of indexation, exchange rate flexibility is preferred in
the case of the aggregate demand disturbance but fixed rates are preferred in

the case of the monetary disturbance. The effect of indexation is to blur
these differences, with full indexation eliminating the advantages or
disadvantages of flexibility in modifying output changes.

II. FOREIGN DISTURBANCES
Flow foreign disturbances affect the domestic economy depends upon foreign

wage and price behavior as well as domestic. The degree of wage indexation in
the rest of the world is important in determining the insulative properties of
a flexible regime in the case of foreign monetary disturbances, and in
determining the relative advantage of flexible rates in the case of foreign
aggregate demand disturbances.

To examine the impact of foreign disturbances on the domestic economy, we
must first analyze how the foreign economy responds to these disturbances.

Three variables are particularly important: the foreign price, output and
interest rate. All three variables provide channels through which the
disturbances affect the domestic economy.

A.

The Foreign Model

(1)'

=

g - g(r - (tEP+i - P)) +

(2)'

=

c + c1(i — b)(P — 1EP)

(3)'

-

u

13

The model parallels that one specified for the domestic country, with

equations for aggregate demand and supply and for the financial sector. The
main difference is that only one good is involved, so there are no relative

prices entering the model. Aggregate supply, therefore, is a function of the
price of the foreign good alone; output responds to unexpected changes in that

price as long as there is less than complete indexation (b is less than
one). Note that for convenience the money demand function is assumed to have
the same income and interest rate elasticities as the domestic country.

The three equations can be solved for P, Y, and r as functions of the

foreign disturbances, u and
mf

=__+_.
2

p —

(7)

df

1

mf

= c(i.

—

(8)

—

df

b)(.E__÷.L)
df

= - (i

r -

(9)

+ c (1-b )

+ (i ÷

)

c(1-b))

1

where

All

+

12

+ c(1—b) + k1c(1—b)/g > 0

F1 =

1

F2 =

F1g/k1

three

ktF

> 0

variables are affected by both foreign disturbances, although

foreign output remains constant if there is full indexation abroad (b =

14ff, , are the solutions of the foreign model when both
disturbances are equal to zero.

1).

14

Foreign Monetary Disturbances

B.

A foreign monetary disturbance, representing an increase in the money

supply abroad (u > 0), leads to a rise in foreign prices and output and to a
fall in the foreign interest rate. The effect on the domestic economy is
summarized

below in the following equations:

= c(1—

(4)'

ab)

(g + g/g)cf(1 — b)

(g +ga)c(1—b) u
=

g +g/g)f •c (i — b
D

(

1

(6)'

(2g

—

X —

1

inf

U

)

__+
1

' umf
+ g a + cb(1—a))
D

1

1

+ I) +

—

t

F1

D
1

+

t

—

D1k1/g) f( -

—

< 0

+ c(1 — ab) > 0

Domestic output and price both increase under fixed rates. (Both terms in

(4)'

and

under

(5)'

are

positive if

is

fixed). The domestic currency appreciates

flexible rates, so exchange rate flexibility tends to dampen the

domestic expansionary effects of the foreign disturbance. In fact, the
appreciation can lead to a net reduction in domestic output, as we shall see
below.

How the foreign monetary expansion affects the domestic economy depends

partly upon the degree of Indexation abroad. Consider first the special case

15

where there is full indexation abroad (b =

1).

The foreign monetary

disturbance then has no effect on foreign output (so the first terms in
equations (4)' —

(6)'

are equal to zero). Only foreign nominal variables are

affected, with the foreign price rising and the foreign interest rate

falling. Under fixed exchange rates, domestic output must rise. Under
flexible rates, however, domestic output is completely insulated from this
disturbance as is the domestic price; the appreciation of the domestic
currency neutralizes the changes in the nominal variables.15
If wage indexation is less than complete abroad, however, this monetary

disturbance raises foreign output as well as the foreign price. Despite
originating as a monetary disturbance, it becomes both a real and nominal

disturbance from the point of view of the domestic country. The real
disturbance, representing the change in foreign output, affects the domestic
economy much as would a domestic aggregate demand disturbance; it raises
demand for the domestic good (proportionally to g in the first terms of

equations (4)' and (5))•16 The nominal disturbance, representing the
combined effect of a higher foreign price and an appreciating exchange rate,

reduces demand for the domestic good. That is because the appreciation is
always large enough to ensure that the domestic currency price of the foreign

good falls.'7 The net result of a higher foreign output and an appreciating
exchange rate can be either a rise or fall in domestic output.

151n equations (4)' and (5)', the second terms are equal to zero, since
the exchange rate appreciates by X — X =

—u/F1.

16The fall in the foreign interest rate reinforces the effect of higher
foreign output on domestic aggregate demand (proportionally to

17That is, (P —

) + (X — i) = [u/F1 + (X — )} <0,

domestic currency price remaining constant only if b = 1.

with the

16

In these circumstances, full wage indexation at home does not insulate
domestic output from the disturbance since it cannot prevent the real

disturbance from affecting domestic output. Instead, it has the unfortunate
effect of preventing the appreciation from dampening aggregate demand.

Indeed, full indexation ensures that domestic output varies as much under
flexible rates as under fixed rates. Ironically enough, it is full iridexation
abroad rather than at home that provides effective insulation.

Partial rather than full indexation in preferable under flexible rates.
In fact, there is an optimal degree of indexation (b) which keeps output
constant in the face of this disturbance:
(

tg

—

(g —

+

—
+

f

+g)
yr
1+k1J

(1 —

k1

b is equal to one only if

g

f

a)(y + g1)

is infinite, the case of perfect substitution

between domestic and foreign goods. Otherwise b is less than one, with the
fraction falling as the price elasticity declines. 18

As far as the choice between fixed and flexible rates is concerned,

flexible rates generally exhibit less output variation than fixed rates, but

it is possible for the opposite to be true. Recall that domestic output is
affected by two conflicting forces: the rise in foreign output raises
domestic aggregate demand, while the appreciation of the exchange rate lowers

demand. The relative importance of the appreciation increases as the price

elasticity (g) rises. For high price elasticities, the effect of the

18Note that we assume k1 < (1 + k1) (1 —
positive.

a),

so the denominator of b is

17

appreciation may be so large that domestic output falls more under flexible
rates than it rises under fixed rates.

The case of perfect substitution (where g is infinite) illustrates this
possibility well. In this case, equations (4)' and (6)t reduce to the
following:

mf
-

(4)'

c(1

-

b)(+ (X f
fc
k1.c1—b)

—

(6)'

xt —x=—

g.(i.
r

+ k + c(1 —
1

mf

mf

u u
b))

F1

F1

As these equations indicate, domestic output rises in response to a foreign
monetary expansion if exchange rates are fixed, but falls if exchange rates

are flexible (since u/F1 + (x —

x)

(

0)

because of the contractionary

effect of the appreciation.19 The change in domestic output under flexible
rates is larger rather than smaller in absolute value if k1.c(1 —
gf (i +

indexation

+ c(1 —

b)).

b)

>

This inequality can be satisfied if there is low

abroad (i.e., (1 —

b)

large) and low sensitivity of foreign demand

to the real interest rate (g small), since then the change in the foreign
interest rate, and therefore the exchange rate, is relatively large. But
otherwise, the superiority of flexible rates is retained even with infinite
price sensitivity.20

19Notice that when perfect substitution prevails, full indexation at home
shields output from the disturbance under flexible rates, the result arrived
at earlier, as well as under fixed rates.
20Alternatively, we might compare the two regimes assuming that optimal
indexation has been adopted in each case, the type of comparison which Flood
and Marion made. Full indexation (b = 1) is optimal under fixed rates because
it reduces the effects of both higher foreign output and prices. But even
with Qptiiual indexation, output variation is zero under fixed rates only in
{.

contitlued)

18

C. Foreign Aggregate Demand Disturbances
In the case of foreign aggregate demand disturbances, there is no longer
a presumption in favor of flexible rates, since the choice between regimes
depends upon the relative degrees of domestic and foreign indexation as well
as other factors.

An increase in aggregate demand abroad (u > 0) leads to a rise in
foreign output, the foreign price, and the foreign interest rate. (See
equations (7) —

(9)).

Under fixed exchange rates, the rise in the foreign

output and price raises domestic output, but the rise in the foreign interest
rate lowers domestic output through the real interest rate effect on aggregate

demand. So whether output increases or decreases even under fixed exchange
rates is ambiguous. In order to avoid this ambiguity so that we can focus on
the foreign output and price effects of this disturbance, we assume at the

outset that the real interest rate effect is zero (g =

0).21

In that case

the impact of the disturbance on the domestic economy is summarized by the
following equations:

(4)"

—

=

df

c(1—ab)g

c(1—b)

D

)" Pt

2.1

df

f u

(1—b

the limiting cases b =

g c(1—b)

D1

2

1

g
— —
P =

+

)

+

2

1

and g =

g + cb(1—a))
D
1

udf

(.—÷
(X
2

—

x))

df

u

.2

÷ (x —

—

x))

considered above. Flexible rates are

therefore superior to fixed rates since as shown above there is no output
variation under flexible rates when the optimal b is chosen.
21Nundell's (1964) analysis of fiscal policy in a two country model
encounters a similar ambiguity. Note that the foreign interest rate still
affects domestic output under flexible rates by influencing the exchange
rate.

19
df

(6)" X —

= ([c(1—b)

Under fixed rates (X =

X),

—

c(1-b)](g-1)

+ (1—g)D2c(1-b))

the foreign demand disturbance raises domestic

output and the price of the domestic good. Flexible rates would be preferred
to fixed rates if the exchange rate appreciated in response to this

disturbance. But it is evident from the expression for X —

I that either a

depreciation or appreciation is possible.

Two sets of factors are especially important in determining the movement

of the exchange rate, the degrees of indexation at home and abroad (b, b) and
the sensitivity of aggregate demand to relative prices as reflected in the

price elasticity (g). In order to investigate the influence of indexation on
the choice between regimes, we will consider two polar cases of full wage

indexation abroad (b = 1) and at home (b =

1).

The analysis will show that

the choice between regimes depends crucially upon whether or not the domestic

country has a high price elasticity. A high price elasticity, however, has an
opposite effect on the exchange rate depending upon whether there is full

indexation abroad or at home. This suggests that the choice between regimes
also depends upon which country is more highly indexed; the general condition
which is presented below confirms this.

Consider first the special case where indexation is complete abroad

(b = 1).

An increase in foreign aggregate demand then has no effect on

foreign output, but raises the foreign price by P —

= u/F2,

with a

proportional increase in the foreign interest rate. Under fixed rates,
domestic output and price respond to this purely nominal disturbance by rising

in proportion to the increase in foreign prices. (See the second terms of

(4)" and (5)"). Note that the effect of foreign prices on
as the price elasticity, g, rises.

and

increases

20

In this case of full indexation abroad, the disturbance has two

influences on the exchange rate: the higher foreign interest rate leads to a
depreciation of the home currency, while the higher domestic interest rate due

to the increase in domestic transactions leads to an appreciation. How much
the domestic interest rate increases depends upon the price elasticity, g,

since a high price elasticity implies a greater increase in the domestic
output and price. The home currency appreciates if and. only if this price
elasticity exceeds unity:22

g > 1.
If the home currency appreciates, then domestic output increases less under

flexible rates than under fixed rates. If the inequality is reversed, the
home currency depreciates and so fixed rates exhibit less variability of
output.

When b is less than one, the disturbance raises both foreign

output (by c(1 —

b)

u/F2) and the foreign price (by u/F2). So the

foreign demand disturbance affects the domestic economy through both real and

nominal channels. Domestic output rises under fixed rates, but under flexible
rates the effect on the exchange rate, and therefore on output, varies
depending upon the price elasticity as before.
Consider a second special case where domestic indexation is complete

(b =

1).

Two results familiar from the earlier analysis emerge. Full

22Under fixed rates, the foreign interest rate rises by r —

u/k1F2,

=

while the domestic interest rate rises by
—

—

r

=

(P —

+ (Y —
=

[1 +

(g — 1)c(1—b)

udf

k1
D1
k1F2
If g > 1, then the domestic interest rate rises more than the foreign
interest rate; thus under flexible rates, the domestic currency appreciates.
But if g < 1, a depreciation occurs.

21

indexation cuts off the nominal channel, so domestic output does not respond

to changes in the foreign price or exchange rate. (The second term in (4)" is
equal to zero). Secondly, output nonetheless rises because the real channel
is still important despite the indexation. Yet because the exchange rate has
no effect on domestic output, the latter changes by the same amount under both
fixed and flexible exchange rates.

The case of b =

1

is interesting per Se, but also because it shows what

happens to the exchange rate when the domestic country is more fully indexed

(in this case, perfectly indexed) than the foreign country. Now the domestic
currency depreciates when the price elasticity is high. That is because a
higher price elasticity reduces the Impact of foreign output on domestic

transactions. (Note that in the first terms of (4)" and (5)" only the

denominators are a function of g). Hence the disturbance has correspondingly
less effect on the domestic interest rate. Assume for the present that

g = i,23

in which case only the price elasticity matters in determining which

way the exchange rate moves (i.e., the last term of (6)" is equal to zero).
Then the domestic currency depreciates if and only if

g > 1.
Thus when there Is full indexation at home, a depreciation occurs under the
same circumstances as an appreciation when there is full indexation abroad.
Because the foreign demand disturbance has opposite effects on the
exchange rate when indexation Is high at home rather than abroad, the relative

23y is an elasticity measuring the percent change in domestic aggregate
demand in response to a one percent change in foreign output. We assume that
g = 1, but later consider the case where y 1. The appendix of Narston
(1981) shows how this elasticity is related to a more traditional export
demand elasticity.

22

degrees of indexation at home and abroad are clearly important in the choice

between regimes. The proposition below shows how indexation affects this
choice:

If the home country has a high price elasticity (g > 1),24
then a foreign demand disturbance has less effect upon
domestic output under flexible rates if and only if

c(1 —

b)

< c(1 —

b)

If wage indexation is lower at home than abroad, the domestic currency

appreciates in response to the demand disturbance abroad.25 The appreciation
dampens the rise in output at home, so flexible rates are superior. If wage
indexation is lower abroad, a depreciation occurs, exacerbating the effects of

the disturbance on domestic output. So a country with a relatively high
degree of indexation should prefer fixed rates to flexible.

The importance of the relative degrees of indexation can be shown most
simply in the case of.perfect substitution between domestic and foreign goods

(g infinite). Under fixed rates, prices, outputs, and interest rates respond
as follows to the disturbance:
—
P

= c(1

—

r -

= (i

—

f

—f =

Pt — P

df

u

''2
—

b)•u/F2

+ c(1 —

b))ktp

r —

= (i

c(1

—

+ c(i —

b) u/F2
bf)).ktF

24We continue to assume that the foreign output elasticity is equal to

one (g = 1).

25Differences in the production parameters, c and c, could also account
for the change in the exchange rate. We assume in this section that these
parameters are equal, although the condition could alternatively be
interpreted in terms of these parameters.

23

By comparing the changes in interest rates, we can establish that the exchange
rate appreciates and therefore dampens domestic output if and only if

—

b)

< c(1 —

b).26

If the foreign country is more highly indexed, the

foreign disturbance leads to an appreciationof the domestic currency because
foreign output responds less to the disturbance than domestic output, and as a
result the foreign interest rate rises less than the domestic interest rate.

Thus the home country should choose flexible rates. If the home country is
more highly indexed, it should elect fixed rates. Note that if the home and
foreign countries have the same degree of indexation, no change in the
exchange rate occurs, so output variation is identical in the two regimes.
These conclusions are modified if the elasticity of foreign output in the

aggregate demand equation is different from unity. If y < 1, then there is a
bias toward depreciation since increases in foreign output have less than
proportional effects on domestic aggregate demand (thereby raising the

domestic interest rate less). On the other hand, if g > 1, there is a bias
toward appreciation. But a higher price elasticity reduces the importance of
this factor (and when g is infinite, the influence of y becomes

negligible). Secondly, these conclusions are reversed when there are low

price elasticities (g < 1), as the discussion above has indicated. Then
flexible rates are superior when wage indexation is higher at home than

abroad. Thus there is an important interrelationship between price
sensitivity and the relative degrees of indexation, as the expression for the
exchange rate (6)" indicates.

261n the case of perfect substitution, no assumption is necessary about
either
or y since neither enters the solution for domestic output.

24

III. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper has reexamined the relative performance of flexible exchange

rates to take into account wage indexation and flexible prices. Two central
conclusions emerge from the analysis. First, for all disturbances the
difference in output variation between fixed and flexible rates is crucially
dependent on the degree of wage indexation, being proportional to (1 —

b).

Thus the more highly indexed the economy, the less difference the choice of

exchange rate regime makes for output variation. With full indexation, output
variation is identical in the two regimes. Secondly, the effect of foreign
disturbances on the domestic economy depends as much on foreign wage and price

behavior as domestic. If the rest of the world is fully Indexed, flexible
rates insulate the domestic country completely from foreign monetary

disturbances. If the rest of the world is more highly indexed than the
domestic country, then for high price elasticities at least, a flexible rate
dampens the output variation associated with foreign demand disturbances.

25

REFERENCES

Eaton,

Jonathan, and Stephen J. Turnovsky (1981) "Effects of Monetary
Disturbances on Exchange Rates with Risk Averse Speculation," unpublished
paper.

Fischer, Stanley (1977) "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability," in K.
Brunner and A. Meltzer, Stabilization of the Domestic and International
Economy, Vol. 5 of the Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy (Amsterdam: North—Holland), 107—148.
Flood, Robert P. and Nancy P. Marion (1980) "The Transmission of Disturbances
under Alternative Exchange—Rate Regimes With Optimal Indexing," NBER
Working Paper No. 500, forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal ofEconomics.
Gray, Jo Anna (1976) "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 2, 221—35.
Henderson, Dale W. (1981) "Balance of Payments Analysis, Fiscal Policy, and
the Boyer Paper: A Comment," unpublished paper.
Marion, Nancy P. (1981) "The Exchange—Rate Effects of Real Disturbances with
Rational Expectations and Variable Terms of Trade," forthcoming in the
Canadian Journal of Economics.
Marston, Richard C. (1981) "Real and Monetary Disturbances in an Exchange—Rate
Union," NBER Working Paper No. 705.
Modigliani, Franco and Tommaso Padoa—Schioppa (1978) The Management of an Open
Economy with "100% Plus" Wage Indexation, Essays in International Finance
No. 130 (Princeton).
Mundell, Robert A. (1963) "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under
Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics and
Political Science, 29, 475—85.

Mundell, Robert A. (1964) "A Reply: Capital Mobility and Size," Canadian
Journal of Economics and Political Science, 30, 421—31.
Sachs, Jeffrey (1980) "Wages, Flexible Exchange Rates, and Macroeconomic
Policy," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94, 731—47.

