                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        TRADE AND PROTECTION WITH MULTI—STAGE PHODUCTION


                          Avinash Dixit
                        Gene M. Grossman


                      Working Fper No. 194




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                         November 1981




We would like to thank Alan Deardorff, Jonathan Eaton and Jean
Baldwin Grossman for comments on a previous draft. This paper was
presented at the 1981 NBER Summer Institute, Workshop in
International Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #794
                                                   November 1981


          TRADE AND PROTECTION WITH MULTI-STAGE PRODUCTION




                              Abstract


     This paper analyzes trade in manufactured goods that are produced via

a vertical production structure with many stages, where some value is added

at each to an intermediate product to yield a good—in—process ready for

the next stage. We consider the stage at which a good is traded to be an

economically endogenous variable, with comparative advantage determining

the pattern of production specialization by stages across countries. We

study how endowment changes and policy shifts move the margin of comparative

advantage, which thus provides a channel for resource allocation adjustment

that is additional to the usual ones of factor substitution and changes in

the quantity of output.



Professor Avinash Dixit              Professor Gene M. Grossman
Woodrow Wilson School                Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University                 Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08544          Princeton, New Jersey   08544
609—452—5635                         609—452—4823
I. INTRODUCTION

     The importance of intermediate goods in international trade is widely

recognized, and many models have been constructed to analyze positive and

normative issues raised by such trade. The early models of effective pro-

tection, e.g. Balassa (1965), Corden (1966), Jones (1971), Bhagwati and

Srinivasan (1973), assumed a vertical two—stage production structure. Pure

intermediate goods were produced using primary factors at an upstream

stage, and combined with further primary factors to yield the final goods

at the downstream stage. With both kinds of goods tradeable, the effect

of a tariff structure on resource allocation could be studied. Some recent

models use this structure for different questions. For example, Sanyal

and Jones (1980) consider the pattern and effects of trade in intermediate

goods alone, by assuming that all goods must undergo further processing in

their ultimate destination, before being consumed. Grossman (1981) examines

content protection which requires that a certain proportion of value added

be domestic. A parallel strand of literature, e.g. Vanek (1963), Melvin

(1969) and Warne (1971), investigates the implications of interindustry

flows when all industries produce final goods that may also serve as inputs

to production in other industries. The usual generalization of all of

these two—stage production structures is to a complete input—output model

where goods may be intermediate, final or both, as in Woodland (1977).

     An alternative extension would better describe the reality of many

manufacturing industries. This is a vertical structure with many stages,

where some value is added at each stage to an intermediate product to yield

a "good—in—process" ready for the next stage. Different stages may have
                                 —2—

different technologies or factor intensities. Considerations of comparative

advantage determine the pattern of production specialization by stages

across countries.

     The most important new feature of this view is that the stage at which

a good is traded is itself an economically endogenous variable. Endowment

changes or policy shifts can move this margin of comparative advantage,

thus providing a channel for resource allocation adjustment that is additional

to the usual ones of factor substitution (movement along an isoquant) and

changes in the quantity of output (movement between isoquants)   .
     The practical importance of this kind of production specialization and

trade has risen in recent years, as transnational firms have increasingly

integrated their production on a worldwide basis. In the automobile indus-

try, the manufacture of component parts and the assembly of the product is

arranged in this way in the European market, and sometimes even more widely.

In this context, the adjustment mechanism is easily illustrated. Increased

content protection requirements will lead to more parts of each car being

produced domestically, and not to a shift in the proportions of wholly do-

mestic versus wholly imported cars. Other examples can be found in assembly

of electronic equipment, and even of shirts being shipped to the far east to

have buttons sewn on. In some cases the product, in the course of these stages,

may cross international boundaries more than once.

     In this paper we study trade of this kind by modelling the production

process as a continuum of stages. Stages are distinguished by factor inten-

sities, and comparative advantage determines the pattern of production and

trade. Our model bears some formal similarity to the models of trade with

a continuum of goods of Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson (1977, 1980) and
                                 —3--

Falvey (1981), but our concern is with the effects of factor accumulation

and protection on the allocation of resources to the entire sector repre-

sented by the continuum.-' Also, since most of the production in our

continuum yields intermediate goods, demand for this output is derived

demand.

     The industry with a continuum of intermediate stages, on which we

concentrate most of our attention, is called "manufacturing" for sake of

brevity. The rest of output is aggregated into one final good which is

produced directly from primary factors and called "agriculture". We con-

sider a semi—small country, i.e. one which can affect its coinniodity terms

of trade but not the factor prices or incomes in the rest of the world.

     We find that production specialization with respect to the stages

in manufacturing is complete, i.e. the country with the highest wage—rental

ratio concentrates production at the most capital—intensive end of the

spectrum of stages. However, as in the simple sector—specific capital

model, comparative advantage is not governed by factor endowment consider-

ations alone. Turning to effects of policies, we find that increased pro-

tection by either tariff or content requirement is successful in the very

limited sense of expanding the range of processes undertaken domestically.

But it runs a very real risk of failing by decreasing the quantity of

output of the manufactured good by so much that resources are shifted

away from this sector. This extends the earlier results for content pro-

tection of Grossman (1981) to adjustment at the margin of production stages,

and is consistent with the intuition developed in the effective protection

literature, that tariff schedules which incorporate duties on intermediate

goods may be anti—protective for a sector as a whole. Finally, as in more

familiar models, a small tariff, by improving the final good terms of trade,

must raise social welfare provided non—distorting policies are available to

redistribute income.
                                            —4—

II. THE MANUFACTURING SECTOR

       The stages of manufacturing are indexed by i, ranging over the interval

[0, 11 .      The upstream end of the range is i     0, and the downstream end is

i = 1    .   We   assume that all goods with index i < 1 are pure intermediates,

i.e. consumers demand only output that has completed the entire continuum

of stages. The intermediate good at stage i + di is produced from one unit

of stage i output, and a capital—labor mix of cost f(w, r, i)di, where w is

the wage rate and r the rental rate on capital. Thus the inputs of the

good in process from an earlier stage are naturally in fixed proportions,

but capital and labor can be substituted for each other in adding value.

The function f has the usual properties of a unit cost function with respect

to w and r; in particular the optimum labor—capital ratio is

        We do not consider any time to be required in this production process.

For the final good to emerge, all that is then required is that it should

pass once through each stage, and the ordering of the stages is immaterial.

We will find it convenient to choose the order by increasing labor intensity,

so that



        (f wIfr)/Bi    >   0                                                (1)




        Now consider two countries with factor prices (w1, r1) and (w2, r2)

which have equal costs in operating the stage of production from i to i + di,

i.e.



                                                                             (2)
        f(w1, r1, j*) =        f(w2,   r2, i*)
                                       —5—

Choose the numbering so that w1 >            and r1 <            As shown in Figure 1,
                                        w2              r2   .




the two countries have a common unit cost contour at i .               By (1), the

cost contour map twists clockwise as i increases.


                r    contours of f(w, r, i)




                           \\
                     (w2, r2)
                                               r1)




                                        \N
                                                                           of
                                                                           i*)



                                                                       w

                                      Figure 1



Then, for i >   i,   country 1 must be on a higher cost contour than 2, i.e.




     f(w1, r1, i) >    f(w2,    r2, 1) for                                           (3)




Therefore comparative advantage for stages downstream from i* lies with

country 2, and upstream from i with 1. In other words, the high—wage

country will specialize in carrying out the stages at the capital—intensive

end of the range, and the low—wage country at the labor—intensive end.

The marginal point of indifference 1* given by (2) is of course endogenous

to the full model, and it moves as endowments, tariffs etc. change factor

prices in one or both countries.
                                                  —6—


       The upshot is that country 1 produces all the stages up to 1*, and

exports the good at this stage to country 2, which completes the rest of

the stages to the downstream end. Our choice of ordering precludes any

reversals or multiple switches of comparative advantage. Since we are

neglecting transport costs, this is a harmless simplification.

       The unit cost of production, and therefore the price, of the final

good can be found by summing the incremental unit costs over all stages,

and the cost at each stage depends on the country undertaking that stage.

Thus

            fj*
                                      +                                                    (4)
       p           f(w1,   r1, i)di       j i*   f(w2,   r2, i)di
           j   0

III. EQUILIBRIUM

       We now embed this model of manufacturing into a complete model of trade.

The manufacturing sector and its output is denoted by x .                    The agricultural

sector and its output is y; this good is chosen as the numeraire, and the

relative price of the x—good is p .                  Agriculture    uses inputs of labor Ly

and land T; manufacturing uses labor L and capital K .                      Total   labor L is

mobile between the sectors, but land and capital are specific to their

sectors.

       We concentrate on a semi—small country with wage w and capital rental r.

We assume that the factor—endowment ratios in the home country are sufficiently

different from those in the rest of the world to prevent factor—price equal-

ization. This is the only interesting case for comparative statics, since the

specialization of stages obtained in Section 2 collapses to total indifference

when factor prices are equa1.-' For sake of brevity we confine ourselves to

the case where w/r is less than that in the rest of the world. So this country
                                      —7—

produces all stages downstream from the marginal index i. The value added

per unit of the x—good is


                     4
     F(w, r, j*)          f(w,   r, i)di                              (5)
                     J




    We treat the rest of the world as one country, and denote variables

pertaining to it by means of a bar overhead. The factor prices w, r are

independent of the home country's behavior, and can be suppressed where not

required. The value added per unit of x in the rest of the world is


             4*
     F(i*)     f(w,      r, i)di                                        (6)
             J
                 0



We abbreviate f(w, r, i) as f(i)

     Let z denote the rental of land, and g(w, z) the unit cost function

in agriculture. We assume that the home country produces something in

both sectors.--' Then the price—cost equations are



     g(w, z) = 1                                                         (7)




     (i*) + F(w, r, i*) = p                                              (8)




     The price partial derivatives of the unit cost functions give the

optimum factor inputs per unit output. Therefore the factor—market clearing

conditions are



       w' z) =       T                                                   (9)
                                    —8—


    x Fr(W r, j*) = K                                                    (10)




       gW' z) + x F(w, r, j*) = L                                        (11)




    Next we have the condition governing the marginal stage of manufacturing

production



             =                                                           (12)
                 f(w,   r, i*)



     Finally, we need an output—market clearing condition. The home country's

national income is



                                                                         (13)
     Q=xT+rK+wL

Let its demand for the final output of the manufactured good be D(p, Q)

Let the rest of the world's demand by (p); any other variables affecting

D are outside the control of the semi—small home country and can be omitted.

Then we have



     D(p, Q) + (p) = x                                                    (14)




     In (7) —     (14) we have eight equations to determine the factor prices
w, z and r, the output relative price p, the output quantities x and y,

national income Q, and most importantly, the marginal stage 1*
                                             —9—

IV.   CONPARATIVE STATICS: FACTOR ACCUMULATION

      The above equilibrium will be shifted by exogenous changes in K, T and

L .   In   this section we study the effects of factor accumulation on the

patterns of production and trade. Here we assume that free trade prevails;

analysis of commercial policy will be taken up in the next section.

      The comparative static effects of changes in factor endowments are

derived by total differentiation of (7) —                (14).   After some substitution,

we derive a matrix equation in terms of changes in three crucial variables:

w, p and 1* .           Let   a carat over a variable indicate a proportional change,

e.g. w E dw/w       .       Then we find




             + XLyy                        XL/v              _XLX(K -   aL          w


              — 1
                                            aK/v



           0Lxx                            + 0Lxx/                                 di*j




                    ALx                     ALy                  -l


                        0                    0                    0      T                (15)

              1—                                                 YnQeL £
                        Q°K                YnQeT


      The symbols are defined as follows. The fraction of the labor force

allocated to sector n, for n =              x,    y, is denoted by AL   .    The distributive

share of factor ni, for m =           K, T, L, in a relevant sector n is O, while
                                                 — 10 —


                                                                                     *
that in national income is 0                 .    For m = K,     L, we set cx
                                                                                 m
                                                                                     0mx/0mx where
                                                                                            ,
                                        m
 *
     is the distributive share of factor m in the marginal manufacturing

stage 1*, e.g.                w f(w, r, i*)/f(w, r, 1*) .                    The elasticity of fac-

tor substitution in agriculture is a                       .   That in manufacturing, in the

aggregate sense holding i constant, is a ,                        i.e.   a      F F IF F   .      The

elasticity of demand for labor in sector : is ,                              and equals aI(l OL)

The rate at which relative costs of manufacturing stages change between

the countries as the index                  rises from the marginal value i is denoted by

71, i.e. 71 E [f1(i*) —        f.(w,    r, j*)]/f(w, r, j*)                  The share of domestic

value added in a unit of manufacturing output is v, i.e. v F/p .                                We


define         E QDQ/D the income elasticity of home demand for manufactures,
         flQ
and y E D/x, the share of home consumption in their world output. Finally,

the total price elasticity of world demand for manufactures multiplied by

minus one is written , which we assume to be positive.i'

       Note that aK > 1 > cxL, since the marginal stage i is the most capital

intensive of the stages undertaken domestically, and each c. is the ratio of

the marginal to average factor share. Also, cr > 0 because comparative cost

advantage shifts to the home country as i increases.

       Writing        for the 3—by—3 matrix on the left hand side of (15), it is

now straightforward to show that



                                        +     " y (n +
      det E      AL(71fl +                                     0Lx + c )

                          f                       —
               + XL n F       (cxK —
                                       cxK)(aK
                                                      1)                                         (16)




               >0
                                                — 11 —




     The key economic variable of interest in this model is the marginal

stage of processing, i .           Therefore we focus our comparative static
analysis on its response to factor endowment changes. Consider first the

effect of an increase in the capital stock. By application of Cramer's

rule to (15), we have



        i*      —l    1           - 1) + _____ (1 —
                                                            pv)
               det    LxK                  v



             + aKAL
                                  xKxv)
                          (1   - p 0                                                          (17)
                  V



where        is the marginal propensity to consume manufactures at home.

The expression in (17) is unambiguously negative if the agricultural good

is not inferior, i.e. p <              1.       At this level of aggregation, it makes

sense to assume that both goods are normal, and we do so henceforth.


     This result accords with intuition. A rise in the capital stock, by

increasing the wage—rental ratio, allows the home country to compete in

more capital—intensive activities, and thereby expands the range of pro-

cesses in which it specializes. In other words, our labor—rich country

will import intermediate goods at an earlier, more capital—intensive, stage

as it accumulates capital, regardless of whether any of the production

technologies admit factor substitution.

     It is not necessarily true, though, that capital accumulation will

cause mobile resources to reallocate to the manufacturing sector, even as

the range of processes performed at home expands. Differentiating L/T =                              g/g
and using the definition of                 ,   we have L =   —       w + T .   Therefore   the
                                        y               y         y
direction of flow of labor is revealed by the response of w, which is given by
                                                 — 12 —



             A
       K3w     Lx) K              [cL(l —    pv)     + pv]
       w K det E vF


                              +    -   —(l   -                                   (18)
                                                  nv)])

If n   , the   total price elasticity of world demand for manufactures, is small,

the second term in the brackets will be negative and the agricultural sector

may expand. This effect is more likely the smaller is t, the home marginal

propensity to consume manufactures, and the larger is ,            the   elasticity of

factor substitution in manufacturing. The most likely outcome, however, is

for capital accumulation to cause an increase in the net imports of agricul—

            8/
tural goods,—  and an increase in the domestic value added per unit of man-

ufactured output.

        We next consider the effects of an increase in the endowment of land.

The response of the marginal manufacturing stage to such growth is ambiguous.

The comparative static derivative is




               =
                    det   E   Lxx + ALyyK)

                                                        l)]
                                                    -                            (19)
                      + ALy[8Lxx


where e        is   the share of sector x in national product. An important case

to consider, based on empirical evidence for several less developed countries,
                                                                                are
is one in which factor substitution possibilities at any given stage
                                                                intensities of factor
limited, but processes vary greatly in their relative

usage.2' With                 and c small, and (cK — 1) large, (18) is negative. For

these parameter values, accumulation of the specific factor in agriculture
                                          — 13 —



has the same effect as that in manufacturing, namely an expansion of the

range of stages produced by the low—wage home country. In fact, with

fixed—coefficient technologies in both sectors, we have




     T'              XLF
            —
                XLf(c
                           -   cLL)




which is independent of demand conditions and depends only on the relative

sizes of the sectors and the factor intensity differences between the mar—

ginal and average processes. Alternatively, whenq is small, an increase

in the endowment of land is seen to cause the home country to specialize

in a smaller number of stages.

     The intuition for these results is as follows. An increase in the

endowment of land, ceteris paribus, increases the demand for labor in agri-

culture. This pushes up the wage rate, and thus the wage—rental ratio in

manufacturing. This alone would tend to expand the range of manufacturing

processes undertaken domestically. But the additional income that accrues

to the new land is partially spent on manufactures, raising their price and

therefore the demand for capital. This effect is large whenn is small, i.e.

when world demand for manufactures is price inelastic. It in turn pushes up

the rental rate on capital. Then the equilibrium wage—rental ratio can actually

fall, and the marginal index 1* can rise. As a further point of interest, we

note that the reallocation of labor in response to an increase in the endowment

of land is also ambiguous. Substitutinr once again into L               T —
                                                                              w   gives




                                      +            -           -   1)
     L T        AL
                           fl +
                                          F            aL)(K

            —              [
                                X FaK(2K                                          (21)
                                      - 14   -




which is more likely to be positive the larger the price elasticity of
world demand, the smaller the home marginal propensity to consume manu-

factures, and the smaller the elasticity of substitution between capital

and labor in agriculture.

    An increase in the labor supply also has an ambiguous effect on the

margin 1*. Applying Cramer's rule once again, we have



               1
     L-— = det     E    KPxyALy0L/0x



                       + (   — 1) —                — p )}            (22)
                                       xeJx (1/v


A small elasticity of substitution between land and labor in agriculture

contributes to an expansion in the range of home processes, while a small

elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in manufacturing has

the opposite effect. If both are small the marginal domestic stage is

necessarily more labor—intensive. Note that the range of home processing

is more likely to increase in response to an increase in labor endowment

the smaller the price elasticity of world demand for manufactures, the

smaller the home marginal propensity to spend on manufactures, and the

smaller the factor intensity differences across manufacturing stages. The

immediate effect of an increase in labor supply is a fall in the wage rate.

However, if the demand for capital falls greatly, as will be the case if

the increase in national income is spent on agricultural goods and if the

price elasticity of demand for manufactures is small, any fall in the

wage—rental ratio in manufacturing will be small. Since irdi* = _OKX(czK
                                                                         —   l)(w   —   r)
+ ply, a small decrease in w/r is consistent with a decrease in 1* so long as

    —   1) is small, and p falls.
                                — 15 —



     To sum up, we have shown that factor endowment changes affect the

patterns of production and trade with multi—stage processing in a complex

way. There is some presumption, especially if elasticities of factor

substitution are small and the price elasticity of world demand for manu-

factures is large, that an exogenous increase in the supply of either

specific factor will cause the range of domestic manufacturing processes

to expand, whereas an increase in the supply of the mobile factor will

have the opposite effect. But since resources may be allocated to, or

withdrawn from, the manufacturing sector on either of two margins, one

intensive and one extensive, the complexities and ambiguities of general

equilibrium comparative statics are unavoidable. Effects from the demand

side can easily overturn the intuitive supply—side impacts, unlike the.

simple two—sector models.


V. COMPARATIVE STATICS: TARIFFS AND CONTENT PROTECTION

     In this section we study the effects of two forms of protection. First,

we consider a uniform tariff at an ad valorem rate t on imports of all

manufactured goods, starting from an initial level of t =   O'   Secondly,

we investigate a content protection scheme which requires that v, the fraction

of value added domestically, be raised by a small amount starting from that

which obtains in a free—trade equilibrium. Such an increase is mandated by

the government, and is enforced by a threat of some economic sanction for

noncompliance.

     When a uniform tariff schedule is in place, the equilibrium conditions

must be modified slightly. We have to replace (8) by


     (j*)(l + t) + F(w, r, j*) = p                                      (8')



and (12) by
                                         — 16 —




     f(j*)(l    + t) =   f(w,   r, j*)                                  (12')




to include the tariff costs faced by private producers. Further, we must

include tariff revenues in national income, so (13) is replaced by



     Q=xT+rK+wL+tF(i*)x                                                 (13')




Taking total differentials of the new system and evaluating at t = 0 we

have the comparative statics of the small tariff in the implicit form



                     -
                         XLX(l
                                   —   v)/v

     E               -[1 +               v)/v]    dt                    (23)



         di*             OL(l — v)/v


     Does a uniform tariff protect the manufacturing sector? The answer

depends on the desired sense of 'protection'. Consider first the effect

on the range of processes undertaken at home, given by




          =
               det EXLXX' + Lyy + aK(l —
                                                       v)/vl + xLeL/v (24)

          <0

Therefore a tariff is unambiguously protective in the limited sense of

expanding the range of home activity to include more capitale—intensive

stages of processing. However, perhaps a better measure of protection

for the manufacturing sector as a whole is in terms of the reallocation of

labor. By this measure a tariff runs the real risk of being anti—protective,
                                      - 17     —




because it raises the cost of intermediates and thereby lowers the effective

protection for the downstream stages. Thus a uniform tariff fails to pro-

tect whenever the fall in manufacturing output it causes results in the

release of more labor than is required to perform the new activities at

the extensive margin. We use the solution to (23) in L = —gw to write



                =                -         (1 +          +         [(1 —   v)   —   (25)
     L dt           detELFK          aL)


For small        this is positive, and a tariff is necessarily anti—protective

in the resource allocation sense. It is interesting to note that whenever

(25) is positive, dw/dt is negative. Since



                                                                  1 —
            =                              +
     pdt        det EfALYY0LXX                 F aKALyy (1 + aK



                +         >                                                         (26)


a tariff may well reduce the real reward for the mobile factor in terms of

both final goods, a possibility that does not exist in the standard two—

good sector—specific—factor model.

    A final question concerns the aggregate welfare effects of a small

tariff. If the home demand functions result from maximization of a

Bergson—Samuelson social welfare function, we can write the change in

social welfare as



     dU/X = dQ — D dp                                                               (27)
                                   —18—


where U is social welfare, and X is its pure income derivative. Now from (13')



     dQ = Tdz + Ldw + Kdr + F(i*)xdt



on evaluation at t   = 0.   Note that L = L   + L , and (7) gives Tdz + L dw =   0,
                                          x      y                       y
while from (8) we have Ldw + Kdr = x(dp —     F(i*)dt).   With the aid of these,

(27) becomes



     dU/A =    (x — D)dp                                                 (28)




which is just the terms—of—trade effect on the final manufactures exports.

It is perhaps surprising that the expression in (28) is so simple. It is

understood by recognizing that the extra cost of inputs to domestic producers

is exactly offset by the tariff revenue that is raised, and since at free

trade the costs of undertaking the marginal stage are equalized, the distortion

created by a small tariff is a second—order effect.

     We have seen in (26) that dp/dt is positive. Thus our semi—small

country benefits by using a small tariff to alter the terms of trade in its

favor. The anti—protective effect in resource allocation is only a distrib-

utive loss, not an aggregate one. Provided the government can redistribute

income optimally at home, a small tariff provides protection in the eco-

nomically relevant sense after all.

     Finally, we consider an alternative form of protection that is being

increasingly used by governments. This is a content requirement for multi-

stage industries of the sort modelled in this paper. Under such a policy

regime domestic firms are required to achieve a specific percentage of
                                — 19 —




domestic value added in their final product. Economic penalties are imposed

for failure to comply. An important outgrowth of many content requirement

schemes has been an expansion in the range of intermediates processes in

which the domestic firms specialize, rather than an increase in the domestic

share of traded intermediates. This aspect of content protection is not

captured in previous analyses, e.g. Corden (1971) or Grossman (1981), which

are couched in terms of standard two—stage production with all goods traded

and complete non—specialization. The prominence given to specialization of

production by stages of processing in the model developed here makes it par-

ticularly appropriate for the study of content protection.

     A single modification of the equilibrium conditions in Section III is

required under a content protection scheme. The costs at stage i* need no

longer be equal in the two countries; instead, the margin must adjust to

fulfill the content requirement. Thus we replace (12) by



     F(w,   r, j*) =   vp                                                    (12")




where v is now an exogenous policy variable. In other words, the government

dictates that the share of domestic in total value added be greater than

occurs in free trade, and enforces the policy by unspecified penalties that

are assumed sufficient to induce compliance. The relative domestic and

foreign unit costs at the marginal stage are now determined endogenously.

We differentiate the equilibrium conditions totally as v changes, and

evaluate the derivatives at an initial free—trade equilibrium, where of

course the two unit costs happen to be equal. After the usual substitu-

tions, we are left with the matrix equation
                                               — 20 —




           TALxx + ALyy                 ALxxIV              ALx(K                                 ro

                      0                -(1 -   v)/v                    f/F                               (29)

              0Lxx                (fl + @/V)
                                                                _akf/F              J[J di*       Loj


Let E" be the 3—by—3 matrix on the left hand side. Then


                                      1 —                   A
                                                                Lx x   +(l—v)c
       det E" =                   +          +A         +                                   > 0
                      FLLxx             V V)    Lyy                         V           )


       Content protection, like a tariff, unambiguously expands the range

of domestic manufacturing activities. The comparative static derivative

of the marginal stage is




       V          =
                      detE" Lx + XLyy(fl + eLXX/v))                                               (30)




But,   again like a uniform tariff, and for much the same reasons, content

protection can be anti—protective for the sector as a whole.—— The di-

rection of reallocation of labor is found from L =                      —       w and
                                               y                             y



              =   —                     —         —
       w dv           detE"   F             aL)                                                   (31)


Therefore     content protection will cause a move              of   resources away from

manufacturing in exactly those cases which may be of empirical relevance,

namely when the elastie-ity of substitution between capital and labor in
                                    — 21 —


manufacutring is small and the differences in factor intensities across
stages are large. Also,

     v 1 E" FLxx
     p dv
            =
                det
                      f
                              + :kLyyak) > 0                           (32)



so the real return to labor is again reduced in terms of both goods in

these cases. However, the aggregate welfare again increases since the

commodity terms of trade improve.

VI. CONCLUDING COMMENTS

     In this paper we have constructed a model of trade in intermediate

goods that is very different from, and in some ways complementary to, the

usual approaches. We have avoided the circularity of input—output models

by stipulating a unidirectional sequence of production stages. At each

stage the good in process combines in naturally fixed proportions with a

labor—capital composite, thus removing the substitution between intermediate

and primary inputs which was a prominent feature of neoclassical models of

effective protection. In return, we are able to capture some complex

realities of manufacturing processes. We are able to determine production

specialization endogenously, and determine which intermediate goods will

be traded. Commercial policy works by shifting the stage at which a

country will import a good in process: a channel which corresponds to

factual observations in many industries. Well—known 'paradoxes' of effec-

tive protection have their counterparts in this setting; in addition there

are more subtle ways in which attempts at protection may fail under

empirically likely circumstances.

     The model is readily adapted to deal with policies like establishment

of duty—free industrial zones. Conversion of the semi—small country model

into a full two—country model presents only algebraic difficulties, and

allows discussion of issues like direct foreign investment. These are

topics for future research.
                                    — 22 —


                                   FOOTNOTES



     1. Empirical studies of the choice of techniques in less developed
                                            have found that although factor
countries by Stewart (1972) and Pack (1976)
substitution possibilities may be quite limited  for a given production pro-
cess, differences in factor intensities across  processes can greatly magnify
                                       between capital and labor in a given
the total opportunity for substitution
                                               to be a prominent feature in
sector. We find this potential magnification
the comparative statics of our model.
                                               a model where production is
     2. In particular, Falvey (1981) presents
                                    Falvey assumes, as we do, that production
most similar in structure to ours.
                                   sector—specific factor, but differs from
in the continuum sector requires a
                                 between this factor and the mobile factor.
us in assuming fixed proportions             motivated jra—industry trade,
He uses this model to study factor—endowment
and thus assumes that all output is for final demand.

     3. An alternative route would be to assume that our ordering of stages
                               literally with the sequencing of production,
by labor intensities coineides
                                           ensures that factor prices are
and that a small amount of transport costs
generically different across countries.

                                          the endowments of all factors are
     4. This will be the case as long as
                             functions in each sector satisfy the Inada con-
positive, and the production
ditions.
                                             derivative of the ost—minimiZiflg
     5. The aggregate a is the logarithmic                 with respect to the
capital—labor ratio in te manufacturing sector as a whole                 It is
wage—rental ratio, for a given range of stages performed domestically.
                                                                labor  at  the
                               substitution between capital and
related to the elasticities of
                                              that is exactly analogous to the
individual stages by a complicated expression
                                      of substitution in the individual sectors
relationship between the elasticities
                                        elasticity of substitution in supply,
of a two—sector model and the aggregate
 as derived in Jones (1965, p. 563).

      6. See Nussa (1974).

      7. We have         —[yn + (1 —           — x1   =   [c   + (1 +   — (1   + )]
                        nC are   respectively the uncompensated and compensated home
 where         and i,
                                                                           to consulPe
                                 and p the home marginal propensity
 and foreign price elasticities,                                               is
                              manufactures are a normal good at home, n
 manufactures. Therefore, if
 necessarily positive.

         8. These net imports may be positive or negative.

         9.   See footnote 1 above.
                                                                     with the
     10.  In principle there could be a tariff schedule t(i) varying
                                         in process crossing international
 index 1 . This may result in the goods
 boundaries several times, and may also break the pattern of complete special-
                                                        index i does not
                              since our ordering of the
 ization by stages. Further,
                               — 23 —




necessarily correspond to the physical sequencing of stages, even with a
uniform tariff there may be several boundary crossings of intermediate goods.
In these cases the tariff is understood to be on a value—added basis to avoid
cascading, e.g. as in the application of offshore assembly provisions.

    11.   Grossman (1981) found a similar result in a partial equilibrium model
of content protection in which all adjustment occurs through an increase in
the ratio of domestically produced goods to imported intermediate goods of a
given kind.
                                — 24   —




                              REFERENCES


Balassa, B. (1965) "Tariff protection in industrial countries: An
     evaluation", Journal of Political Economy, 73(4), pp. 573—94.

Bhagwati, J.N. and Srinivasan, T.N. (1973) "The general equilibrium
     theory of effective protection and resource allocation", Journal of
     International Economics, 3(3), pp. 259—81.

Corden, W.M. (1966) "The structure of a tariff system and the effective
     protective rate", Journal of Political Economy, 74(2), pp. 221—37.

Corden, W.M. (1971), The Theory of Protection (Oxford: Oxford University
     Press).

Jiornbusch, R., Fischer, S. and Samuelson, P.A. (1977) "Comparative advan-
     tage, trade and payments in a Ricardian model with a continuum of
     goods", American Economic Review, 67(5), pp. 823—39.

Dornbusch, R., Fischer, S. and Samuelson, P.A. (1980) "Heckscher—Ohlin
     trade theory with a continuum of goods", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     95(2), pp. 203—24.

Falvey, R.E. (1981) "Commercial policy and intra—industry trade", Journal of
     International Economics, forthcoming.

Grossman, G.M. (1981) "The theory of domestic content protection and content
     preferences", Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Jones, R.W. (1965) "The structure of simple general equilibrium models",
     Journal of Political Economy, 73(4), pp. 557—72.

Jones, R.W. (1971) "Effective protection and substitution", Journal of
     International Economics, 1(1), pp. 59—81

Melvin, J.R. (1969) "Intermediate goods, the production possibility curve
     and gains from trade", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 83(1), pp. 141—51.

Nussa, M. (1974) "Tariffs and the distribution of income: The importance of
     factor specificity, substitutability and intensity in the short and
     long run", Journal of Political Econy, 82(6), pp. 1191—1203.

Pack, H. (1976) "The substitution of labour for capital in Kenyan manufacturing",
     Economic Journal, 86(1), pp. 45—58.

Sanyal, K. and Jones, R.W. (1980) "The theory of trade in middle products",
     manuscript.

Stewart, F. (1972) "Choice of technique in developing countries", Journal of
     Development Studies, 9(1), pp. 99—121.
                               — 25—




Vanek, J. (1963) "Variable factor proportions and inter—industry flows in
     the theory of international trade", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     77(1), pp. 129—42.

Warne, R.D. (1971) "Intermediate goods in international trade with variable
     proportions and two primary inputs", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     85(2), pp. 225—236.

Woodland, A.D. (1977) "Joint outputs, intermediate inputs and international
     trade theory", International Economic Review, 18(3), pp. 517—33.
