                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             TARIFFS AS INSURANCE: OPTIMAL COMMERCIAL
            POLICY WHEN DOMESTIC MARKETS ARE INCOMPLETE



                         Jonathan Eaton

                        Gene M. Grossman


                      Working Paper No. '191




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          November 1981




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the NBER Summer
Institute, Workshop in International Economics. We are grateful to
the workshop participants and to Jean Baldwin Grossman and Carl
Shapiro for useful comments. Rob Feenstra deserves special thanks.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NEER Working Paper #797
                                                      November 1981



                 Tariffs as Insurance: Optimal Commercial

                Policy When Domestic Markets Are Incomplete.




                                  AB S TRACT


     Free trade is not optimal for a small country that faces uncertain terms

of trade if some factors are immobile ex post, and markets for contingent

claims are incomplete. The government can improve social welfare by using

commercial policy that serves as a partial substitute for missing insurance

markets. Using a combination of analytical and simulation techniques we

demonstrate thatoptimal policy for this purpose will often have an anti-

trade bias. We also show that the usual preference by economists for factor

or product taxes and subsidies over tariffs and export subsidies may not be

justified in this context.




Jonathan Eaton                                        Gene M. Grossman
Department of Economics                               Woodrow Wilson School
Yale University                                       Princeton University
New Haven, CT   06520                                 Princeton, NJ    08540
                                                      609—452—4823
1.- Introduction

    An important accomplishment of international economics in the past

decade has been an extension of the theory of international trade to

situations of uncertainty. A major result has been that, if appropriate

risk sharing arrangements exist among domestic consumers and producers,

the traditional arguments in favor of free trade remain intact. For a

number of reasons, however, falling for the most part into the categories

of "moral hazard" and "adverse selection", domestic risk sharing

arrangements are likely to be incomplete. In such situations free trade

may no longer constitute optimal commercial policy.

     The implications of incomplete insurance markets for the optimality

of competitive equilibrium have been explored by Hart (1975), Newbery and

Stiglitz (1981), and Comes and Mime (1981). Newbery and Stiglitz (1981)

have shown explicitly that trade intervention may be optimal when domestic

markets fail to allocate risks optimally. Commercial policy can act as a

partial substitute for insurance markets.

     A number of trade theorists have recognized, at a somewhat informal

level, the role of commercial policy as insurance. See, in particular,

Corden (1974, pp. 320—321), Cassing (1980, pp. 396—397) and Baldwin (1981,

pp. 20—21). Quoting the last author:

          Workers and capital owners who are risk—averse wish
     to avoid human and physical capital losses due to sudden and
     significant increases in imports that compete with the domestic
     products they produce. However, private markets to insure against
     this risk fail to exist, apparently for reasons of inadequate data
     or "moral hazard". The import relief legislation involving recoin—
     mendations from the International Trade Commission can, for example,
     be viewed as a means of providing the desired insurance (p. 21).

In fact, some analysts have explained the existence of tariffs as the
                                    —2—


manifestation of a social desire to provide such insurance. See for exanple,

Corden (1974, p. 321)

     While the role of commercial policy as a substitute for insurance has

been recognized on both a theoretical and practical level, little has been
                                                 intervention is desirable, (2)
done to determine (1) conditions under which

the form that intervention should take, and (3) the optimal level of inter-
                                              address these issues in a frame-
vention. The purpose of this paper is to

work that is familiar to trade theorists

     In an economy in which all individuals have identical tastes, own

identical amounts of each factor of production, and can diversify their
                                            issue of insurance does not
factor endowments among activities, the
                                          all individuals, who are equally
arise. Risk is spread equally among
                                                                    there
willing to bear it. Any market for insurance will be inactive. If
                                                                     else
are asymmetries either in tastes or in initial factor endowments, or
                                               their use of a factor in some
 if individuals must completely specialize

 activity, a reallocation of risk is likely to be optimal. In this paper
                                 before uncertainty is resolved, all indi-
we assume that ex ante, i.e.,

 viduals are identical in their tastes and factor endowments. Individuals
                                 endowment of one factor to a particular
 must, however, allocate their
                                                                             Ex
 activity before the actual terms of trade of the country are known.
                            that materialize will benefit some individuals
 post, the terms of trade
                                           commercial policy as a method to
 relative to others. We thus focus on
                              unfavorable outcomes in the terms of trade.
 insure Individuals against

 This insurance motive for trade intervention is distinct from a redistributive

 ntive that would arise if workers differed in their initial endowments or

  in their attitudes toward work.

      We consider a small, open economy characterized by the standard

  Ueckscher—Ohlin assumptions    two factors of production, capital and labor
                                  —3—

produce two traded commodities, both of which are consumed domestically.

Production of both commodities takes place under perfectly competitive con-

ditions. Following, for example, Rothenberg and Smith (1971) and Eaton

(1979), we assume that, at the time capital must be allocated between pro-

ductive activities, the terms of trade are unknown. Labor, unlike capital,

can move between the production of exportables and import substitutes after

the uncertainty is resolved. In the short—run, then, the model is equiva-

lent to the two—commodity, three factor Ricardo—Viner model analyzed exten-

sively by Jones (1971).2 Individuals have identical tastes and initial

endowments of labor and capital, but an individual must engage his capital

entirely in one activity or the other. This assumption may be justified

by the presence of indivisibilities and set—up costs that make specialization

highly efficient. For example, human capital is frequently most productive

when it takes the form of specialized training; an individual farm is usually

more productive when it produces a small number rather than a wide variety

of products.3

     An individual's pre—tax income, then, is determined by the wage earned

by labor, which is the same for everyone, and the rate of return on capital,

which depends upon the activity in which it is engaged. Ex post, individuals

with capital in different sectors earn different incomes. We assume that

there is no market, such as an insurance or a stock market, in which agents

can trade claims to capital income across states of nature.4 We also assume

that redistribution via an income tax is infeasible, perhaps because of

transactions costs and evasion.

    We do not attempt to explain the non—existence of optimal redistribution

methods, but assume it, appealing to the well—known reasons of moral hazard

and adverse—selection. See Arrow (1970) and Shavell (1979) for a discussion.
                                 —4—

We show, in this context, that an interventionist commercial policy in

general raises social welfare. Furthermore, when individuals anticipate the

policy when they make their capital allocation decisions, intervention is

Pareto—improving in the sense that it makes everyone's expected utility

higher, ex ante.

     The main form of policy that we consider is import tariffs. We consider

a number of variations in institutional format of the tariff policy. As is

generally the case in models of optimal taxation, interesting comparative

static results are hard to come by for very general cases. For this reason

much of our analysis takes the form of simulations.

     Section 2 sets forth the basic assumption of our model and simulation

analysis. In section 3 we show that intervention, in a number of variants,

is likely to be welfare improving. Section 4 examines the optimal level of

intervention and how it is affected by changes in (1) the amount of uncer-

tainty; (2) tastes; and (3) technology. Section 5 summarizes our major

conclusions.

     While we examine a number of factors influencing optimal commercial

policy, three general results seem to emerge. One is that, as long as the

government budget must always beinbalance, the net effect of policy is

likely to favor import—competing industries relative to export industries;

i.e., there is an anti—trade bias to optimal policy. A second result is

that an increase in substitutability between commodities in consumption or

between factors in production is likely to diminish the optimal level of

intervention. Finally, tariffs may dominate production subsidies or taxes

as a maans of insuring against shifts in the terms of trade.
                                         —5—

2. The Model

         We consider an economy that can produce two commodities, commodity 1

and commodity 2, with capital and labor. Outputs of the two commodities

in state of nature i are at levels X11 and x21, given by



(2.la)        x11 = F1(K1,    L")       I =   A, B


(2.lb)        x2 = F2(K,      L21)      I =   A, B


where K and L1 denote the amount of capital and labor, respectively, engaged

in producing commodity j in state i. The functions F are homogeneous of

degree one in K and L3 quasi—concave and twice—differentiable. Factor

allocation is subject to the constraints



(2.2a)        K' + K2 < K


(2.2b) L +               <   L,      I = A, B



where K and L represent the aggregate endowments of capital and labor. We

assume that each individual is endowed with one unit of labor and k units

of capital. We normalize the number of individuals to equal one. Thus

L       1 and K =   k.
        We assign the international price of commodity 2 the role of numeraire

and denote the price of comndity 1 in state of nature i as P1. We assume,

for simplicity, that there are two states of nature, A and B, characterized by

    >   B    Without loss of generality (via the Lerner symmetry theorem) we

assume that tariff intervention takes the form of taxes or subsidies on
                                         —6—

imports of commodity 2. Thus the domestic price of commodity 2 in state

of nature i is 1 + t, where t1 is the ad valorem tariff rate in state of

nature i.

          Since       and L2 are determined after P1 and t1 are known, ignoring

corner solutions competition implies that



(2.3)          w1 =
                       P'F(K',   L1') = (1 + t1)F(K2, 1 —        L11),   0 <   L"    <   1; i = A, B


where w1 denotes the wage in state of nature i. Here                                     and

     =    Fk/Kj.       Implicitly, the second part of (2.3) defines a labor allo-

cation function Lh1(P1, t', K', K2). The rates of return on capital in

sectors 1 and 2 are, respectively, given by



(2.4a)        Rli =
                       P'F(K1,   L)             I =   A, B


(2.4b)             =    (1 + t1)F(K2, L2')      i =   A,   B.




          Individuals will have allocated capital either to one sector or the

other. The income of individual j,           having allocated his capital to sector
j,   is   thus, in state i,



(2.5) Yj R31k + w1 + T1                    = 1, 2; i = A, B



were T1 denotes tariff revenue distributed to individual j                     in   state i.

Total tariff revenue is given by tiM1, where M denotes imports of commodity

2 in state i. We assume that this is distributed equally among all mdi—

viduals     in a lump—sum fashion.
                                   .5    Thus Tji =    t Li.
                                                           , j = 1,
                                                           x'i            2.
                                               —7—

        In state i the utility of individual j is given by the indirect

utility function V(Y1, P1, 1 + t'). Consumption of commodity 2 by

individual j in state i, C, is given from Roy's identity, by



(2.6)         C2 =   — V1/V'                   =    1, 2; i = A, B


where V31 E V(Y31, P1, 1 + t'), V V31/3Y and V =                              V1/t'          Imports

of commodity 2 in state i are thus


               i         11                2
(2.7)         M =   AC        + (1 — A)C        —   F[(l   — A)K, 1   —   L 1•'}; i = A, B



where A      K1/K, the share of capital in sector 1 (i.e. exportables).

        If capital is allocated to both sectors in positive amounts then the

expected utility of placing capital in one sector or the other must be the

same. Thus the condition



(2.8)         E7r'(V — V2') = 0,


where       denotes the probability that P                 P1, i = A, B, must obtain in

equilibrium.

        Together, conditions (2.1) —           (2.8)    constitute a system of 26 equations
                                      ii   2i ii   2i   1   2  i   ii
which determine equilibrium levels of X , X , L , L , K , K , w , R

R2', y'1' y21, C11, C21 and                as functions of the capital endowment K,

the terms of trade P, the probabilities ii, and the tariff rates t.

        In our simulations we assume that the utility function and both pro-

duction functions are of the constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
                                               —8--


form.    We also assume constant relative risk aversion. The indirect

utility function can be shown to be of the form


                                                                          + 1 - a   )_l/PY
(2.9)          V(Y, P1, 1 + t1) =          .: y'              C                 C
                                           Y
                                                    [             1+t1+P1
where      E   [(1   —   a)P'/a(l + t)]" +
The production functions are given by



(2.10)
                 1
               X =       [cx1(K
                                1Pi
                                 )  + (1       -
                                                   a1)(L
                                                                  i—p1
                                                                      )     ]1
               X2 =               2 2 + (1     — cz2)(L 2)                2 1/2
(2.11)                   [cz2(K )                                           J




The elasticities of substitution are


                     =                     k =     C, 1,          2
                           + p

                                                                  = 1/2 and, PA = 1
                                               A              B                                  B
        In our simulations we set r =                   'ii                              + u and P + 1/(1 + u).

We thus consider uncertainty in terms of a geometric mean preserving spread

around a price of one. Such a characterization has the virtue of being

insensitive to the choice of numeraire. See Fleimning, Turnovsky and Kemp (1977).

        The following are theparaineter values that are used throughout most

of our simulation analysis, and which constitute our "base" case:

                u =      .15,   .25, .35

                y—l
                     = .01
               PC
               a = .25
                C
                     = .01
               p1
                                        —9—

                    = .01

               ai =

               a2 = .25

                L= 1
                K= 1
Note that our parameter values imply a degree of relative risk aversion of

two, and elasticities of substitution in both consumption and production very

near unity. We also assume in our simulations that the prr' cct i

more capital intensive.

 3. Optimal Tariff Intervention

         We assume that the goal of policy is to maximize expected social

welfare, where welfare in any state i is the sum of all individuals' levels

 of utility in that state. The social welfare function W may therefore be

 defined by



 (3.1)          W             + (1 —   A)v21j


         In   steady state it is reasonable to assume that intervention policy is

anticipated at the time capital is allocated. If the political environment

has changed, however, capital may have been allocated under the assumption

that free trade would always prevail. In this case unanticipated policies

may be implemented.

     Anticipated policies are, of course, of greaterinterest than unanticipated

ones. We find it useful, however, to consider first the case in which

capital was allocated between sectors under the assumption that there would

be no intervention. For this case we can ignore the effects of the policy

on the allocation of capital. We introduce a capital—allocation effect

subsequently.
                                       — 10 —




3.1     Optimal Unanticipated Tariff Policy

        Even when intervention has no effect on the allocation of capital, a

policy of free trade is not optimal. Appropriate intervention transfers

income toward the group with the higher marginal utility of income in each

state of nature. To dennstrate the desirability of intervention we first

show the following results:

Result 1: An increase in the tariff on commodity 2 shifts labor from sector

1 to sector 2, given the allocation of capital.

        This result follows from differentiating the second part of the condition

(2.3) to obtain

                ii                     2
              dL                   F
                      =            L               <0
(3.2)
              dt' l             + (1 + t1)FL



Result 2: An increase in the tariff on commodity 2 distributes income away

from individuals with capital in sector 1 toward those with capital in sec-

tor 2, given the allocation of capital.
                                                   i_ 2i    —   Y
                                                                 11
        This follows from differentiating Y = Y                     where, from (2.5),




(3.3)
              d(Y1)
               dt1
                          =
                              {4(K2,
                                           1 -   L)-   [(1 + t1)F + piFl)dL
                                                                             dt



which, since F > 0, is positive.
        Analogously, an increase in P, the price of commodity 1, shifts labor

from sector 2 to sector 1, and distributes income from individuals with

capital in sector 2 (type 2 individuals) to those with capital in sector

1 (type 1 individuals). It is therefore the case that, in the absence of

tariffs, type 1 individuals have relatively higher incomes when P =
                                                    — 11 —




i.e.,    that lA —        2A   >   1B     —   2B       Since the expected utility from engaging

capital in the two sectors must be equal, we must have either                                    >    v
and V < v2E, or the converse. As all individuals face the same commodity

prices, differences in utility between individuals in a given state

derive solely from differences in income. Since type 1 individuals have

relatively higher income in state A it must be that V > v2A while

VlB<     V
             2B             lÀ           2A     .       lB        2B
                  and that Y       > Y        while Y        <   Y            type 1 individuals earn

absolutely more income when P =                        and conversely when P = P1.

        To show that a nonzero tariff is optimal we differentiate W with respect

to t, holding K1 and K2 constant, and evaluate the resulting expression at
   =    0.        Using the derivative of the equilibrium condition (2.3) with respect

to t, and exploiting Euler's theorem and Roy's identity, we obtain the

expression
             .6

(3.4)
                   dti
                         l
                               A(l -
                                         A)ri(V        —
                                                           V)[d)     dt
                                                                                   +      -   C21)j


        Consider first the case i = A.                  Since             >   2A   diminishing marginal
                               2A   lÀ
                                                                     From (3.3) d(LY') is positive.
utility of income implies that V. >
                                                        V        .

                                                                                 dt
Finally, if commodity 2 is non—inferior,                              >   C.  Thus all the terms in

expression (3.4) are positive. From a position of free trade imposing a

small positive tariff raises social welfare.

        The tariff distributes incomes from individuals with a low marginal

utility of income (type l's) to individuals for whom the marginal utility

of income is high (type 2's). It does so in two ways. First, because the

tariff raises the relative producer price of commodity 2, it transfers in-

come from type 1 to type 2 individuals, via result 2. Second, because the

tariff raises the consumer price of commodity 2 above the world price, it
                                    — 12 —


taxes consumption of commodity 2. The higher income group (type 1) pays
more   of   the tax since they consume more of commodity 2. Since tax revenue

is distributed as a poll tax, the result is a transfer to the group with

lower income.
                                               lB       2B       2B        lB
       Consider next the case i = B.    Since Y <   Y        ,
                                                                 V    <
                                                                          V,    and, because

of noninferiority,         < c2B.   Thus (3.4) is ambiguous in sign. The effect

of the tariff on producer prices tends to make an import subsidy optimal,

since a subsidy transfers income toward type 1 individuals. But an import

subsidy also lowers the consumer price of commodity           2, which tends to
benefit     type 2 individuals, who consume relatively more commodity             2. For
this   reason the sign of expression (3.4) is ambiguous.

       Welfare improving commercial policy thus requires a tariff on imports of

commodity 2 when the world price of commodity 2 is below mean, but may require

either an import subsidy or a tariff when the price is above mean,.                  The

effect of a positive tariff on consumer prices is always to transfer income

toward the lower income group. There is thus some reason to think that

optimal intervention, on average, will tend to reduce the average amount of

trade. This presumption was supported by our simulation analysis, in which

we found that the optimal tariff, when the price of commodity 1 was high,

was in every case as large or larger in absolute value than the optimal

import subsidy when the terms of trade were unfavorable. The optimal tariffs

as well as the share of the capital stock invested in sector 1 are reported

in Table 3.1. We note once again that because the policies we are considering

here were unanticipated when capital was allocated between sectors, the

optimal tariffs in Table 3.1 need not Pareto—dominate free trade; policy

may   lower   the expected utility of individuals in one sector or the other.

It is true, however, that some set of state—contingent tariff rates can

be found such that each type of individual benefits in anex ante (i.e.

expected utility) sense.
                                — 13 —


3.2   Anticipated, Time—Consistent Tariff Policy

      We now consider how policy is modified when its effects on capital

allocation are taken into account. A problem that arises in this context is

that, at the time tariffs are actually imposed, the capital stock is fixed

in place. The commercial policy that maximizes social welfare from the

perspective of the period in which the policy is implemented can ignore its

effects on the allocation of capital, which at that point is a bygone.

Policy makers may wish to affect the allocation of capital in the previous

period by announcing policies that affect capital allocation in the direction

desired. But once the capital has been allocated, policy makers will

typically have an incentive to deviate from the announced policy.

      Unless policy makers have a means of constraining themselves to policies

that were announced previously, they will pursue policies that are optimal

from the perspective of the period in which they are implemented. These

are referred to as time—consistent policies. If individuals are rational

in forming their expectations, these are the policies that they anticipate

when deciding where to invest their endowment of capital.

      In this section we consider time—consistent policies. In the sections

that follow we assume, instead, that policy makers are able to precommit

themselves credibly to policies at the time that capital is allocated

between sectors, and actually pursue the policies announced. We refer to

these as optimal, anticipated policies.8

      Since time—consistent policy takes the allocation of capital as given

it is formulated according to the same principle as unanticipated policy.

Thus expression (3.4) also indicates the direction that time—consistent

intervention will take. Individuals now, however, anticipate the policies

that are in fact pursued, rather than free trade, when making their invest-

ment decisions. Therefore the equilibrium condition (2.8) now applies to
                                      — 14 —




expected utilities under time—consistent policy rather than under free

trade. The difference between optimal unanticipated policy and time—

consistent, anticipated policy is that the second affects the allocation

of capital while the first does not.

     Anticipated, time consistent tariffs for our base case are reported

in Table 3.2. Note that, as with optimal unanticipated policy, there is

an anti—trade bias: there is always a higher tariff rate in state A than

subsidy in state B. Comparing this table with Table 3.1 note that the

effect of intervention is always to shift capital into sector 2, the import—

competing sector. The two tables also show that, for our base case, whether

policy is unanticipated or anticipated and time—consistent, trade intervention

offsets roughly one—third of the variability in international prices.


3.3 Optimal Anticipated Tariff Policy

     We now consider optimal commercial policy when the government can

commit itself credibly to a particular policy before capital is allocated

between sectors. The government may bind itself legally to a particular

response, or else it may act out of concern for the effect of its current

policies on its future reputation.9

     As in the previous cases we considered,a small positive tariff when

the terms of trade are favorable is welfare improving, while a welfare

improving small deviation from free trade in the state with unfavorable

terms of trade may involve either a tariff or an import subsidy.

     To see this, consider first commercial policy in state of nature A.

The first derivative of the welfare function with respect to tA, evaluated

at    =   tB   =   0,   is given by
                                               — 15 —




                dtA
                       A(lA){rA(V2A        -
                                               VA)[:9+                          (CiA -   c2I
                           B 2B      lB Y BdK1
                      +r(V -V)[ K1 dt

                  lB
Since V > JA and V.1 > V, a tariff (subsidy) can only be welfare improving
      2A                2B
                                       ,



if either the expression in the first square bracket on the r.h.s. is positive

(negative)or the expression in the second square bracket is negative (positive).

It is straightforward tO show that the first bracketed expression is positive
                           LA — 2A  A
if and only if d(V             V )/dt <            0,    i.e. if   a   tariff in state of nature A

increases the relative utility of type 2 individuals in that state. Similarly,

the second bracketed expression is negative if and only if d(V —                           v2B)/dtA      >   o.
But note that a fully anticipated commercial policy cannot, in equilibrium,

raise the relative utility level of the same group of capital owners in both

states of nature, since expected utilities must remain equal. Therefore,

d(VLA —   v2A)/dtA     <   0   <>   d(V —      v2B)/dtA       >    0, and thus a tariff (subsidy)
is welfare improving only if both the first bracketed expression is positive

(negative) and the second bracketed expression is negative (positive). We

will show that the conditions for an import subsidy to be welfare improving

lead to a contradiction.

        Suppose that an import subsidy in state of nature A were welfare improving.

We know from (3.3) that                        >    0,    and if importables are non—inferior

    —   C   >   0.    Evaluating the effect of a change in K' on the income dif—

erential we obtain



(3.6)           =               + (1 + t)F + [P1F + (1 + ti)F11), I = A,                            B.
                                   — 16 —



From (2.3)

                          11
                        P FLK + (1 + t
                                         i 2
                dL"                          )FLK
(3.7)
                                         .    2
                                                    >0.
                dK
                        PFLL+(l+t)FLL

Substituting (3.7) into (3.6) yields an expression that is positive (since

the determinant of the Jacobian of a two—factor constant returns production

function is zero).

     Thus, if the first bracketed expression in (3.5) is to be negative,

dKl/dtA must be negative. However, this would imply that the second bracketed

expression in (3.5) is also negative, which violates the equilibrium condition

requiring that the total effect of a commercial policy be to transfer utility

in opposite directions in the two states of nature. Hence, we conclude that

dW/dtA >   0,   i.e. that a fully anticipated small tariff when terms of trade

are favorable increases social welfare.'0 It does so directly by transfering

income to type 1 individuals in state A, and indirectly, via the capital

reallocation, by transfering income to type 2 individuals in state B.

     Turning now to optimal policy in state B, we have an expression analogous

to (3.5) for dW/dtB and we can apply exactly the same reasoning to conclude

that a small welfare—improving policy in state B must cause capital to

reallocate to sector I, so that type 2 individuals benefit in state A. And

similarly, In equilibrium intervention must benefit type 1 individuals in

state B. As in the unanticipated and time—consistent cases, this may involve

either a tax or a subsidy. Again there is a presumption that optimal policy

has an anti—trade bias, since the effect of an import tariff, as opposed to

an import subsidy, on consumer prices is to transfer income from the high

income to the low income group.

     Our simulation results for this case are presented in Table 3.3.
                                  — 17 —



 Comparing this table with Table 3.2 note that time—consistent and optimal

 anticipated policies are virtually identical. At the three—digit level of

accuracy of our calculations we can discern differences only when the

degree of price variation reaches 35 per cent. For this case optimal policy

requires a slightly higher subsidy to the export sector when the terms of

trade are unfavorable. The share of capital allocated to the export sector

is consequently larger: when policy makers take into account the effects

of their policies on capital allocation, they reduce the anti—trade bias of

intervention, but only very slightly. The share of capital allocated to

the export sector is still much lower than what it is if individuals

anticipate free trade. We conclude the major channel through which optimal

anticipated intervention raises social welfare is not through its effect

on capital allocation.


3.4 Optimal One—State Tariffs

       The tariff authority may find itself constrained to set tariffs only

at non—negative rates: import subsidies, which require that revenue be

raised via a poll tax, may be politically infeasible. If, in fact, a

non—negative tariff is optimal in both states, this constraint is not

binding. Otherwise, the optimal tariff in state B will equal zero while

the tariff in state A will be modified. Optimal state A tariffs, when

   =   0, are presented in Table 3.4. The optimal tariff in state A is
always lower than in the unconstrained case, but the net effect on capital

allocation is much larger: when commercial policy is constrained to non—

negative tariff rates it results in shifting more capital to the import--

competing sector than otherwise; the anti—trade bias is stronger.
                                       —18—



3.5 Non—State Contingent Tariffs

        So far we have assumed that tariff rates may depend upon the terms of

trade that materialize. This assumption is appropriate to situations in

which (i) policy makers are very flexible or (ii) variation in the terms

of trade is of rather low frequency. If neither condition is met a state—

contingent policy may in fact be infeasible. A policy of imposing a tariff

at a fixed rate still dominates free trade, however. To illustrate this

result we differentiate the social welfare function T. with respect to
  _A
t —t =B
      t ,      and evaluate the resuiting expression at t0, to obtain



(3.8)           =          —           —
                                           vli)['    +         —   c21n


Since (V —
          2i    1,                      .
                         reverses sign while
                                  .           dY 1
                                             dt > 0,     i   = A, B the sign of the
               V     )


expression is ambiguous. However, since the sign of (V —
                                                                   2      ii.
                                                                           ) is,   if

commodity 2 is non—inferior, always equal to the sign of (C1' —              C2'),      there

are three positive and one negative terms. A tariff at a positive level

will, via its effect on consumer prices, always transfer income from the

rich to the poor. The effect on producer prices is, of course, always to

transfer income from type 1 to type 2 individuals. Our simulations for

this case, presented in table 3.5, do, in fact, always indicate that a

small, positive tariff is optimal. Once again, optimal policy has an

anti—trade bias.


3.6 Production Taxes/Subsidies vs. Commercial Policy

        A policy of taxing or subsidizing production can affect producer

prices while allowing consumers to buy commodities at world prices.                  If

taxes/subsidies can he state contingent a welfare—improving ad valoreni

subsidy s1 to sector 1 in state i has the sign of
                                              — 19 —




(3.9)
              ds 1=0
                             =   A(l   - A)
                                              j=A,B
                                                   7r(V    -
                                                               vj) ds'



         dLY3 = dZY
where                  .     Optimal policy will necessarily require a subsidy on
         ds     dt
sector 2 output in state A and a tax in state B. Table 3.6 presents optimal

subsidies and taxes (defined as negative subsidies) to sector 2, the import—

competing sector.

        If a state—contingent tax/subsidy scheme is infeasible, the optimal

fixed ad valorem subsidy has the sign



(3.10)
                 s=o
                           A(l - A)
                                        j=A,B
                                              ir(V     -




While there is less presumption that this magnitude is positive, a non—zero
                                                           dYA    dYB
value is still likely. One reason is that                                in general. A given

subsidy rate may transfer more income in one state than in the other.

Another reason is that the condition ETr(V2 —                    V1)   = 0 does not necessarily

imply that Er(V —            V) = o)'
        Economists often recommend taxes and subsidies over tariffs as a means

of correcting domestic factor market imperfections because they effect only

producer prices, leaving consumer decisions undistored. This effect operates

in favor of a production tax/subsidy policy in our context as well. A

factor operating in the other direction, however, is the effect of a tariff,

via its impact on consumer prices, to redistribute income from the rich to

the poor in either state of nature. Our simulations indicate that, in fact,

a policy of imposing taxes and subsidies on trade may                     Pareto   dominate a
                                    — zu —




policy   that imposes taxes and subsidies on production, especially when the

elasticity of substitution in consumption is low.


3.7 Stochastically Balanced Budget

     So far in our discussion we have assumed that, in each state of nature,

tariff or tax revenue is redistributea equally to all individuals in a lump—

sum fashion or, alternatively, that a poll tax is imposed to finance an import

or production subsidy. Such poll taxes and subsidies might not be feasible

policies. The government may, however, be able to borrow and lend in inter-

national capital markets so that the budget need only be in balance on

average. e consider optimal tariff policy when Poll taxes are infeasible,

but when the government is constrained to balance the budget only in an

expected sense ,   facing   the constraint,




(3.11)       [1T1t'(C1 - F1].



Our simulations, presented in Table 3.7, still indicate that a tax on imports

is optimal when i =    A, while a subsidy is optimal when I = B.   The optimal

import subsidy in state B is now, however, much larger than the optimal

tariff in state A: it is optimal for the government to run a budget deficit

when the terms of trade are unfavorable, giving out larger subsidies, and

to run a surplus urtder favorable terms of trade. In this way the government

smooths out the effect of terms of trade fluctuations on income. The conse-

quence of such a policy is to attract capital to the export sector. The

rest of the world, through government borrowing and lending, Is acting to
                                       fluctuations in its terms of trade. It
insure the entire economy against

is optimal for individuals to behave in a more risk neutral fashion, and to

 specialize more in producing the export good.
                                        — 21 —



    4.   Sensitivity Analysis
-

          In   section 3 we established that, when domestic risk sharing arrangements

are incomplete, an interventionist commercial policy is generally welfare

improving. We characterized optimal intervention under various institutional

arrangements for a given set of parameter values. In this section we

restrict ourselves to commercial policy that involves taxes or subsidies on

    (i) imports, where tariff rates (ii) are anticipated, (iii) are state—

contingent, (iv) may be positive or negative and (v) are subject to a

balanced—budget constraint in each state. We assume that policy makers

can credibly commit themselves to their actual policies before investment

decisions are made. We analyze how optimal intervention changes with changes

in tastes and technology.


4.1 Risk Aversion

         We calculated optimal tariffs for the values of y indicated in Table

4.1, holding other parameters at the levels given in section 2, and setting

u = .25.        Note that if individuals are risk neutral (y =   1),   free trade is

optimal. Optimal intervention rises with the degree of relative risk aver-

sion R, (whereR = 1 —       y),   as does the share of capital allocated to the

import—competing sector.


4.2 Elasticity of Substitution in Consumption

         We calculated optimal tariffs for the values of p given in Table 4.2.

As the elasticity of substitution rises            falls), the optimal tariff

rates fall in absolute value, as does the share of capital allocated to

the export sector. As substitutability between the two goods rises, so

does the distortion implied by a given level of tariff protection. Thus
                                — 22 —



the optimal tariff falls as    rises. In contrast to the effect of varying

the risk aversion parameter y, large changes in     have rather insignificant

effects on the optimal tariff rates.


4.3 The Share of Exports in Consumption

    As Table 4.3 indicates, as the imported good comes to occupy a larger

share of expenditures (c falls) the optimal tariff becomes smaller in

absolute value. As the share of imports in consumption becomes larger, a

given reallocation of income can be obtained with a smaller tariff rate.


4.4 The Elasticity of Substitution in Production

    As p1 and p2 fall, (implying higher values of      and 02) the optimal

tariff falls, while the share of capital allocated to the export sector

grows. These results are reported in Table 4.4. As production becomes

more elastic, re labor is transferred between sectors in response to the

state of nature. A given tariff therefore has a greater distorting effect

on production. Thus the optimal tariff rate falls as o and 02 rise.

Greater substitutability between factors acts, also, to reduce the effects

of terms of trade variations on the returns to capital, thereby providing

an insurance effect. The optimal amount of capital allocated to the ex-

port sector therefore rises as technology becomes more elastic)2 Note

that changing the elasticity of substitution in production has a much more

pronounced effect on the optimal tariff rates than does changing the elas—

ticity of substitution in consumption.


4.5 Capital Shares

     Reducing the capital shares cz1 and cx2 reduces the optimal amount of

tariff intervention, as shown in Table 4.5. The reason is that as the
                                 — 23 —



share of the mobile factor (labor) rises, so does the ex post flexibility
of the economy. The distortion implied by a given tariff rises. At the

same time the wage is higher relative to capital income. The overall

differences in income between the two types of individuals becomes lower.

For this reasons we found that reducing a, and a2, but holding a1/cx2 con-

stant, increases the share of capital allocated to the export sector.


4.6 The Capital —Labor Ratio

     As we raise the capital—labor ratio, the optimal level of protection

also rises, as reported in Table 4.6. The reason is that as this magni-

tude rises, so does the share of capital income in total income. Differ-

ences in income between the two types of individuals across states of

nature are consequently larger. The share of capital allocated to the

export sector also rises with the total capital—labor ratio, as would be

expected from Rybczynski Theorem considerations.


5. Conclusion
     We have shown how in an economy in which agents must specialize in

their use of a factor endowments, and in which domestic risk sharing

arrangements are incomplete, departures from free trade are likely to be

welfare improving even for a small, open economy. We emphasize, however,

that an interventionist commercial policy constitutes a second best

solution. A first best policy would redistribute income directly without

distorting consumer or producer prices. In our simple model a tax on

income would serve this purpose. Problems of evasion may make an income

tax difficult to administer, however, especially in a less developed

country where much domestic economic activity takes place outside the mar-

ket. For this reason commercial policy may be the only available method

of pooling risk.
                                    — 24 —




-    Our results may   be   compared with Johnson's (1965) and Bhagwati's (1971)

analysis of commercial policy in the presence of other domestic market un—

perfections such as factor market distortions. Here as well an interven-

tionist commercial policy is not the first best means of correcting the

distortion, but if other instruments are not available then free trade is

not optimal.

     Finally, we note that in this paper we have restricted ourselves to

consider the terms of trade as the source of uncertainty. Uncertainty

may also arise in domestic preferences and technologies.      The essential

arguments that we have made here are not affected if the source of uncer-

tainty changes. We performed a number of simulations in which the source

of uncertainty was a multiplicative disturbance term in the production

function of the exportable good. No results emerged that were qualitatively

different from what we report above.
                              FOOTNOTES


1.   Eaton and Rosen (1980a, 1980b) examine the implications of incomplete
     wage insurance markets for optimal income tax policy. In their model,
     however, all private risk is eliminated at the aggregate level by the
     law of large numbers. When uncertainty arises from the terms of trade
     it is aggregate risk which is not diversifiable.

2.   Grossman (1981) develops a model which allows for gradations of inter—
     sectoral factor mobility, in constrast to the sharp distinction between
     perfect mobility and perfect immobility we draw here. As long as some
     degree of immobility is present, the basic implications of our analysis
     remain intact.

3.   See Grossman and Shapiro (1981) for a model that endogenizes the
     efficiency gains from specialization in sector—specific training.

4.   If perfect insurance markets existed, the outcome would be identical
     to the one that would obtain if individuals could divide their capital
     between activities. It is this essential indivisibility of capital, as
     well as its immobility, that leads to a suboptimal allocation of risk.
     It is in assuming that capital is indivisible that our analysis here
     differs from that in Eaton (1979). This second model assumes that the
     representative individual can divide his capital between activities.
     The optimality of free trade follows.

5.   Note that "tariff revenue" may be negative. In such cases the import
     subsidy is financed by a poil tax.

6.   The derivation of (3.4) is provided in the appendix.

7.   Strictly speaking, this statement is necessarily true only for small
     deviations from free trade. Globally optimal policies could possibly
     be opposite in sign to small, welfare—improving policies if there are
     strong interactions between the welfare effect of a trade policy in a
     given state and the distortion caused by the non—infinitesimal deviation
     from free trade in the opposite state. We found no examples of such
     reversals in our simulations, however.

8.   Kydland (l977)defines a policy that (1) is time—consistent and (ii)
     responds to current information about the state of the economy as the
     feedback solution to the government's control problem. A policy
     response that (1) is optimal from the perspective of an initial period
     prior to the period of implementation but (ii) responds to current
     information is the closed ioop solution. The open loop solution
     (i) is optimal from the perspective of an initial period prior to the
     period of implementation and (ii) depends only on information available
     at that initial period. According to this nomenclature this section
     treats feedback commercial policy. In section 3.3 we consider closed
     loop policy while open loop policy is taken up in section 3.5

9.   Dybvig and Spatt (1980) model the reputation phenomenon formally for a
     firm concerned with its reputation for product quality. They find that
     time—consistent policy in general lies between the feedback policy
     when there is no reputation effect and the closed—loop policy.
10. Since expected utilities are equal an increase in social welfare for
     an anticipated policy is equivalent to an increase in expected utility
     of the representative individual.

11. This relationship is, however, implied by constant absolute risk
     aversion.

12. The last result also appeared in Eaton's (1979) one—individual model.
                              REFERENCES



Arrow, K.J. (1970) Essays in the Theory of Risk Bearing (Amsterdam:
   North Holland).

Baldwin, R.E. (1981) "The Political Economy of Protectionism", in Bhagwati,
   J.N. (ed.), Import Competition and Responde (Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press).

Bhagwati, J.N. (1971) "The Generalized Theory of Distortions and Welfare",
   in Bhagwati, J.N., Jones, R.W., Mundell, R.A. and 3. Vanek (eds.),
   Trade, Balance of Payments and Growth (Amsterdam: North Holland).

Cassing, J.H. (1980) "Alternative of Protectionism", in Levenson, J. and
   J.W. Wheeler (eds.), Western Economics in Transition (Boulder: Westview
   Press).

Corden, W.M. (1974) Trade Policy and Economic Welfare (Oxford: Oxford
   University Press).

Comes, R. and F. Mime (1981) "An Analysis of Mutually Disadvantageous
   Trades", manuscript.

Dybvig, P.R. and C.S. Spatt (1980) "Does it Pay to Maintain a Reputation?"
   Financial Research Memorandom No. 32, Princeton University, August.
Eaton, J. (1979) "The Allocation of Resources in an Open Economy with
   Uncertain Terms of Trade", International Economic Review 20 (2),
   pp. 391—403.

Eaton, J. and R.S. Rosen (1980a) "Optimal Redistributive Taxation and
   Uncertainty", Quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (3), pp. 357—364.

Eaton, J. and H.S. Rosen (1980b) "Labor Supply, Uncertainty and Efficient
   Taxation", Journal of Public Economics 14 (3), pp. 365—374

Fleming, J.S., S.J. Turnovsky and M.C. Kemp (1977) "On the Choice of
   NuDieraire and Certainty Price in General Equilibrium Model of Price
   Uncertainty", Review of Economic Studies 64(3) pp. 573—584.

Grossman, G.M. (1981) "Partially Mobile Capital: A General Approach to
   Two—Sector Trade Theory", International Finance Section Discussion
   Paper G—81—Ol, Princeton University.

Grossman, G.M. and C. Shapiro (1981) "A Theory of Factor Mobility", Woodrow
   Wilson School Discussion Papers in Economic No. 1, Princeton University.

Hart, O.D. (1975) "On the Optimality of Equilibrium When the Market
   Structure is Incomplete", Journal of Economic Theory 11 (3), pp. 418—443.
References, cont 'd.

Johnson, H.G. (1965) "Optimal Trade Intervention in the Presence of Domestic
   Distortions" in Caves, R., Johnson, B.C. and P.B. Kenen, (eds.), Trade,
   Growth and the Balance of Payments (Chicago: Rand McNally).

Jones, R.W. (1971) "A Three—Facotr Model in Theory, Trade and History", in
   Bhagwati, J.N., Jones, R.W., Mundell, R.A. and 3. Vanek (eds.), Trade,
   Balance of Payments and Growth (Amsterdam: North Holland).

Kydland, F. (1977) "Equilibrium Solutions in Dynamic Dominant—Player Models,"
   Journal of Economic Theory, 15 (2), pp. 307—324.

Newbery, D.M.G. and J.E. Stiglitz (1981) The Theory of Commodity Price
   Stabilization (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Rothenberg, T.J. and K.R. Smith (1971) "The Effect of Uncertainty on
   Resource Allocation in a General Equilibrium Model", Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 85 (3), pp. 440—453.

Shavell, S. (1979) "On Moral Hazard and Insurance", Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 93 (4), pp. 541—562.
                     Tables

                    Table 3.1

       Optimal Unanticipated Tariff Rates

U
.15         .06                 —.06             .671

.25         .09                 —.09             .690

.35         .13                 —.12             .709



                    Table 3.2

      Anticipated Time Consistent Tariff Rates

U             tA                  tB               1


.15          .06                 —.05            .642
.25          .10                 —.08            .633
.35          .14                 —.10            .613


                    Table 3.3

        Optimal Anticipated Tariff Rates
              A                   B
 U           t                   t
.15         .06                 —.05             .642

.25         .10                 —.08             .633

            .14                 —.11             .627



                    Table 3.4

         Optimal One—State Tariff Rates

 U           tA                  tB
.15         .03                  0               .616

.25         .06                  0               .585

.35         .08                  0               .579
                                        Table 3.5



              U
             .15
                                       tt
                   Optimal Non—State Contingent Tariff Rates
                                            A

                                           .01
                                                 =tB
                                                                .638
             .25                           .02                  .631
             .35                           .04                  .579



                                       Table 3.6

                                    Optimal Subsidies
                                A                           B
   U                       S                            S

   .15                     .08                         —.07            .656

   .25                     .13                         —.10            .649

   .35                     .19                         —.13            .638



                                        Table 3.7

          Optimal Tariffs with a Stochastically Balanced Budget
                          A                   B                         1
   u                        t                           t               K

   .15                     .12                         —.149           .733

   .25                     .30                         —.332           .862

   .30*                    .36                         —.469           .99



*At u     .35 complete specialization occurred.
                                   Table 4.1

                          Variations in Risk Aversion

•y(R       1 —    y)
        1.0                0.0                 0.0                  .714

           .01              .06                —.05                 .667

       —1.0                 .10                —.08                 .633

       —2.0                 .13                —.10                 .60S

       -9.0                 .21                -.13                 .522



                                   Table 4.2

       Variations in the Elasticity of Substitution in Consumption

       =
           1
       100.00               .12                —.10                 .663

        0.50                .11                —.09                 .642

        0.01                .10                —.08                 .633

       —0.33                .10                —.08                 .621

       —0.50                .10                —.08                 .613



                                   Table 4.3

                Variations in the Share of Exports in Consumption
           a
            C
                             t
                              A                 tB                   K
                                                                         1


           0.5              .11                —.09                 .614

           0.25             .10                —.08                 .633
           0.1              .10                —.08                 .665
                                             Table 4.4

             Variations in the Elasticity of Substitution in Production

=        =           =   1
                         +    )       tA
             4.00                     .15                 —.13            .447

             0.50                     .12                 —.10            .566

             0.01                     .10                 —.08            .633

             —0.33                    .07                 —.06            .735

             —0.50                    .05                 —.04            .806

             —0.67                    .02                 —.02            .903


                                             Table 4.5

                                    Variations in Capital Shares
                                                 A
                                                 t                  tB            K

    .75                        .5               .14                —.12          .583

    .75                        .25              .10                —.08          .743

    .5                         .25              .10                —.08          .633

    .1                         .05              .03                —.01          .676


                                              Table 4.6

                             Variations in the Capital—Labor Ratio
                                                                           1
                K                                                         ElK
               1.15                   .10                 —.09             .748

                                      .10                 —.08             .633
               1.0
                                      .09                 —.07             .500
               0.85
                      Appendix: Derivation of Equation (3.4)


        To derive expression (3.4) in the text we first differentiate the

social welfare function W with respect to t to obtain:



(A.1) dW—         I    = irI {A[Vii   dY1'
                                                   +
            dt1 i                     dt1


                                            dY21
                        + (1 —
                                 A)[v'      dt   ii       t
                                                       + v2']}



Differentiating (2.5) with respect to t yields


             li
(A.2)
            dY  =PikFl1L+_+M1+t1i_
            dt1                         dt1               dt'


and


                                                                             i dM1
(A.3)
            dY21 =
                   —k         - (1    + t1)k F +                 +   +   t
            dt'                                            dt'


where



(A.3)                 —dL1/dt'



Since we consider deviations from an initial situation of the free trade we

set



(A.4)        t = 0
From (2.3)



(A.5)
             dw'      = P I ii :1i
                            FLL Lt



and also



             dw' I    =      21 -    21
(A.5 )                                    L'
                          FL        FLL



Euler's theorem implies that



(A.6)        F1 =    — F31    L'/K         j   = 1,   2
              KL       LL


and that



(A.7)
             4' = (F2'
                          —
                               F' L2')/K2
Finally



(A.8)              = AC1' + (l—A)C — F2'



Substituting (A.3) through (A.8) into (A.2) and (A.2') gives


                               ii
             dY1' = A
             ____              L    dw    + AC1' + (1 — A)C21 —   F2'
(A.9)               (
             dt                     dt



and
(A.9')


                                             ii
          dY2' =      F2' — (A••L                     + AC + (1 — X)C2' — F2'
(A.9')
          dt'
                     1 —                          )




Substituting (A.9), (A.9') and Roy's identity (2.6) into (A.1) we obtain




(A 10)
          dW             —
                         —        { (vj —')[(A
                                          vy
                                                               -   Ll1)
                                                                     dt'
                                                                               I
                                                                                        — Ac21]

                    K;t=O                                                          K1

                                  ii    r
                                       A1AC
                                              ii
                                            + (1 — A)C2' — C11]



                         + V'(1 — A)[AC1' + (1 — X)C2' —                                ca))


Rearranging we get


                                                          L' dw'
(A.11)          I           = i{x\r11[(A
          dt'
                            + AC1 + (1 — A)C2' — F2' — C1']


                                              2i 21                          A—L'dw'
                            -3-
                                  (1—A)V [F /(iA)+(i_x)
                                                     dt



                            + xc" + (1 — X)C2' —                   F2'   -   C2'])


(A.11')
                            =     I     ii —
                                      [(Vt
                                                      21
                                                      V    )(A —   L1')
                                                                     dt


                                                                     -       C1')   —           —
                            + A(1 —A)(V —                   v)(C2'                       X(V1       V1)F21]
(A.11")                =           - V)A(l - A)E(1:
                                                          x)
                       + F2'/(l — A) + (dl — C21)]



From (A.9) and (A.9') we have



            dLY1         F21        X—L1' dw1
(   .   )
            dt
               i   —
                   —
                       (1 — A)
                               —
                                   'X(l   —   A\1i
                                               'dt   ji


Substituting (A.12) into (A.11") yields expression (3.4). Expression (3.5),

(3.8), (3.9) and (3.10) may be obtained via a similar set of substitutions.
