                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ISSUES IN THE TAXATION OF FOREIGN SOURCE INCOME




                       Daniel   J. Frisch


                     Working Fper No. 798




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         November 1981




This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on Behavioral
Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, January 25—21, 1981,
Palm Beach. I am indebted to Martin Feldstein, David Hartman, and
Thomas Horst for invaluable criticism and comments. The U.S.
Treasury Department, Office of International Tax Affairs, provided
financial assistance and were most cooperative in providing data.
The NBER also provided financial and logistical support. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation and project in Tax Simulation. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                   NBER CONFERENCE
                       Papers Available from the Conference on
                      SIMULATION METHODS IN TAX LICY_ANALYSIS*
                                 Palm Beach, Florida
                                 January 25—21, 1981
                                -
     Paper
     Number

 WP 497       "Alternative Tax Treatments of the Family: Simulation Methodolor
              and Results,'1 by niel Feenberg and Harvey S. Rosen
 WP 788       "Stochastic Problems in the Simulation of Labor Supply," by Jerry Hausrnan
              "Alternatives to the Current Maximum Tax on Earned Income," by
              Lawrence B. Lindsey
              "The Distribution of Gains and Losses from Changes in the Thx
              Treatment of Housing," by Mervyn King

 wP 682       "Simulating Nonlinear Tax Rules and Nonstandard Behavior: An
              Application to the Tax Treatment of Charitable Contributions,"
              by Martin Feldstein and Lawrence B. Lindsey

 WP 798       "Issues in the Taxation of Foreign Source Income," by Daniel Frisch

 WP 583       "Modeling Alternative Solutions to the Long—Run Social Security
              Funding Problem," by Michael Boskin, Marcy Avrin, and Kenneth Cone

              "Domestic Tax Policy and the Foreign Sector: The Importance of
              Alternative Foreign Sector Formulations to Results from a General
              Equilibrium Tax Analysis Model," by Lawrence Goulder, John Shoven,
              and John Whalley

 wp 673       "A Reexamination of Tax Distortions in General Equilibrium Models,"
              by Don Fullerton and Roger Gordon

 m,.p 799     "A General Equilibrium Model of Taxation with Endogenous Financial
              Behavior," by Joel Slernrod

 wP 68i       "Alternative Tax Rules and Personal Savings Incentives: Microeconomic
              Data and Behavioral Simulations," by Martin Feldstein and Daniel Feenberg

 WP 729       "National Savings, Economic Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation,"
              by Alan Auerbach and Laurence Kotlikoff

WP 757        "Tax Reform and Corporate Investment: A Micro—Econometric Simulation
              Study," by Michael Salinger and Lawrence Summers

    is expected that the papers resulting from this conference will be published
in a volume edited by Martin Feldstein.

Copies of these conference papers may be obtained by sending $1.50 per copy to
Conference Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138.
Please make checks payable to National Bureau of Economic Research. Advance
payment is required on orders totaling less than $10.00
                          List of Ptrticijarits
                SIMULATION METHODS IN TAX M)LICY ANALYSIS

                       The Breakers, Palm Buach

                          January 25-21, 1981
Name                                         Affiliation

Henry J. Aaron                    The J3rookings Institution
Alan J. Auerbach                  Harvard University
Martin J. Bailey                  University of Maryland
Michael J. Buskin                 Stanford University
Daniel H. Feenberg                National Bureau of Economic Research
Martin Feldstein                  Harvard University and NBER
Daniel J. Frisch                  University of 'Tashington
Don Fullerton                     Princeton University
Harvey Galper                     U.S. Department of the Treasury
Roger H. Gordon                   Bell Laboratories
Lawrence H. Goulder               Stanford University
David G. Hartrrian                Harvard University
Jerry A. Hausrnan                Massachusetts Institute of Technolor
James J. Heckrrian               Unversity of Chicago
Patric Hendershott               Purdue University
Thomas 0. Horst                  U.S. Department of the Treasury
Mervyn A. King                   University of Birmingham, England
Laurence J. Kotlikoff            Yale University
Lawrence B. Lindsey              Harvard University
Charles E. McLure, Jr.           National Bureau of Economic Research
Peter Mieszkowskj                University of Houston
Joseph J. Minarik                The Brookings Institution
Richard A. Musgrave              Harvard University of the University
                                   of California at Santa Cruz
Joseph A. Pechman                The Brookings Institution
Michael Salinger                 Massachusetts Institute of Techno1o
Robert J. Shiller                University of Pennsylvania
John B. Shoven                   Stanford University
Joel Slernrod                    University of Minnesota
Joseph E. Stiglitz               Princeton University
Lawrence H. Summers              Massachusetts Institute of Technolor
John Whalley                     University of Western Ontario
David Wise                       Harvard University
                                           NBER Working Paper #798
                                                November 1981




       ISSUES IN THE TAXATION OF FOREIGN SOURCE INCOME

                       Daniel J. Frisch



                           Abstract


      This paper examines some aspects of the tax treatment of U.S.

multinational corporations. The emphasis is on problems of coordina-

tion of the different tax systems faced by the firms. The U.S. cor-

porate income tax must take account of the fact that the firms' over-

seas income is taxed by the host governments, in a variety of ways.

Currently, the foreign tax credit is the principle mechanism for making

these adjustments; it is examined, along with alternative methods such

as territorial treatment and a deduction for foreign taxes. The paper

also considers the closely related question of coordinating measures of

taxable income. The most common method, the arm's length rule, is

examined. Alternatives to it, including allocation by shares and a

partial case involving allocation of research and development expenses,

are also considered.

      First, the revenue effects of these tax regimes are simulated,

with no behavioral responses considered. Responses in location of

investment decisions are then included. The data are taken from the

corporations' U.S. tax returns, cross—tabulated into approximately

240 industry and country cells.


                                      Daniel J. Frisch
                                      Department of Economics
                                      University of Washington
                                      301 Savery Hall
                                      Seattle, Washington 98195

                                      (206) 545—1859 or 543—5955
       This paper is a simulation study of the international aspects

 of U.S. corporate taxation. Recently, international operations of

 U.S. corporations have accounted for a fifth of total profits and a

 quarter of total investments.' Taxes on these activities riay have

 important effects on the international and domestic investment decisions

 of the firms. For these reasons, analysis of the taxation of U.S.

 corporations is incomplete unless international aspects are considered.

       Recent attempts to reform the U.S. tax structure have not ig—

 nored international aspects. President Carter's 1978 proposals in-

cluded some major changes in this area. Although these suggestions

went the way of most of the other elements in his package, the issues

they raised are likely to reappear in future calls for reform. For

example, President Carter's package called for the ending of "deferral,"

an aspect of U.S. tax law that is discussed below.

      In 1977, the I.R.S. issued a set of regulations that made a

potentially important change in the way overseas income is to be de-

fined for tax purposes.2 These "861 regulations", which are also dis-

cussed below, have been the subject of considerable controversy, since

they may affect investment decisions in a number of important ways.

A major goal of this study is to analyze methods of defining foreign

taxable income, especially methods for deciding what part of total

profits are to be taxed as domestic income, and what part as foreign

income. The issues raised by the "861 regulations" are discussed in

this context.
                                2



      This study extends previous work in three ways.3 The analysis

of methods for allocating income between domestic and foreign sources

is the first extension. Although a previous work did consider the 861

regulations in isolation, no general treatment of the revenue impact

of these methods seems to exist.4

      The second extension involves the level of aggregation of the

analysis. This study uses data which contain information cross—

tabulated by industry of the U.S. firm and by country where the in-

come was earned. The impact of many aspects of international tax law

turn on the precise alignment of U.S. and foreign tax parameters.

Therefore, the availability of data from a number of countries is

potentially of great value, since a range of foreign tax situations

may be included.

      Previous studies, in contrast, have had to rely on information

tabulated by the industry of the US. firm, with totals of domestic

and overseas income reported for each industry. Aggregating across

countries in this way may obscure important effects, since firms

operating in one set of countries may be affected in one way by a

tax change, while firms in other countries may be affected not at all

or in the opposite direction.

      The third extension concerns responses that the firms might

make to changes in tax law. Any such change will in general alter

the structure of investment incentives, and the firms' investment

decisions can be expected to change. Responses of this kind may

have sizeable consequences for the firms and for evaluation of tax

policies toward them.
                                   3



          Section 1 of the paper lays out the issues to be considered.

 First, issues involving the current U.S. tax structure, given the

 measures of taxable income, are discussed. Then the issues in-

 volving definition of domestic and foreign income are described. A

 list of nine reform proposals that illustrdte these issues is formu-

 lated.

          The next section describes the development of INTERSIM, the

 tax calculator used in performing the simulations. Data used by

 it and techniques used to calibrate it are discussed.

          Section III presents the simulations of changes in tax revenues,

given that the firms do not change their behavior. First a baseline

simulation is defined and results for it are displayed. Then the

results of nimulating each of the nine 'ronosals are tresent'd.

      Section IV extends the analysis to cover behavioral responses

by the firms. Responses that can and cannot be included are outlined.

Methods to implement those that can be included, and assumptions re-

quired by those that cannot, are discussed.

      The next section discusses the effects of each of the reform

proposals on behavior in more detail. It also presents the results

of rerunning the simulations with behavioral responses built in.

     There is a brief concluding section.
                                   4




 I.    Issues to   be Considered

       A.    The Foreign Tax Credit Mechanism


       By convention, each country is given the primary right to tax

 income earned within its borders. The U.S., like many other countries,

 claims the further right to tax the income of its "persons," including

 corporations, earned abroad. U.S. law recognizes the primary right of

 the host countries through the foreign tax credit mechanism.

       The first step in this mechanism is to define the total income

 of U.S. corporations, including income earned abroad, and tax it at a

 standard rate (now 46 percent). Then, a credit is allowed for foreign

 taxes paid, except that if the foreign tax rate is greater, credits

only up to the domestic rate may be claimed. In effect, if the foreign

government taxes at the U.S. rate or higher, then income earned there

is not taxed further at home. But if the foreign government chooses

to tax at less than the standard rate, the U.S. collects a tax equal

to the difference. Of course, this describes a simple foreign tax

credit mechanism; actual practice in the U.S. is subject to several

compromises and difficulties.5

      It should be noted that even a pure foreign tax credit mech-

anism may not be the tax structure that maximizes welfare. It would

insure that U.S. firms would not have a tax incentive to invest in

low—tax countries rather than in the U.S., since low tax rates would

be brought up to the U.S. level. In this sense, it would bring the

world closer to "capital export neutrality," defined as the situation

where U.S. owned capital pays the same corporate tax rate no matter
                                5



 where employed. The incentive to avoid high—tax countries would still

 exist, however, unless an unlimited credit for foreign taxes is

 allowed. But then the pernicious incentive would exist for foreign

 governments to raise their tax rates on U.S. firms almost without

 limit, since the revenue would be at the expense of the U.S. Treasury.

 A further point is that "capital export neutrality" may improve world-

 wide welfare by removing distortions in the location of capital, but

 U.S. welfare may not be improved. Still further, the presence of

 other taxes, including the taxes on domestic capital, makes the ques-

tion of taxes on foreign source income a second best one. For these

reasons, welfare evaluation of the tax schemes is beyond the scope of

this study.6

      One departure of current U.S. practice from a pre foreign

tax credit mechanism concerns pooling the tax situations of several

countries. A U.S. firm may operate in two other countries, one with

a tax rate less than in the U.S., and one with a tax rate higher. It

would seem that the firm should pay additional tax on income earned

in the low—tax country and not on the other income. The firm should,

in effect, calculate a separate foreign tax credit for each country

and then use the sum. This type of structure is known as a foreign

tax credit with a "per country limitation."

     The U.S. structure uses, instead, an "overall limitation" for

most firms.7 A firm with operations in two or more countries adds

its income earned and taxes paid abroad. If total foreign taxes are

less than 46 percent of total foreign income, then the difference is
                                 6



  owed to the U.S. government. Only 46 percent of foreign income can

 be claimed as a credit if total foreign taxes are greater than this

 amount.

       An example illustrates how the presence of the overall limita-

 tion complicates the foreign tax structure. A firm may be operating

 in a country with a 40 percent tax rate. The firm would then owe

 an additional 6 percent to the U.S. on income earned there, so that

 its final rate of tax on this income is 46 percent. Now the firm

 opens up an operation of equal size in a country with a 54 percent

 tax rate. The overall foreign tax rate is now 47 percent, so that

 the firm now owes no tax to the U.S. on any foreign income. The ef-

 fective tax rate on income from the first country thus falls from 46

percent to 40 percent, for reasons unrelated to anything happening in

that country. It is clear that incentives are different under the

per—country limitation vs. the overall limitation. For this reason,

imposition of the per—country limitation is one of the reforms

analyzed in this study.

      Note that this analysis makes use of the availability of data

by country. Data aggregated up to the industry level already have the

overall limitation built into them, in effect. Therefore, analysis of

the per—country limitation would be impossible with it.

      The second departure from a pure foreign tax credit is the issue of

"deferral." Simply put, not all income from foreign operations is subjected

tothe foreign tax credit mechanism. Profits earned abroad by foreign

subsidiaries of U.S. firms are included only if repatriated to the
                                    7




 parent as dividends. If retained abroad, they are left out of the

 U.S.'s definition of worldwide income until and unless the subsidiary

 is dissolved. In 1972, foreign subsidiaries as a whole repatriated

 40.9 percent of their income. Since pre—tax profits were $15.356

 billion, $9.075 billion were "deferred." U.S. firms earned another

 $ 9.893   billion overseas from operations not separately incorporated

 ("branch" operations) and from receipts of interest, royalties, and

 other fees. This income is not affected by deferral in any way. Thus,

 repealing deferral would have increased taxable foreign source income
                                8
of U.S. firms by 56 percent.

       It is not clear, of course, how much additional tax revenue would

have been raised. For example, if all countries in the world had tax

rates greater than the U.S. rate, no extra revenue would accrue. It is

therefore worthwhile to include plans that end deferral in the reforms

to be studied.

       There are two approaches to ending deferral that should be mentioned.

One would tax the U.S. firms as if their subsidiaries repatriate 100

percent of their profits. The second would treat subsidiaries like branches;

in other words, this method would consolidate foreign subsidiaries for tax

purposes much as domestic subsidiaries are. One difference between them

would arise from foreign subsidiaries with losses. Under the first

method, they would be ignored, since dividends cannot be negative.

Under the second, their losses would be allowed to decrease the

firm's worldwide income. Both methods are considered in this study.

However, data limitations will force the difference between them

to be understated. Subsidiaries with losses cannot be treated

separately if they appear in the same industry—country cell as
                                            8



 subsidiaries with positive profits. Since some cells do show losses,

 however, the two methods for ending deferral do show different

 results.

          Two more reforms to the basic foreign tax structure are

 considered. They are the major alternatives to the foreign tax credit

 mechanism. The first is the "territorial" system. Under it, basically no

 attempt is made to collect taxes on income from activities abroad.

 The tax systems of France and the Netherlands are closest to this

 approach.

       The second alternative would replace the foreign tax credit with

a deduction for foreign taxes paid. This approach was contained in

 the Burke—Hartke Bill, debated by Congress in 1971. Just as a foreign

tax credit is supposed to help attain "capital export neutrality,"

a deduction system is supposed to attain "national neutrality." This

is the situation under which U.S. firms are led to equalize social

rates of return on capital used at home and abroad, where social rates

of return are defined from the U.S. perspective. Let:


      r          rate of return to capital in the U.S.;

      t      =   tax   rate in the U.S.;

      r* = rate of return abroad, and

      t*     =   tax   rate abroad.


Then social rates of return, defined as income accruing to either

U.S. shareholders or the U.S. government, are equal to r for capital
                          *     *
used at home, and r (1—t )            for   capital used abroad. Private rates

of return are equal to r (l—t) for domestically used capital, and
                                                            9


     *          *
 r       (1—t )(1—t) for foreign capital when a deduction system applies.

 Since the firms equate private rates of return,

                                             *      *
                            r(l—t)   =   r       (l—t )(l—t)

                        *        *
 Thus, r =          r       (l—t ) so that social rates of return are also equalized.

As Feldstein and Hartman (1977), Horst (1980), and Dutton (1980) show,

this reasoning is far from a satisfactory welfare analysis of the de-

duction system. Still, the claims made for it render it an interest-

ing addition to the list of reforms to be studied.


           B.           Methods for Allocating Income


           It is useful at this point to summarize some of the tax structures

desCribed so far. Total taxes paid by a U.S. firm operating in one

other country are, in general:


                                         T + T*                                          (1)
                        TTOTAL

                                                                *
Taxes paid to the foreign government, T ,                           are,   in general:


                        T
                            *
                                =t Y
                                     **                                                  (2)



where Y is the foreign country's measure of taxable income from the
                                                        *
firm's     activities there, and t is the foreign tax rate. Under a

foreign tax credit mechanism, U.S. taxes are:


                    T           t(Y + zY*) — c                                           (3)
                                   10



 where Y is the U.S. government's measure of taxable income of domestic

 operations and t    is   the corporate tax rate.   z is the   payout       ratio for

 the firm's foreign subsidiary, the ratio of dividends paid over total

 after—tax earnings of the subsidiary.9 C is the foreign tax credit.

 It equals:


              C =   Mm
                          [ *                                               (4)


        It is easy to see how the reforms mentioned so far could be in-

corporated into this structure. For example, ending deferral could

be modelled as setting z to unity (with possibly an adjustment for

subsidiaries with losses). A territorial system would set z to zero.

A deduction system, with deferral left intact, would replace (3) with:


              T
                             *
                    t(Y + zY —   zt
                                      **Y )                                 (5)

More countries would have to be added to these simple equations before

the per—country limitation could be modelled.
                                                         *
        The remaining questions all concern Y and Y , the measures of

taxable income. It is useful first to specify their sum, worldwide

income of the firm, in a simple way:


                            + Y = P(S + S*) —   DTOTAL
                                                                            (6)
              T0TAL

where P is the world price of the firm's one product, and S and               S
                                                                    *
are   quantities sold to customers at home and abroad; P(S + S          )    thus

equals worldwide sales revenues. DTOTAL are worldwide deductions, and

include cost of materials, payments to factors, depreciation allowances,

and the like. Except for issues concerning exchange rates, defining
                                   11



 10TAL
           is conceptually nei tlier easier nor harder than defining tax-
 able income    for a   purely domestic firm; all the same issues appear.
 For this reason, problems in defining ToTAL are neglected and a mea-
 sure of it is assumed known and constant.

          How should         be split up between Y and Y? Most governments

 have   agreed to use the "arm's length" system. 10 The fundamental idea
 is to ask how market forces would make the split. This rule asks the
 firm to pretend, for tax     purposes, that its domestic and overseas

 operations are independent economic entities, operating at arm's

 length from each other. Profits of each entity would be naturally

defined as its sales minus deductions.

          Intrafirm flows of goods must be measured when defining sales

revenues of each part. Let E (for exports) represent sales of the

home office to foreigners, net of sales of the foreign operation in

the home market. Alternatively, one may assume that each entity car-

ries on all sales to local customers. Then E represents net intra—

firm flows of the product between the U.S. firm and its foreign sub-

sidiary. Since there is a single world price for all transactions,

sales revenue of the domestic part of the firm would be P(S + E),

which equals its revenue from sales to local customers and from

exports. "Net" revenues of the foreign part would be P(S*_E), which

equals its sales to its local customers minus what it had to pay for

imports from the domestic part.

        How should total deductions of the firm be split up? In     the
market,    each producer has to pay for the factors it uses. Therefore,

each part of the firm should deduct the cost of factors used for what

is produced locally. Let D be the cost of factors (and related
                                     12


                                            *
 deductions) used in the U.S., and D be the cost of factors used abroad.
 If factors can be used in only one place, then D + D* will equal

 DTQTAL. The incomes of domestic and foreign operations may then he

 defined as:


               Y = P(S + E) — D                                         (7)

                   *      *         *
               y       =P(S —E) —D                                      (8)



 These two equations represent the simplest form of the arm's length

 rule for allocation of incomes. Note that Y +            =
                                                              TOTAL' as required.
       Although the basic conception seems simple, the above description

of the arm's length approach may leave the reader somewhat uneasy.

There are many heroic assumptions and loose ends. What if intra—

 firm flows take more complicated forms than exports of a single final

good, with its easily observable world price? What if a factor of

production acts like a "public good" within the firm, so that all

parts of the firm benefit if one part hires it? These problems have

of course occurred to other experts in this field, and the response
                                                                   11
has been the suggestion of an entirely different approach.

      This approach begins byrecognizing that measuring TOTAL directly
                                                          *
avoids many of the problems with measuring Y and Y using the arm's

length rule. Why not, then, just split up                on some sort of rea—
                                *
sonable basis to get Y and Y ?          If domestic operations seem to account

for 75 percent of the firm's total activities, then Y should be set

to 75 percent of TOTAL        Similarly, Y should be set to 25 percent

of TOTAL Of course, a rule must be formulated to decide for what

share each part of the firm accounts. The prime requirement for this
                                              13




 rule that sets the shares is that it depends on something easy to

 measure. In symbols, this "shares allocation" approach would set:


                   Y =      S                     and
                                   TOTAL'                          (9)



                        =       (1-s)    .
                                              total'    with       (10)


                                         *
                    =       x/(x   + x       ),                    (11)


              *
 where X and X are attributes of the firm that are easily observable
 in both countries.

       Domestic and foreign taxable income may be recomputed in this

 way in order to simulate the effects of adopting a shares allocation

 approach. Note that such a simulation does not necessitate any change

 in the foreign tax credit mechanism. Once the new taxable income

measures are defined, the original mechanism, described in eqs. (l)—(4),

may be applied to them.

      U.S. states that levy a corporate income tax face the same

problems in taxing national firms as national governments do in taxing

multinational ones. Although the arm's length approach is the rule

among national governments, the shares allocation approach is typically

used by the states. They usually use a weighted average of three

attributes, sales, assets, and employment, to define the shares of

taxable incomes.

      The data to be used in this study do not contain information on

employment. Therefore, the following definition of s will be used in

simulation of the shares allocation system:
                                                 14




                         s =     a( S) + (1-a) (       A)                        (12)
                                   S+S                A+A

                  *                                      *
 S   and S are local sales, and A and A are local assets. Proxies

 used to measure them are discussed in Section II below. A value of

 .5 is used for a in the simulations presented in Sections 111 and V.

              It should be noted that z in eqs. (3) and (4), the fraction of

 foreign income in U.S. tax base, now has a different interpretation.

This fraction is, implicitly, the ratio of actual intrafirm dividends

to measured foreign taxable income. Up to this point, firms do not

change their behavior when tax laws change; in particular, intrafirm
                                                            *
dividends do not change. Thus z and Y move in precisely offsetting
directions and the quantity of foreign income in the U.S. tax base,
     *
zY       ,   does not change. Note that domestic tax base, Y, and foreign
                            *
taxes paid, T , do change.

             In sum, there are at least two ways for governments to define
              *
Y and Y .              What happens if different governments adopt different

methods? The country that hosts the subsidiaries of U.S. firms need
                                             *
concern itself only with Y .                     The U.S., however, needs to define tax-

able income both at home and abroad. It is possible for the foreign

government's measure of local taxable income and the U.S.'s measure

of income in that country to differ. We need to complicate the basic

specification of taxes as follows:

                                 T + T*                                       (1)
               TTQTAL


               T
                   *
                       =t 'i
                            **                                                (2)



               T =     t(Y      + zY*) - C                                    (3')



               C =     Mm       1zt
                                zt Y
                                              15


                                                           *
 Equations   (1) and (2) are repeated for convenience. Y should now be

 interpreted as the foreign government's measure of taxable income arising

 out of a U.S. firm's activities in its country. Y is defined as the

 U.S. government's measure of income from the some activities.

        Note that the top line of eq. (4') contains Y .
                                                       *
                                                               t
                                                                   * Y*
                                                                          equals

 the taxes paid by the firm to the foreign government; this is an ob-

servable quantity. Therefore, this actual tax liability is used in

the U.S. foreign tax credit computation. A separate measure of

foreign taxable income is needed in the computation of C only to in-

sure that too much credit is not taken.

        Tax treaties between governments usually specify that both

signatories will strive to coordinate their treatment of multinational
                                                           *         "*
firms. 13    In our symbols, it is deemed desirable that Y = Y

However, if one government decides that a shares allocation approach

should be substituted for arm's length, there would certainly be a

long lag before all other governments concurred. Therefore, simulation
                                                   *
of   both a "coordinatedt' reform, in which both Y and Y will be

altered, and a "noncoordinated" one, in which only Y will be altered,

will be considered.

       Another modification must be made to equations (1) through (4)

in order to analyze the 861 regulations.


                                  T + T                                    (1)
              TTOTAL


              T
                  *
                      =    t
                               * Y*                                        (2)

              T =         t(Y + zY    )   C                                (3')
                                  16



                C = Mm                                                 (4")

 The only change is the appearance of a new measure of taxable income
 abroad,        in the bottom line of the credit computation. It is needed
 because    this measure need not equal Y ,   in   eq. (3'), the me3sure of

 taxable income earned abroad that is subjected to the basic U.S. tax

 rate, t.

        Y   is governed by Section 482 of the Internal Revenue Code, which

deals with the division of income of related parties. Defining ,

for   purposes of the foreign tax credit, is not seen as a matter of

dividing income of related parties; rather, it is seen as a matter of

defining foreign as opposed to domestic income. This distinction has

meaning in situations that are much more complex than those considered

in this paper. For example, consider a purely domestic firm which

receives income from abroad that is somehow subjected to a foreign

tax. Since there is no related party abroad, there is no Y .          Yet

the firm gets to claim a credit for the foreign taxes; therefore, a

Y must be computed. For this reason, a separate part of the Internal

Revenue Code, Sections 861 — 864, governs the definition of income used

in the foreign tax credit computation.

       In short, there are administrative reasons why Y and Y need

not be identical. As mentioned above, the I.R.S. recently issued a

set of regulations that affect the latter concept and not the former.

It should be stated at the outset that this study is not intended as

an exhaustive analysis of these regulations. They are much too com-

plex to be included fully in the simple model developed here. In
                                    17


particular, they list many alternative solutions for each of the

problems they raise. It is not clear that the solutions singled out

here are the ones enforced most frequently; indeed, it is not clear

they are or ever will be the ones enforced. This study is intended

rather as a discussion of the implications of certain principles that

seem to underlie the regulations.

         The major reason new regulations were issued in 1977 was the

problem of accounting for factors of production that operate like pub-

lic goods within the firm. Many expenses are typically incurred by

the head office of a multinational firm, yet benefit all parts of it.

Examples cited in the regulation include administrative costs and

research and development expenses. Perhaps a little more hard to see

as a public good is the renting of capital. Yet interest expenses

are also included. This reasoning

            is based on the approach that money is fungible and that

         interest expense is attributable to all activities and pro-

         perty regardless of any specific purposes for incurring an

         obligation on which interest is paid.1-4


         If these "head office charges" benefit all parts of the firm,

then a fair share should be charged to foreign source income. The

effect is to reduce    in the bottom line of eq. (4"), and, if this

line applies, reduce the foreign tax credit and raise U.S. tax liability.

        How should     be computed, according to the 861 regulations?

Arm's length, since it is the basic principle, should be used for most
                                         18



  aspects of revenue and costs. Yet for the factors singled out            as
  head—office charges, an additional allocation must be done. The

  regulations suggest, as one alternative, that the shares allocation

  approach be used to compute this additional piece.

           This option would split D, domestic deductions in eq. (7),

 into ordinary deductions, DNHO and head—office deduction, DHO:


                D =        +
                                                                          (13)



 Income for the purpose of computing the credit limitation is then:


                   =   P(S* - E)   - D     — (1 -        s')              (14)
                                                               DHO


                s' =
                       a'(—-)
                          S+S
                                + (1 —        a')   (    A)               (15)
                                                        A+A

 s' and a' are the weights that perform the special shares allocation

of DHO.

       The baseline for the study is tax law as of 1972, which did

not include these regulations. Therefore, this computation may be

considered a reform package which may be simulated. Two simulations

are performed. The first sets a' to .5, the same value used for a in

the shares allocation reforms. The second sets a' to zero, so that

only assets are used to perform the allocation of the headoffice

deductions.

      To summarize, nine simulations are to be performed.            They are:
      1)      Imposition of the per—country limitation.

     2)      Repeal deferral, complete payout method.
                                 19



        3)     Repeal deferral, consolidation method.

       4)     Territorial treatment given all foreign source income.


       5)     Deduction for foreign taxes paid substituted br foreign

              tax credit.


       6)     Shares allocation substituted for arm's length method, by

              all countries.


       7)     Shares allocation substituted for arm's length method, by

              U.S. only.


       8)     861 regulations allocation, with a' =   .5.

      9)      861 regulations allocation, with a' = 0.


II.   Data   and Techniques

      A.     Data


      The basic source of data is a file of 1972 tax returns of U.S.

multinational companies maintained by the Treasury Department. Speci-

fically, each firm files an "information return" (form 2952) for

each of its "controlled foreign corporations." The Office of Inter-

national Tax Affairs at the Treasury kindly made information from

these forms available to me.

      In order to preserve the confidentiality of the tax returns, the

Treasury had to crosstabulate the data before releasing them. Fifteen
                                20



  manufacturing industry groups and seventeen countries were chosen;

  see Table 1. Cells with information drawn from less than three tax

  returns were suppressed, and the amounts placed in the seventeenth

  country column ("all other countries"). 246 cells of data resulted.

       The variables included in the data set are: subsidiaries'

 assets, business receipts ( the measure of sales), earnings and profits,

 dividends, payments of interest and royalties to the parents, and

 income taxes paid to foreign governments. Taxes are divided into

 ordinary corporate income taxes and so—called "withholding taxes"

 paid on flows of dividends, interest, and royalties to the parents.

 The firms are required to calculate all quantities according to U.S.

 tax definitions, except that accelerated depreciation may not be used.

 Note that assets are therefore based on historic costs.'5   Tables 2, 3,

 and 4 present selections of the data. They display foreign subsidiaries'

 assets, taxable income, and tax paid to foreign governments, respectively.

      Supplementary data are taken from I.R.S., Statistics of Income:

1968—1972, For4n Tax Credit, cpp         ons.   They provide information

about the domestic activities of the fifteen industries. Also they are

used to calibrate the simulation program. The volume contains data on

various intermediate quantities calculated as part of the foreign tax

credit structure. An example is worldwide taxable income, corresponding

to eq. (3) of the last section. Only industry totals are given.

      The simulator can calculate the same concepts from the basic

data and aggregate across countries. When these figures do not agree,

a residual variable is created and spread out over the countries in

proportion to income. In this way, the basic data are not changed,
                                     21



 but industry totals from the simulator can be brought into confor-

 mity with the published nwribers.

          An example of the ways in which the numbers can diverge is carry-

 overs of foreign tax credits. Firms that operate in liigh—t rix count ries
 are allowed to carryover excess foreign t;x credits. These qwntities
 are included in the Statistics of Income volume and not in the basic
 data.        The simulator spreads them out over countries as it does the

residuals, but in proportion to excess credits generated in 1972. Since

excess credits in prior years generated the carryovers, this seems the

most reasonable way.

         Headoffice deductions are needed for the simulations involving

the 861 regulations. Data were collected on the two major types,

interest deductions and research and development expenses. The former

are taken from I.R.S., Statistics of Income,_Corporationsj972. The

National Science Foundation's measure of " funds for R & D"

is used for the latter; see NSF (1978), Table B—3. Since these

sources include all U.S. firms in the industries, these two variables

are scaled down by the ratio of domestic income of the N.N.C.s to

total domestic income. These ratios are computed from the I.R.S.

volumes.


         B.       Techniques and Assumptions


         The presence of the overall credit limitation creates a problem

in calculating foreign tax credits using aggregated data. Firms

operating in one country may or may not be operating in other countries
                               22


 simultaneously. The more countries they operate in, the more advan-

 tage they can take of the overall limitation. The U.S. would collect

 more tax if every firm operated in only one other country than if

 every firm operated in every country, for given amounts of income.

 Without micro data, there is no way to tell how completely the present

 structure of U.S. firms takes advantage of the overall limitation.

 Therefore, there is no way to calculate credits after limitation pre-

 cisely.

       The Statistics of Income book presents the actual level of credits

allowed after limitation in 1972, by industry. The following procedure

allows one to use this information to skirt this problem.

       It is assumed that there are only eighteen (types of) firms in

each industry. Seventeen operate in the U.S. and one other country

only; they are called "binational" firms. The last firm in each indus-

try is assumed to operate in every country; it is an "omninational"

firm. The last assumption is that the omninational firm accounts for

a constant proportion of the industry's activities in each country.

This proportion may be called a1 for the first industry, and so forth

through a15.
      Given the a1's, the simulator can calculate final credits.

Foreign income taxes are split in two in each industry—country cell;

aj go to the omninational and (1—a1) to the binational. The limitation

is Immediately calculated for the binatiorial, and its final credit

computed. The sum of credits for all binationals is then computed by

adding over countries. The omninational's credit is computed by first

adding its shares of income and taxes over the countries; then its
                                   23



limitation is computed and imposed. The total credits for the in-

dustry are then the sum of the binationaig' credits and the omni—

national 's.

      The larger is a1, the larger the total credit will be for the
industry. This is so because the overall credit limitation does more
"good" the closer the industry is to complete omninationality. There
will be one value of a., for each industry, that causes credits com-
puted by the calculator to match credits reported in Statistics of

Income. Once they are known, calibration of the simulator is complete.

They may be used whenever limitations need to be calculated.

      The a's that satisfy this condition are as follows:


      1)       Food products:                        0.6680

     2)        Textiles and Apparels:                0.2118

     3)        Lumber and Paper:                     0.4908

     4)        Printing and Publishing:              0.5000

     5)        Chemicals:                            0.4544

     6)        Rubber Products:                      0.9593

     7)        Stone, Clay, and Glass:               0.7152

     8)        Primary Metal Products:               0.1929

     9)        Fabricated Metal Products:            0.0023

    10)        Machinery, Except Electrical:         0.2520

    11)        Electrical Machinery:                 0.1291

    12)    Motor Vehicles:                           0.4199

    13)    Aircraft and Other Transportation
           Equipment:                                0.8989
                                 24



      14)      Scientific Instruments, Etc.:           0.6924

      15)      Other Manufacturing:                    0.7196


       Two adjustments were made. First, there never are excess cre-

 dits in the fourth industry, printing and publishing. Thus the problem

 of how to compute the limitation never arises. All values of

 would yield the same answer for this industry; therefore, a value

 of 0.5 is arbitrarily chosen. The simulator calculated credits of

 $24.17 million; the published number of $24.00 million. These are off

 by less than 1 percent. A residual equal to the difference will be

 subtracted from credits for the seventeenth country class in all runs.

      The other problem concerns industry 9, fabricated metal products.

Even when a9 is set to zero, calculated credits exceed reported cre-

dits. There may be an error in the data or method. Or the aggrega-

tion done to compute the seventeenth country group may not allow a

strict enough limitation to be imposed. With     set to 0.0023, com-

puted credits are $61.73 million. Reported credits are $61.29 million;

the computation is off by 0.72 percent. Again, a residual equal to

the difference will be subtracted from the seventeenth country class

in all runs.


III. Simulation Results


      With the calculation of the proper a.'s, the calibration stage

is complete. The simulation package, INTERSIM, is therefore able to

analyze the tax issues discussed in Section I.
                                 25




          In order to facilitate comparisons among the   reform   proposals,

 a baseline proposal is defined first. It simulates the effect of two

 minor changes in actual 1972 experience. These changes are also in-

 cluded    in the simulation of each reform proposal, and the fi tial results
 from each are expressed relative to the baseline. The first of these
 changes   is that carroversof excess foreign tax credits from prior

 years are neglected. Without a series of years of data, there would

 be no way to simulate how the carryovers would change when the laws

 were changed. By dropping them in the baseline, the analysis may

 consistently neglect them for the whole analysis. Second, dividends

 received from less developed countries were taxed in a special way

until 1976; this "no gross up" provision is taken out in the baseline

and all other simulations.

      The data show that total assets of foreign subsidiaries of U.S.

manufacturing firms were equal to $lOO.250 billion in 1972. Total U.S.

corporate income tax paid by these firms was $ll.810 billion. Note

that only taxes paid by U.S. multinational companies are included in

this number; also, it is net of foreign tax credits and investment tax

credits. These firms and their subsidiaries paid $5.087 billion in

taxes to foreign governments. Thus, their total tax liabilities were

$l6.897 billion.

      Table 5, line 1 displays the changes causedby the baseline

simulation. U.S. tax revenues increase by $96 million, in 1972 dollars.

Foreign tax revenues are not affected. Thus, except for rounding errors,

the change in total tax liabilities equals the U.S. change. The

possibility that assets of the firm could change is considered in the

     section.
                                 26




          The results of imposing the per country limitations are presented

  in line 2. This reform would seem to have little effect.     Foreign tax

  credits are reduced, and thus U.S. taxes increased, by $70 million over

  the baseline. Again, except for rounding, this change equals the

  increase in total tax liabilities, since foreign taxes are unaffected.

          The two proposals that eliminate deferral show more of an effect.

 The consolidation method causes an increase in U.S. tax revenues of

 $344 million over the baseline. For the reasons described above, the

 complete payout method causes a slightly larger increase in tax,

 $354 million.

       Eliminating all U.S. taxation of income earned abroad, the

 territorial approach, would reduce U.S. taxes by $815 million, relative

 to the baseline. Line 6 shows that substituting a deduction for the

 foreign tax credit would raise U.S. tax revenues by $l.366 billion.

Dismantling the foreign tax credit system in favor of a deduction

would be an important change in U.S. tax policy toward international

income.

      A coordinated, worldwide, move to a shares allocation approach

would also have major repercussions. The firms' overall tax liabilities

would increase by $544 million. This is the net effect of increasing

U.S. taxes by $2.387 billion and decreasing taxes paid to foreign

governments by $l.842 billion (except for rounding errors). The

current arm's length approach allocates more income to the foreign

subsidiaries than would an approach based on shares of sales and

especially assets. Substantial redistributions of worldwide tax

revenues are implied.
                                    27




            Countries that show especially large ratios of income to sales

      and assets suffer the largest decreases In tax revenues. Since the

      INTERSIM package is able to calculate results by industry and

     country,   it is possible to break down the   aggregate   change In   foreign
     tax revenue shown in the third column, line 7, of Table 5.        Table 6

     displays foreign tax liabilities by country, before and after world—

     wide adoption of a shares allocation approach.
b          Undoubtably, many foreign governments would balk at a move to
     a shares allocation system. Line 8 of Table 5 presents the results

     if only the U.S. used the shares allocation approach in computing

     taxable incomes. Foreign tax revenues are preserved. U.S., and

     thus total, tax liabilities rise by approximately $2.059 billion.

     This rise is smaller than the one for U.S. taxes in the worldwide

     reform because higher levels of foreign tax imply higher foreign tax

    credits. Still, the rise in U.S. revenues is substantial. Now, however,

    instead of foreign governments bearing the cost, the firms do. In fact,

    this reform would cause a larger change in total tax liabilities of the

    firms than any other reform simulated.

          The last two lines present the results of simulating the special

    allocation mentioned in the 861 regulations. They imply that foreign

    tax credits will decline, since foreign tax base used in computing the

    credit limitation must be reduced. When sales and assets are used in

    the required allocation, credits decline, and total taxes rise, by $888

    million. Using assets alone causes a slightly larger allocation of

    headoffice deductions; therefore, taxes rise slightly more, by $921

    million, approximately.
                                   28




         To summarize, the largest changes in tax revenues would be pro-

 duced by the deduction for foreign taxes paid and by the shares allo-

 cation approach. If a shares allocation system is instituted world-

 wide   simultaneously, it would   affect the distribution of tax revenues

 more   than the total burden on the firms. The territorial system would
 also produce a large change in U.S. and total taxes, in the opposite
 direction. Finally, the aspects of the 861 regulations that are
 simulated produce sizeable changes in tax liabilities.



 IV.     Behavioral Reponses

        The simulation results presented so far assume that the firms'

decisions are fixed. This assumption is unwarranted; the firms may

respond to the tax reform proposals in ways that could affect the

results substantially. This section considers two sets of responses

the firms might make and ways to include them in the simulations.


        A.    Responses in Financial Decisions

        Accounting for changes in intrafirm financial flows can have sub-

stantial impacts on the simulation results. Bergsten, Horst, and

Moran (1978) present a model aimed at dealing with this issue in con-

siderable detail. Partly because their analysis is so complete, this

question is handled in a much more cursory fashion here.

        The deferral provision of U.S. law emphasizes the importance

of financial variables. If all firms made full use of deferral, by

having their subsidiaries retain all profits, they could avoid paying

any tax to the U.S. Note that this policy would not place substantial
                               29




  limits on the firms' movements of capital. They could use intrafirm

 loans and changes in the subsidiaries' equity structure to reallocate

 retained funds for investment purposes.

       Of course, full use of definal would place some restrictions

 on the fir-ms. If all funds are retained abroad, they do not show up

 in the parent corporations' incomes. Since dividends paid out by the

 parents cannot exceed their profits, it is possible that complete

 deferral could restrict payouts by the corporations to their ultimate

 shareholders. It seems that in order to understand why the firms do

 not use intrafirm flows to minimize taxes, one must answer the question,

 why do the U.S. firms pay dividends? The difficulty others have had

 in answering this question is the second reason financial responses
                                     16
 are given cursory treatment here.

      The simplest treatment for intrafirm dividends is to assume that

the subsidiaries keep their payout rates constant. This is done,

with two adjustments. In the simulation of shares allocation with

coordination, dividends are assumed proportional to net income as

measured by the present "arm's length" method. In other words, dividends

do not change just because the way of measuring net income for tax

purposes changes.

      The second adjustment concerns measuring payout rates with the

cross—tabulated data. Cells containing subsidiaries with both posi-

tive and negative profits could pose problems. The cells may show

positive dividends, since the firms with losses will not pay dividends

and the others may, but total profits could easily be negative. Spurious

negative payout rates would result. The Treasury computed a special
                                30



 tabulation, which excluded firms with losses, in order to solve this

 problem. Payout rates are computed from the dividends and profits

 reported by this tabulation.

       Interest, royalties, and other fees also flow between the

 subsidiaries and parents. It is assumed that the ratios of these

 variables to gross income are kept constant.



       B.     Responses in Investment Decisions

      The focus of concern with behavioral responses is the firms'

 investment decisions. Frisch (1980) presents evidence about the

 sensitivity of location of investment to rate of return and tax rates.

Using much the same data as is used here, it relates changes in assets

between 1968 and 1972 to gross and net rates of return. A significant

relationship seems to exist. Specifically, a one percent decrease in

rate of return, accounting for taxes, in one country seems to cause a

decrease in assets there of between .1 and .2 percent over the next

four years.

      The partial equilibrium nature of this approach should be stressed.

Some of the tax reform proposals raise effective tax rates, and thus

reduce net rates of return, in almost every situation. The empirical

results in Frisch (1980) imply that these reforms would reduce assets

of U.S. firms in almost every country. Where would this capital go?

Some might be invested by the firms in the U.S., some might be hid

away by local firms in the countries, and some might be consumed in

the long run as investment opportunities are worsened. Of course, all

of these mechanisms would have repercussions, and a complete analysis

would have to include these general equilibrium effects. Unfortunately
                                 31




 they are beyond the scope of this paper, since they require the

 construction of a general equilibrium model of the world economy.

          The basic approach, in short, is to assume that firms change

 their overseas assets in response to net rates of return, which

 change   as tax rates change. The reform proposals thus influence
 behavior through their   effects on tax rates on investment. Computa-

 tion of these tax rates and the effects that the reforms would have

 on them are discussed below and in more detail in the next section.

       Applying an elasticity to changes in net rates of return

 yields changes in assets. A set of assumptions is needed to translate

 these changes into changes in income flows and tax liabilities. The

simplest assumption is that gross income is proportional to assets;

in other words, that gross rates of return are constant     The special

tabulation mentioned above allows one improvement. Presumably, a firm

losing money in a country is not likely to expand assets there in the

expectation that it will lose even more money. Only positive gross

rates of return should be used. Thus, ratios of gross income to

assets are computed from the tabulation which includes only profitable

subsidiaries. Intercept terms are added to account for losses. For

example, consider a small reduction in a tax rate, thus a small in—

crease in net rate of return, and a small increase in assets. If

gross income was positive before, it will increase in proportion;

if negative, it will be a little less so.

      Interest, royalties, and other fees are then computed from gross

income as discussed above. Foreign taxable income is then equal to

gross income minus these fees (except in the worldwide shares
                                32




 allocation regime). Foreign tax liability equals taxable income

 times the effective foreign tax rate. These tax rates are computed

 from the special tabulation, in order to avoid spurious negative tax

 rates. Dividends are then computed from net income, as described

 above. The INTERSIM package is then ready to compute all other

 parts of total tax liabilities and display the results as desired.

       The remaining issue is the computation of tax rates on invest-

 ment. Needed are changes in total tax that would result from changes

 in investment, on the margin, under each tax regime. The TNTERSIM

 package is able to compute these marginal effective tax rates

directly. It perturbs assets, traces the effects on income flows

and tax liabilities, and computes the resulting changes in total tax.

Likely values of the marginal tax rates under each regime are

discussed in detail below.17

      In the first set of results presented below, a value of 0.15

is used for the elasticity of assets with respect to net rate of

return. This value is chosen because it is in the middle of the

range of findings in Frisch (1980). The tentative nature of this

paper suggests, however, that a sensitivity analysis on this para-

meter is appropriate. For example, the paper is able to capture only

four—year   responses; therefore, the true long—run elasticity may be
larger. For this reason, further results are presented which use
elasticities that range from 0.05 to 1.00.
                                     33




 V.    Re s u 1 t   s In cludin Behavioral Resoonses


       Table 7 presents simulation results with behavioral responses

 included. The elasticity of assets with respect to net rate of return

 is set to 0.15. The two changes in the        baseline   simulation cause a

 slight decrease in overseas investments. Assets decline by $100 million,

 or 0.099 percent, from actual 1972 levels. As a result, foreign income

 and taxes decline slightly. The baseline simulation now shows an

 increase of only $91 million in the total tax liabilities of the firms.

       Imposition of the per—country limitation either raises margihal

 tax rates or leaves them unaffected. Consider an omninational firm

 that, for simplicity, does not use deferral. Say its foreign taxes

are only 40 percent of its foreign income. Then its effective tax

rate on all foreign income, after the U.S. credit mechanism, becomes

48 percent, the basic U.S. rate in 1972. Now impose the per—country

limitation. The effective tax rate in low—tax countries is still

48 percent. However, the firm might have some operations in a country

with a 50 percent tax rate; the effective tax rate for this country

would go from 48 percent to 50 percent.

      The opposite case is an omninational firm with an average foreign

tax rate over 48 percent but with some operations in a low—tax country.

Now the tax rates in high—tax jurisdictions are unaffected, but the

effective tax rate in the low—tax country is raised to the U.S. level.

      In short, the "typical" operations of the omninational firms

are unaffected. Tax rates that are on the other side of 48 percent

from the firm's average rate will go up, either to 48 percent or to

the foreign rate, which ever is higher. Income that is deferred or

attributed to the binational firms is unaffected.
                               34




        Line 2 of Table 7 illustrates these effects on investment

  incentives. Assets decrease slightly, compared to the baseline

  results. Detailed results (available from the author) show that some

  industries are totally unaffected. Total foreign assets of U.S.

  firms decrease by $30 million more than the baseline; this change

 causes a small reduction in foreign tax revenues. Imposition of

 the per—country limitation, taking behavioral responses into account,

 would increase total tax liabilities of the firms by $68 million,

 relative to the baseline.

       Inferring the direction of movements in marginal tax rates is

 easier for this reform plan than for most of the ones to follow.

 Per—country limitation is one of only two reforms in which movements

 can occur in only one direction. In the others, some marginal tax

 rates increase and others decline. The reason is the overall limi-

 tation, together with omninational firms whose average tax rate flips

 from one side of 48 percent to the other.

      Consider the plans that end deferral. If subsidiaries in low—

tax countries retain more than average, ending deferral will lower

averaged foreign tax rates. An omninational firm could find itself

pushed from above 48 percent to below. Effective tax rates on all

its income will go from being equal to local levels to 48 percent, the

U.S. rate. This means that effective rates decline for high—tax

countries and increase for low—tax countries. Another industry might

have its omninational in exactly the opposite position; below 48

percent at first and above 48 percent after deferral is ended. Then

marginal tax rates in the same countries would move in exactly the
                               35




 opposite directions. The overall limitation can lead to some exceed-

 ingly complex patterns in marginal tax rates and investment incentives.

       Although   anything can happen to marginal   tax rates in specific

 circumstances, typical trends are clearer. Movements for the binational

 firms and for more typical circumstances for the omninationals are

 usually unambiguous. For example, ending deferral can only raise

marginal tax rates for the binational firms. If the deferred income

 is taxed more than 48 percent abroad then there is no effect; if the

 tax rate is lower abroad, the marginal tax rate has to increase.

       The first column in lines 3 and 4 of Table 7 show that ending

deferral would cause sizeable reductions in investments abroad. Assets

decline by $l.594 billion relative to the baseline. The plans have

exactly the same effect on investment since they differ only in the

treatment of losses and, by assumption, subsidiaries with losses do

not respond.

      These changes in investment decisions are large enough to

affect U.S. as well as foreign tax revenues. Foreign income is

reduced; therefore, repatriations to the parents fall. As a result,

U.S. revenues fall by $30 to $32 million, compared to the simulations

that neglect behavioral responses. In addition, foreign tax revenues

fall by $66 million. The result is that total tax payments by the

firms are only $249 million larger than the baseline for the complete

payout method, and $257 million for the consolidation method.

      Territorial treatment reduces marginal tax rates in typical

situations. The credit mechanism, in general, sets the effective tax
                                    36



 rate on repatriated income to the higher of the local rate or 48

 percent. Since the territorial system suspends this mechanism en-

 tirely, marginal tax rates in low—tax countries decline. Some marginal

 tax rates could still increase. An omninational firm that is low—

 tax on average    has marginal tax rates of 48    percent on all nonde—

 ferred    income, including income from high—tax countries, if any.
 Suspending the credit system causes the marginal tax       rates for this
high—tax income to go up, to the local rate. In this atypIcal case,
 to reset marginal tax rates to local levels is to raise them.

          Line 5 of Table 7 shows that the typical situations rule.

Territorial treatment lowers investment disincentives, and causes

assets abroad to increase by $800 million. Foreign tax payments

rise by $40 million as a result. Note that the change in U.S. tax

revenues is not affected by inclusion of behavioral responses.

Since basically no attempt is made to tax foreign operations, U.S.

revenues are insulated from changes in the firms' overseas investment

decisions.

      Substituting a deduction for the foreign tax credit raises

marginal tax rates in every instance. In the simplest case, the

marginal tax rate under the credit system is the higher of the

foreign tax rate and the U.S. tax rate. Under the deduction regime,

                               *         *
                    MTR=t +(l—t)t                                       (16)

                     *
      As long as t ,     the    foreign tax rate, is between zero and one,
                     *
MTR exceeds both t and t, the U.S. rate. Therefore, the marginal

tax rate under the deduction is greater than either of the values
                                37




 it could take under the credit. Inclusion of deferral, overall

 limitation, and the other aspects of actual law do not change the

 conclusion that marginal taxes on investment must increase.

          The result is that assets abroad fall by $2.221 billion.

 The firms end up paying an additional $l.3l4 billion to the U.S..

 and $l.146 billion overall,

          The remaining four simulations involve some form of the shares

 allocation approach to defining tax bases. This approach can have

 some fascinating effects on marginal tax rates and investment incentives.

 For example, marginal tax rates on domestic activities can he affected

directly, since domestic assets and income appear in the allocation

formulas. The question of incentives for domestic investment is

beyond the scope of this paper; however, some simple examples are

presented in an appendix.

         Marginal tax rates on foreign investment can increase or decrease,

no matter what the credit situation, and can even become negative.

Consider a coordinated shares allocation with only assets used to

define the shares. Further consider, for simplicity, a firm that

does not use deferral and that operates in only the U.S. and one other

country, which has a higher tax rate than the U.S. Equations (1) —

(4)    and (9) — (11) would then imply that total taxes paid by the firm

are:



                                       + t(l —                       (17)
              TTOTAL t*(-) TOTAL                     TOTAL
                                              38




        Note that the credit mechanism insures that the tax rate on
                     *
  foreign income is t , since it is higher than t. This equation may

  be reexpressed:


                    TTOTAL =         "TOTAL                                              (18)


                           **
                   —
                    t =   tA     +tA
                          A +A                                                           (19)


          t   is   the appropriate weighted average of tax rates applied to total

 income. The marginal tax rate on overseas investment is:



                       i0TiJ -       T0TAL +
                                                   T0TAL                                (20)
                       BA              BA                  A
         There are now two channels by which a marginal investment abroad

 can affect taxes. First is the usual one; more assets imply more

income to be taxed. Second, assets affect the average tax rate be-

cause they affect the weighting scheme. Evaluating the derivative

in the second term,



                   TTOIAL =
                                 t   "T0TAL                *
                                              + 'T0TAL (t — t)     A   —
                                                                                        (21)
                    BA                BA                         (A+A)2
    *
If t is less than t, the second term is negative; increasing assets

abroad reduces taxes because the smaller tax rate becomes more impor-

tant in the average.

        The   first    term is always positive. It will be small, however,

if gross rate of return in the foreign country is small.                   In   fact,
                                 39




 if gross rate of return abroad is extremely small and the tax rate

 there is low, the whole expression can be negative. Note that baseline

 marginal tax rates should be small in such a situation, since not much

 income is produced on margin and it is lightly taxed. In sum, it is

 possible for low baseline marginal tax rates to be pushed through

 zero by the shares allocation schemes.

       This occurs in five out of the 246 cells in the data. The cells,

 and the marginal tax rates for the baseline and shares allocation

 scheme with coordination are:




 Industry                  Country
                                            -   Ma rgina1 Tax Rate
                                            Baseline         Shares
 Printing, etc. (4)        Venezuela (5)      .0008         —.0157
 Stone, etc. (7)           Spain (11)       .0003           —.0122
 Fabricated Metals (9)     Venezuela (5)    .0026           —.0025
Motor Vehicles (12)        South Africa     .0057           —.0044
                             (14)
Other (15)                Japan (15)        .0096           —.0104




In these cases, interactions among tax rates in the various countries

actually result in subsidies to investment.

      Such sharp declines in marginal tax rates are not typical for

the shares allocation regimes. On average, in fact, marginal tax

rates rise moderate amounts. Assets and sales are distributed in

the data in a way that shifts income into the relatively high—tax

countries. The net result is to discourage investment abroad by

U.S. firms. As Table 20 shows, assets fall by $852 million under

the coordinated shares allocation regime.
                              40




       Total tax liabilities rise by $509 million when behavioral

 responses are included. Foreign taxes fall by $l.845 billion and

 tax collected by the U.S. rises by $2.353 billion. Again, this

 regime implies a particularly large redistribution of tax revenues

 away from foreign governments and towards the U.S. (Disaggregated

 results, analogous to Table 6, are available from the author.)

      Marginal tax rates for the shares allocation scheme without

 coordination are more complex. Income is first taxed at the basic

 foreign rate, then U.S. law adds aspects that work through the two

channels outlined above. In effect, foreign income is potentially

double—taxed, once by the ordinary foreign rate, and again by the

shares allocation mechanism. To the extent that income is deferred,

this double taxation is avoided.

      The effect is to cause greater increases in the marginal tax

rates. In three cases, they rise by enough to force net rate of

return negative. This fact poses a problem for the routine that

calculates behavioral responses. Since a constant elasticity form

is used, a negative net rate of return would call for an infinitely

large reduction in assets. It is clear that the simple functional

form chosen is inadequate for some of the large changes that can

result from this reform. Rather than investigate more realistic,

but more complex, functional forms, this study resets the three

negative net rates of return to 25% of their pre—reform levels.

This procedure insures that behavioral responses in these three

cells are proportionately larger than in any other cell, but not so

large as to skew the whole analysis. The three cells and their
                                        41




 net rates of return under the baseline, under this reform before

 adjustment, and after adjustment are:


                                                          Net Rate of Return   _____
 In d   u strv_________                       Base line   NotAdjt e  d   Adjusted
 Scientific        (14)    Brazil (4)         .0993       —.2027         .0248
        I'
                           Venezuela    (5)   .1176       —.0079         .0294

                           BelgIum (6)        .1986       —.1390         .0496



             Overall, adoption of a shares allocation approach by the U.S.

 alone would cause assets abroad to decrease by $4.351 billion; see

 line 8 of Table 7. This is largest response in assets of any of the

 simulations. This result agrees with the fact that, when behavioral

 responses are neglected, this same regime causes the largest change

 in taxes. With responses included taxes increase by $l.370 billion.

 Inclusion of behavioral responses causes the change in total tax

liabilities to be only two thirds as large as before.

             The final two simulations involve the aspects of the 861 regula-

tions. Under these regimes, a share of certain domestic deductions is

allocated to the measure of income used to compute the foreign tax

credit limitation. The result is to reduce credits and raise U.S.

taxes.

             Since taxes must increase, it should not be too surprising that

marginal tax rates increase on average. None increase by enough to

cause net rate of return to go negative. On the other hand, it is

probably not surprising by now to discover that some rates go down.

In fact, the third of the five cells listed above again experiences

a negative tax rate, of —.000002.
                             42




      How can a marginal tax rate fall so sharply in this regime?

Remember that the tax rate in this cell is very low; therefore, the

foreign tax credit never approaches the limitation. So an allocation

that reduces this limitation does no damage. But headoffice deductions

allocated into this country cannot do damage elsewhere. In shorts

the firms have the incentive to increase operations in this country

so that the special deductions are allocated away from where they

matter into a situation where they do not.

      The average effect, however, is to increase disincentives for

investment abroad. Line 9 of Table 7 presents the results when both

assets and sales are used in the 861 allocations. Assets abroad

decline by $l.644 billion. Total taxes increase by $755 million.

Finally, the last line presents the results when only assets are used

as the basis of the allocations. The decline in assets is slightly

larger, $l.650 billion. The change in total taxes is still slightly

higher, $793 million.

      In summary, the nine reform proposals can change investment

incentives in complex ways. The result is that overseas investments

of U.S. firms can respond by large amounts. Substituting a deduction

for the foreign tax credit and instituting a shares allocation scheme

without coordination would have the largest effects. Changes in total

tax liabilities are smaller than when behavioral responses are neglected.

It is clear, however, that changes in tax revenues are not the only

importait aspect for evaluating the reforms.

     Tables 8, 9, and 10 present the results of the sensitivity analysis

on the basic response elasticity. Perhaps the most interesting changes

show up in Table 10, when the elasticity is set equal to 1.00. Assets
                                 43



 now change by as much as $—23.963 billion; again, the shares allocation

 regime instituted by the U.S. only shows the largest response. This

 reduction   in overseas investment causes large reductions in tax revenues

 in   the U.S.   and abroad. In fact, these changes are large cnough to

 reverse the direction of change in    total tax revenues; total tax pay-

 ments now fall. Note that U.S. revenues still increase, although the
 change is smaller than with no or more modest response elasticities.

 Similar results hold for the simulations that repeal deferral.

        In sum, the effects on investments now appear to swamp, or

nearly swamp, the effects on total tax revenues. One implication is

that the reforms do more to redistribute revenues from the foreign

governments to the U.S., than they do to increase total tax payments.

        This implication does not apply, of course, to the territorial

treatment simulation, which reduces U.S. tax revenues. Note that

changes in overseas investments are so large that U.S. revenues are

affected even for this reform. Comparing line 5 of Table 10 to the

same line in Tables 5 or 7 shows that the U.S. collects an extra

$4 million as the result of the response in assets. This increase

comes from the small flows of interest payments, royalties, and other

fees paid by the subsidiaries to the parents. These flows are still

part of the income of the parents arid thus are taxed by the U.S.,

even though the subsidiaries' profits are not taxed by the U.S. under

this regime.
                               44




 VI.    Conclusions


        This paper looks at some aspects of U.S. tax policy toward

 multinational corporations. Six basic issues and nine specific re-

 forms are formulated. The INTERSIM computer simulation package is

 used to estimate the effects of these reforms on investment decisions

 and tax liabilities.

        It is important to emphasize the limitations of the analysis.

 First, it is necessary to work with cross—tabulated data, rather than

 with data from individual firms. This fact makes dealing with the

 overall credit limitation somewhat difficult. Perhaps simulation

 of the per—country limitation, which is closely related, is inaccurate

as a result. Further, the difference between the two plans for end-

ing deferral is probably understated, since some of the subsidiaries

with losses are hidden in the cross—tabulation process.

       One could wish for better data, also, on quantities that are not

now involved in the tax calculations but are important to the analysis.

The prime example is assets of foreign subsidiaries. This number is

required on the information returns filed by the corporations; how-

ever, since it does not affect tax liabilities, it is possible that

neither the firms nor the I.R.S. take it very seriously. Biases may

result in the simulations involving shares allocations, since they

depend on assets to set the shares. The simulation of behavioral

responses also relies on assets and may also be faulty. Of course,

it is impossible to measure these biases with the current data.

       Similar problems arise in measuring the special deductions

needed for the 861 regulations regimes. Only a proxy could be used,
                             45



since research and development expenses of the U.S. firms are not

separately listed in the data or in published I.R.S. statistics.

      As is discussed above, the analysis of behavioral responses by

the firms is certainly not complete. Responses in financial de-

cisions are given only summary treatment. Only partial equilibrium

analysis of responses in investment decisions is attempted.

      In sum, this paper extends previous analyses of U.S. taxation

of international income in some ways. It uses data that affords

an improvement since they provide information by industry and by

country. A wider set of issues is examined, particularly in connection

with allocation of income among national tax jurisdictions. Treat-

ment of responses to tax changes in the investment decision of the

firms is begun. However, it is clear that many extensions need to

be done before analysis of these issues is complete.
                                                  TABLE   I
                                                                        j1e/4. ,jc/
                                  I Ul)USTIY   CROW'S AND COUN11 I ES


 A.        Industry_çps
           1.  Food and kindred products
           2. Textile and apparel products
           3.     Lumber and paper products
           4. Printing and publishing
           5.     Chemicals and   a] lied products
           6.    Rubber and miscellaneous plastics prducus
           7.    Stone, clay, and glass products
       8.       Primary metal industries
       9.       Fabricated metal products, except nichinery
      10.       Machinery, except electrical
      11.       Electrical machinery
      12. Motor        vehicles and equi)menr
      13.        Transportation equipment, except motor vehicles
      14. Scientific instruments, photographic equipment, wa tclies, and clocks
      15. Other, including tobacco, furniture, leather, and miscellaneous products


B. Countries
      1. Canada
      2. Mexico
      3.        Argentina
      4. Brazil
      5.  Venezuela
   6.           Belgium
   7.       France
   8.       Italy
   9.       Netherlands
  10.       West Germany
  11.       Spain
  12.       Switzerland
  13. Ijnited Kingdom
  14.      South Africa
  15.      Japan
  16.      Australia
  17.      Other Countries
TABLE    2                SELECTIONS FROM 1972 DATA.




 RESULTS BY INDUSTRY AND COUNTRY   FCR      FOR ASSETS


                CANADA        MEXICO        ARGENTINA    BRAZIL        VENEZUELA       BELGIUM           FRANCE            ITALY             NETHERLNDS
 FOOD PRODS      •1OOE+1O      .2990E+09     .1305E+09    •2225E+09                     •1204Ee09
                                                                        . 1699E+09                        •   5787E +09    . 2379E+09         .2657E0c
 TEXTILES        •3842E+09     .1483E+09     .5301E+06    •3902E+06     • 5800E+08      •T1O1E+08         .6705 E+08       •56'7E+08          .167PE.08
 LMBR,APER       •1855E+1Q     .6701E+f)8   0.            .9440F+O8     • 1598E.08      .1 6OE +09        • 203E +09       • 2160E+09         •1164E.09
 PRINT,DUPI      .',378E+09    .4411E+0B     .1438E+07    •1060F+O6     • 1150E +06     .51 17E 407       •3881E+08          6576E +08        .2953E+C8
 CHEMICALS       •32'.oE+1O    •6280E+09     .2692E+09    .6490E+09     .3025E+09       • 7077E.09        •1033E+10          109 3E.10        .8891E+09
 RUBBER PRO      •4558E+09     •1000E+09     .6347E+QB    .1785E+09     .7901E+08       .212 3E+09        .2 486 E +09     .1127E÷09          •1028E.09
 STONE,CLAY      .6774E+O9     .3620E+O5     •3025E+O6    .8651E+08     • 5140F+08      • 4164E+08        • 92 25 E +08    .5339E+08
 PRIM.METAL                                                                                                                                   •8625E+07
                 .1636E+10     .2273E+09     .6627E+08    .1155E+09     • 105?E+09      • 6750E+08        .6361E+08        .9775E'08          ..6?E+C9
 FABR.METAL      •7868E+09     •8387E+OB     •1378E+08    •4865E+08     • 4322E+08        1427E+09        • 185 7E+09       •   16 77E +09
 MACHINER'r                                                                                                                                   .1611E409
                 .2311E+1O     .3254E+09     •1145E+09    .5652E+09     • 1ô99E+09      .5913E+09           1932E+j0        .1077E+10         •7@1OE.O9
 ELEC.MACH.      •1787E+1O     .2213E+09     •4987E+09    ,2892E+09     • 108 bE +09    •   668 3E +09    • 7547E+0c        • 7917E+09
 MOTOR VEH.                                                                                                                                   .3477€.Oc
                 •4302Ee10     .3194F+09     .4237E+0     •7352E+09       1967E + 09    .1203E+09         .1093t+10         •2826E+09         •3093E+09
 AIRCRAFT        •1575E+IQ     .2486E+08     .1346E+0B    •4373E408       3426E+07      .1 501E #08       •2752E+09         • 7053E +08       •36'.1E+08
 SCIENTIFIC      •3575E+09     •5648E+08     •2479E+08    .757E#O8      • 1198E+08      .6217E+08         .7760E+09         • 3047E+09
 OTHER MANU                                                                                                                                   •2305E+C9
                 •4647E+09     •2853E+O8     •2064E+08    .1515E+O      .8153E.08       .429 SE +08       • 3385E.08        .2225 E + 08      .3806E'C8
 TOT CNTRYI      •2168E+11     .2608F410     .1724E+1O    •3191E+1O     . 1409E+10      .305 1E+L0        • 7379E+10          4649E+L0        .3681E+10

                W. GERMANY    SPAIN         SWITZERIND   U. KINGDOM    S. AFRICA       JAPAN             AUSTRALIA         ALL OTHER         TOT.   INDL.JS

 FOOD PRODS      •4479E+09     .7984E+Ob     .1350E+09    .1249E+1O     .6633E+08       •16€7E+09         •4572E+09         •1506E+10         •7533E+10
 TEXTILES        •1001E+09    0.             .6434E+08    .1'.89E+09    •3885E+07      0.                 .2783E+0d         .2681E+09         •1507E.10
 LMBR,PAPER      .1173E+09     •4704E+O8     .2349E+08    .3202E+09     .1959E+08      0.                 •1181E+09         .6081E+09         .3990E.1C
 PRINT,PUBL      .2954E+08     .1159E+08     .2470E408    .1560E.09     .6805E+07       .2S11E+08         •761E+O8          .6798E+08         .1019E.10
 CHEMICALS       .1163E+1O     .3202E+09     .1309E+10    •1742E+10     .1452E+09       .2619E+09         .6771E+09         .349',E10         •1793E.11
 RUBBER PRO      .1640E+09    0.             .1321E+09    .3403E+09     .5793E+O6      0.                 .118'.E+09        •8473Es09         .3213E+jO
 STONE,CLAY      .2458E+09     .1344E408     •028E+08     .1340E+09    0.               •7733E+07         .2252E+08         .2576€t09         .1757E+10
 PPIM.METAL      .2345F+09    0.             .4689L#08    .3790E+09     .1230E+08       .3879E.08         •1199E+1O         •1105E+10         .741E.10
 FABR.METAL      .4fl64E+09    .Z1Z7E+OB     .8608E+08    .3212E+09     .1758E+08       .5107E+O7         .9047E408         .38A4E+09         .2966E#10
 MACHINERY       •2088E+1O     •2763E+09     .8444E+09    •2718E+1O     .2301E+09       .8812E+09         .66OE+09          .185'.E+10        .1742E+11
 ELEC.MACH.      •1750E+10     .4519E+09     .5485E+09    .210E+10      •1028E+09       .8487E+08         .2764E+09         •1805E+1O         .1259E.11
 MOTOR VEH.      .2612F#1O     .2540E+09     .3099E+09    .1366E+10     .3118E+09       •2393E+08         .11'i6E+10        .1154E+10         •149eE.11
 AIRCRAFT        .2085E+09     .1224E+oe     •5964E+OB    .5318E409     .3451E+07       .4480E+06         .2138E+09         .4515E+0Q         .3539E.1O
 SCIENTIFIC      •3992F+09     •4666E+08     .1570E+O9    •7910F+09     •2956E+O        •331E+O8          .1504E+09         .4542E+09         .00SE.10
 OTHER MANU      .1544€+09     •1610E+08     •2689E+09    .1436E+09    0.               .2380E+08         •2020E+09         •4995E+09         .2056E.10
 TOT CNTRYI      •1012E411     •1553E+10     .4040F+10    •1244E+11     •1009E+10       •1556E+10             •5'.06E+10    •1476E+j1         •1003E+12




              RESULTS FROM INTERSIM COMPUTER SIMULATION PACKAGE.
              ALL QUANTITIES ARE IN 1972 DOLLARS.
              FEBRUARY 15, 1981.
TABLE     3
                          SELECTIONS FROM 1972 DATA.



RESULTS BY INDUSTRY AND COUNTRY FOR:
                                           FOR TX INC


                 CANADA       MEXICO       ARGENTiNA     BRAZIL       VENEZUELA      BELGZLM             FRANCE             ITALY              NETHERINDS
FOOD PROr)S       .2041E+oc    .1233E+o8
TEXTILES                                    •3400E+07     .21E.O5      •1586F+08
                  •2307E+O8    .4732E+07                                              .1291E+Q$           • 3679E +08        •   1730E+05
LMBR,PAPEP                                  •5622E+o7    —.2316E.O7    •1179E+07      • 8080E +07
                                                                                                                                                .3400E+os
                  •1304E+09    •1267E.Q8                                                                  • 8636 E+0 7       •   8586E+Q6
PPINT,PUBL                                                .1963E+08    •4751E+07      • 414 2€ +07
                                                                                                                                                .3152E.Q7
                  .3709E+08    •2556F+07   —.1243E+06                                                     •5518E.O8              30 37 E +07
CHEMICALS                                                 .3545E+07        .5j9E05    • 1149E+37
                                                                                                                                                •1207E+08
                  •2775E+09    •1026E+Og    .2068E+oa                                                     • 7228 E +07       •2160E.07          •4400E+07
RUBBER PRO        .4566E.Oe                               •480E+o8     .3169E+O8      • 7225E .08
                               •1640E+Os    .1559E+08                                                       1436E.09         • 1546E.Oc
STONE,CLAY        .7880E+05                               .3757E+08    •1181E+Q8      .421 7E +07
                               •1931E+07                                                                  • 7595E+07         •   '.328E+07
PRIM.METAL                                  .3706E+07     .6237E+07    .82?6E+07       6291 E+07                                                •4683E+07
                  .5290E+O8                 .1b11E+07                                                     • 1067E+08
                                                                                                                             .2312E+07
FABR.METAL                                                .7656E+06    .3228E+07      .9249E+06           •
                                                                                                                                               —.8146E+o5
                  •9178E+O8    •5619E+07    .11b0E+o7                                                         62 23 E. 07    . 3853E+07
MACHINERY                                                 .8957E+07    .1170E+07      .61 40E+07                                                •1308E.O
                  •3004E+0c    •2243E+08    .7216E+07                                                     •2184E+08          .82o5.Q7           •1399F+05
ELEC.MACH.                                                •5571E+08    .2870E+O8      .6741E+08
                  •1705E+0Q    .325CE+O5    •6915E+07                                                     .3290E+09          • 1420E,09
MOTOR yEN.        •5551E+09                               .1981E+oB    •1524E+oe      .4208E+OB
                               •1487E+o8   —.3361E+06     •6694E+08                                       •5535E+o8          • 3380E 408        .1365E.0e
AIRCRAFT          .1169E+09                                            .1093E+03      • 1164E+08
                                                                                                          .59?3E+08
                               •2741E+07    •6593E+06     •9861E+07                                                          • 1658 E +05       .4260E+08
SCIENTIFIC        .1052E+Oq    •15cE+O                                 •1995E+oo      .8 14 7E +06        .2333E+08          .5279E+07
OTHER MANU                                  •2304E+07     •9663E+o8    .5929E+o7      • 991 6E+08
                                                                                                                                                .2550E+06
                  .3925E.08    .2223E+07    •3751E+0b                                                     .5547E.08          • 5222E+08         .4393E05
TOT CNTRYI        .2229E.1O                              —.7129E+06    •1125E+O8      . 31 1 6 E + 0 7    •1094E+07
                               .2576E+0c    •6878E.O8     •3971E+09                                                            232 SE +06       .1821E+07
                                                                       •1501E+Q9                          .82 17E+09         • '468E +09
                                                                                                                                                •3879E+09
                 W. GERMANY   SPAIN        SWITZERLND    U. KINGDOM   S. AFRICA      JAPAN               AUSTRALIA          ALL OTHER          TOT.   INOUS
FOOD PRODS        •9248E+0e    •1022E.os    .111E+07     •1039E+O9     .5944E+07
TExTILFS          .1556E+07   O                                                       •7369E.O8           •3565E.08          .963CE+08
LMBR,PAPEP                                  .5397E+06    .1104E+08     .1822E+o6     0.                                                         •7864E+og
                  .2644E+o8    •9609E.O7    •5694E+07    •5941E+08                                        •4274E+07          .1905E+08          .8821E+08
RINT,DUPL         •3604E+07                                            .2805E+07     0.                   •366bE+oe
                               .1600E+07    •4412E+07    .2120E408     •1122E+07                                             •3868E.o8          .4212E+0c
CHEMICALS         .1826E+0c    •4928E+05                                              .1952E+0o           •4607E+07         —.1232E.07
RUBBER PRO                                  •7914E+O8    .1966E+oc     .2274E+O5      •4829E+O8                                                 •9346E+08
                 —.8280E+07   0.            .2139E+07                                                     .7609E+o5          .2365E+o9          •1829E+1O
STflNE,CLAY                                              .7820E.07     .1141E+o8     0.
                  .1987E+0     •8368E+O6    •432'.E+07   •5842E+09                                        •4944EQ7           .71618+08          .2395E.09
PRIM.METAL                                                            0.              •4900E+06          •1819E+07
                  .57158+07   0.            .2o9E+o7                                                                         .9667E+07          .73938+09
FABR.METAL                                               .20908+08     •1906E+07      •651+Q7
                  •5045E+08    •4030F+o7    •5212E+07                                                    .8663E.08                              .27466+09
MACHINERY         •474E,O9                               .28398+08     .30248+07      .51058+06          .96198+07
                               .51158+08    .1295E+09    •2948E+09     .20678+08                                             •2264E+O5          .28286+09
ELEC.MACH.        .20178+09    .50926+08                                              .22428+09          .7013E.o8           .2202E+09          .25656+10
MOTOR yEN.                                  •3571E+oB    •1456E+09     .3554E+07      .20998+08
                  .321F+0c    —.1144E+07    •2308E+o8    •3322E+08                                       •2256E+O8           .14118+09          .10128+10
AIRCRAFT          .96068+07                                           —.1366E+o8      .15758+07          .79466+08
                               •1415F+O7    .5128E.07    .1329E+Q8     •4960E+O6                                             .4831E+oa          .12778+10
SCIENTIFIC        .700SE+0e    .91576+07                                              .11928+05          .23758+08           .2117E.od          .23448+09
OTHER MANU                                  .19608+08    .12138+09     .10368+08      •785E+O7
                  •1087E+o8    •1635E+07    .49848+08                                                    •4958E.08           •568E+o8           .82166.oc
TOT CNTRYz                                               .18378+08    0.              •2437E+07
                  •1482E+1o                                                                              .37408+06




              RESULTS FROM INTERSIM COMPUTER SIMULATION
              ALL QUANTITIES ARE IN 1972 DOLLARS.       PACXAGE.
              FEBRUARY 15, 1951.
TABLE    4                SELECTIONS FROM 1972 DATA.




 RESULTS BY INDUSTRY AND COUNTRY FCR*        FOR TAXES


                CANADA         MEXICC        ARGENTINA        BRAZIL        VENEZUELA     BELGIUM       FRANCE        I   TALY        NETHERLNDS
 FOOD PRODS      .9605E+OB      .1705E+08     .3732E+07        .6179E+07     .586E+O7      .4267E+07     .1719E+08        .1159E+08    .1369E+08
 TEXTILES        .1209E÷OP      .2600E+07     .1900E+07        .3b9E+Oô      .1759E+O7     .'.22E+O7     .'t230E+07       .1ô7E+O7     .1295E407
 LMBR,PAPER      .5273E+08      .7037E.07    0.                .4924E+07     .1280E+07     .1507€+07     .1122E+08        .1Q6E+O7     .'.36E.O7
 PRINT,PUBL      .1840E+06      .1'.37E+07    .1OQOE+Ob        .ô'sO3E+05    73'5.         .4'.25E+Ob    .3240E407        .1597E+07    .fl37E+07
 CHEMICALS       .1333E+09      .5950E+08     .1154E+OB        .1858E+08     .1322E+08     .2814E+08     .7'.9E+OB        .47c2E'08    .4005Ee08
 RUBBER PRO      .2371+O8       .987E+O7      .t272E+07        .1'O2E+08     .5808E+07     .1045E+O1     .32b3E+07        .1613E.07    .2393E+O7
 STONE,CLAY      .3074E+O8      .lb8lE+07     .18',9E+07       .1232E.07     .3322E+07     .2417EO7      .'83E+O7         .1098E+07    .386E+O6
 PRIM.METAL      .3122E+O6      .3177E+07     .12'2E+O7        .1703E+07     .1201E+OT     .9536E+Ob     .3oe3E+o7        .Z3'4E+O7    .3540E'07
 FABR.METAL      .''.9E+O8      .4225E+07     .b71E+O          .3188E'07     .13'.5E+Ob    .2006E+07     .7597E+07        .842E+O7     .8103E+O7
 MACHINERY       .1543E+09      .1457E+08     .4085E+07        .1700E+08     .1251E+O8     .24OE+O8      .I4E',EO9        .8025E+OB    .5737E+08
 ELEC.MACH.      .791'E+OB      •2002E+OB     .3329E+07        .3883E+07     .738E+Q7      .1BOBE+08     .2145E+O8        .2515E+08    .ce82E÷07
 MOTOR VEH.      .2690E+09      .9107E+07     .3801E+O7        .2639E+07     .813E+O7      .5492E+07     .2700E#O5        .9740E+07    .152'E+O8
 AIRCRAFT        .4795E+06      .1636EO7      .50P6E+06        .3744E+O7     .1771E+06     .5290E+06     .7937E+07        .2759E+O?    .19'E+O6
 SCIENTIFIC      .bOlbE+08      .1321E.O      .1895E+07        .8973E+OB     .647E+O7      .83Ot.+O8     .3122E+O8        .2ôcOE+08    .2015E+O6
 OTHER MANU      .1701E+08      .1'13E+O7     .436'E+O         .5073E+O5     .4805E+07     .18?4E+07     .9920E+Oo        .827E.O      .214E4O
 TOT CNTRYi      .1091E+1O      .1b67E+09     •4176€+08        .1b93E+09     .6971E+OB     .17BZE+09     .35c2E+09        .2182E+09    .1783E.09

                W.   GERMANY   SPAIN         SWITZERLND       U. KINGDOM    S. AFRICA     JAPAN         AUSTRALIA     ALL OTHER       TOT. INDLS
 FOOD PRC5       .3907E+06      .'.387E+07    .5550E+07        .4112E+08     .3072E+07     .3344E+08     .1913E+O3        .334CE+OB    .3575E+09
 TEXTILES        .1O9E+O7      0.             .311iE+O         .5036E+O7     .'.445E+05   0.             .1957Es07        .4318E+07    ..31IE+O8
 LMBP,PAPFR      .I52E+OB       .3017E+07     .13OeE+07        .1893E+OB     .1927E+07    0.             .1077E+08        .1924E+08    •155bE+09
 PRINT,PUBL      .2265F+07      .5923E+06     .1396E+07        .9820E+07     .3474E+(Th    .1841E÷O6     .137E+O?         .1OZIE+07    .4351E+08
 CHEMICALS       .7713E+08      .1510E+08     .23OE+O6         .7471E+08     .1054E+08     .2475E+08     .3743E+O8        .9485E+O8    .7777E+09
 RUBBER PPD      .2OO4E+O      0.             .593',E+fl6      .3345E+O7     .5065E+O7    0.             .25'sOE+07       .3O'2E+O8    .1103E+C9
 STCNE,CLAY      .1007E+08      44b2.         .9638E+O6        .29'.6E+09   0.             .3358E+06     .B647E+O         .2771E+07    .357?E.09
 PRIM.METAL      .21E+07       0.             .6109E+O6        .8205E+07     .8846E+O6     .3122E407     .1805E+O8        .2271E+08    .1042E+C9
 FABR.METAI      .2393E+O8      .9798E+Oô         .7971E+0     .1332E+08     .1487E+07     .228E+O6      .4543E+07        .3O1E+O7     .1282E.C9
 MACHINERY       .2'3OE+09      .1945E÷Ob         .3583E+OB    .1550E+09     .1173E+O9     .9675E+OB     .4080E+08        .95QE+O8     .1211E+1C
 ELEC.MACH.      .7497E408      .l89E+08          .1118E+OB    .6629E+08     .1834E+07     •1035E+08     •1OB1E+OB        •O97E+O8     .24OE4OQ
 MOTOR VEH.      .1796E+09      .17's7E+07        .6756E+07    .151'E+O8     .5151E+Ob     ,1571E+Oô     .38OE+O8         .2583E+08    .61E.O9
 AIRCRAFT        .31'4E+07      .5811E÷06         .145E+07     .B5'BE+O7     .22'dE+Oo     7870.         ,27OE+O7         .8123E+07    .cz7bE408
 SCIENTIFIC      .'225E+08      .2e97E+Q7         .7?87EO7     .8915E+08     .BBQBE+07     .3726E+07     .3991E.O6        .3722E+06    .5818E+09
 OTHER MANU      .5559E+07       .91O3E+O         .1b96E+08    .7870E+07    0.             .1881E+Ob     .2201E.08        .4430E+07    .E5OCE+08
 TOT CNTRYI      .7199E+09       .815E+08         .116E+09     .8111E+09     .456E.O8      .1732E+09     .2522E+O9        .4295E+09    .5067E•1O




              RESULTS FROM INTERSIM COMPUTER SIMULATION PACKAGE.
              ALL DUANTITIES ARE IN 1972 DOLLARS.
              FEBRUARY 15, 1981.
                                                           Table 5


                                       Simulation Results No Behavioral
                                                                        Response

                                                   Change in         Change in     Change in     Change in
                                                   Assets of         U.S. Tax      Foreign Tax   Total Tax
                                                   Foreign           Liabilities   Liabilities   Liabilities
                                                                        .

                                                   Subsidiaries                                  .




A.   Changes From 1972 Data
     1.   Baseline Simulation                          —                +96             —
                                                                                                     +97
B.   Changes from Baseline Simulation
     2.   Per     Country Limitation                   —                                —
                                                                        +70                          +69
     3.   Repeal Deferral, Complete Payout             —                                —
                                                                        +344                         +344
     4.   Repeal Deferral, Consolidation               —                                —
                                                                        +354                         +354
     5.   Territorial Treatment                        —                                —
                                                                        —815                         —815
     6.   Deduction For Foreign Taxes                  —                                —
                                                                        +1,366                       +1,365
     7.   Shares Allocation, Worldwide                 —
                                                                        +2,387        —1,842         +544
     8.   Shares Allocation, By U.S. Only              —                                —
                                                                        +2,059                       +2,058
     9.   861 Allocation, Sales and Assets Used        —                                —
                                                                        +888                         +888
                                                       —                                —
     10. 861 Allocation, Assets Only       Used                         +922                         +921

          Note:    In Millions of 1972 Dollars.
                                  Table 6

                    Foreign Tax Revenues, By Country


                   From 1972           With Shares     Change
                     data              Allocation

 Canada              1,091                   737.1     —353.9
Mexico               166.7                  127.3      —39.4
Argentina            41.38                  38.55      —2.83
Brazil               169.3                  68.06      —101.24
Venezuela            69.71                  50.86      —18.85
Belgium              178.2                  86.87      —91.33
France               359.2                  247.5      —111.7
Italy                218.2                  142.3      —75.9
Netherlands          178.3                  113.8      —64.5
West Germany         719.9                  389.9      —333.0
Spain                68.15                  44.27      —23.88
Switzerland          114.6                  79.77      —34.83
United Kingdom       811.1                  409.8      —401.3
South Africa        46.56                   36.94      —9.62
Japan               173.2                   61.23      —111.97
Australia           252.2                   181.7      —70.5
Other               429.5                   434.5      +5.0




  Note: In Millions of 1972 Dollars.
                                                     Table   7

                                                Simulation Results

                                                Elasticity       0.15

                                                     Change in          Change in     Change in     Change in
                                                     Assets of          U.S. Tax      Foreign Tax   Total Tax
                                                     Foreign            Liabilities   Liabilities   Liabilities
                                                     Subsidiaries


A.    Changes From 1972 Data
      1.   Baseline Simulation                        —100               +96          —4            +91
2.    Changes from Baseline Simulation
      2.   Per Country Limitation                     —30               +69           —2            +68
      3.   Repeal Deferral, Complete Payout           —1,594            +314          —66           +249
      4.   Repeal Deferral, Consolidation             —1,594            +322          —66           +257
      5.   Territorial Treatment                     +800               —815          +40             774
      6.   Deduction for Foreign Taxes               —2,221             +1,314        —169          +1,146
      7.   Shares Allocation, Worldwide               —852              +2,353        —1,845        +509
      8.   Shares Allocation, By U.S. Only           —4,351             +1,777        —408          +1,370
      9.   861 Allocation, Sales and Assets Used
                                                     —1,644             +860          —106          +755
     10.   861 Allocation, Assets only Used
                                                     —1,650             +895          —103          +793



           Note: In Millions of 1972 Dollars.
                                                    Table 8
                                               Simulation Results

                                               Elasticity =   0.05

                                                    Change in        Change in     Change in     Change in
                                                    Assets of        U.S. Tax      Foreign Tax   Total Tax
                                                    Foreign          Liabilities   Liabilities   Liabilities
                                                    Subsidiaries


A.   Changes From 1972 Data
     1.    Baseline Simulation                       —30              +96           —1            +95

B.   Changes from Baseline Simulation
     2.    Per Country Limitation                    —10              +70            1            +69
     3.    Repeal Deferral, Complete Payout          —537             +334          —22           +312
     4.    Repeal Deferral, Consolidation            —537             +343          —22           +321
     5.    Territorial Treatment                     +270             —815          +13           -802

     6.    Deduction for Foreign Taxes               —749             +1,348        —57           +1,291
      7.    Shares Allocation, Worldwide             —289             +2,375        —1,844        +531
      8.    Shares Allocation, By U.S. Only          —1,484           +1,964        —143          +1,821
      9.    861 Allocation, Sales And Assets Used    —554             +879          —36           +843
     10.    861 Allocation, Assets Only Used         —556             +913           35           +878




           Note:   In Millions of 1972 Dollars.
                                                      Table   9

                                                Simulation Results

                                                Elasticity =      0.50

                                                     Change in           Change in     Change in
                                                     Assets of                                       Change in
                                                                         U.S. Tax      Foreign Tax   Total Tax
                                                     Foreign             Liabilities   Liabilities   Liabilities
                                                     Subsidiaries

A.    Changes From 1972 Data
      1.     Baseline Simulation                      —332               +94            —15           +79
B.    Changes From Baseline Simulation
      2.     Per Country Limitation                  —125                +69             —6           +63
      3.     Repeal Deferral, Complete Payout        —5,122              +248           —213          +35
      4.     Repeal Deferral, Consolidation          —5,122              +258            —213         +45
      5.     Territorial Treatment
                                                     +2,692              —813           +136           677
      6.     Deduction for Foreign Taxes             —7,126              +1,202         —536          +688
      7.     Shares Allocation, Worldwide
                                                     —2,656              +2,302         —1,823        +479
      8.     Shares Allocation, By U.S. Only
                                                     —13,395             +1,249         —1,190        +59
      9.     861 Allocation, Sales and Assets Used
                                                     —5,282              +801           —338          +462
     10.     861 Allocation, Assets Only Used
                                                     —5,311              +838           —330          +508

     Note:     In Millions of 1972 Dollars.
                                                   Table 10
                                              Simulation Results

                                              Elasticity =    1.00

                                                   Change in         Change in     Change in     Change in
                                                   Assets of         U.S. Tax      Foreign Tax   Total Tax
                                                   Foreign           Liabilities   Liabilities   Liabilities
                                                   Subsidiaries                              .




A.    Changes From 1972 Data
      1.   Baseline Simulation                       —662             +92           —30           +62
B.    Changes From Baseline Simulation
      2.   Per Country Limitation                    —247             +63           —12           +56
      3.   Repeal Deferral, Complete Payout                           +163
                                                     —9,707                         —406          -243
      4.   Repeal Deferral, Consolidation                             +176
                                                     —9,707                         —406          —230
      5.   Territorial Treatment                                      —811
                                                     +5,492                        +278            533
      6.   Deduction for Foreign Taxes               —13,489          +1,062        —1,008        +54
      7.   Shares Allocation, Worldwide              —4,671           +2,330        —1,667        +663
      8.   Shares Allocation, By U.S. Only                            +682
                                                     —23,936                        —2,348        —1,318
      9.   861 Allocation, Sales and Assets Used                      +723          —639
                                                     —10,016                                      +84
     10.   861 Allocation, Assets Only Used          —10,092          +763          —626          +137




      Note:   In Millions of 1972 Dollars.
                                                    Daniel J. Frisch




                                   APPENDIX


                  MARGINAL TAX RATES ON DOMESTIC ACTIVITIES:
                                 TWO EXAMPLES




              This appendix points out that international aspects of U.S.
        law may affect purely domestic activities of U.S. multinational cor-
       porations. Specifically, the marginal corporate tax rate on debt—

        financial capital is examined. It is well—known that this tax rate is

       zero for a completely domestic firm.18 o simple examples are pre-

       sented to show that this rate can differ from zero for a multi-

       national firm even on its domestic activities.19

             Consider a firm with investments as listed in lines 1. through 4.,

       column (1), of Table A.l. Total investment in the U.S. is $2000, of

       which half is debt financed.    Investment abroad, which for simplicity

       involves only one foreign country, equals $1000, and is all equity

       financed. What happens if the firm undertakes a new investment project

       at home, and uses debt to finance it? Column (2) displays the results

       after a $1000 project of this type is undertaken (the size is im—

       material for the conclusions to follow).
MG1E         Assume that the return to capital equals 10 percent worldwide.

       Also, the worldwide interest rate is set equal to this rate by competition.

       Then the extra return to capital (in line 5.) will be offset by the

       extra interest expenses (in line 6.). If these expenses are deductible,

       taxable income is unchanged (in line 7.). A purely domestic firm

       would therefore find its tax liability unchanged. The project would

       engender no increase in taxes; thus, debt financed capital would be
                               A2


 untaxed at the corporate level. A similar result would hold for a

 multinational company facing a pure foreign tax credit mechanism

 based on arm's length principles.

       Injection of shares allocation principles can alter this result,

 however. To see this, consider the simplest form of a shares allo—

 cation regime, with complete coordination worldwi(e and uith only one

 factor, assets, used in the allocation formula.

       The allocation share (in line 8.) changes as the structure of

 assets changes. The result is that less income is allocated to the

 foreign government (in line 9.) and, implicitly, more to the U.S.

 The first effect is that taxes paid to the foreign government (line

 10.) fall.

       This fall in taxes abroad is partially made up by a rise in taxes

in the U.S. Note that it is assumed, for simplicity, that the firm

does not defer any foreign income. In this example, the foreign tax

rate, 60 percent, exceeds the U.S. rate, 46 percent. Therefore, the

extra taxes at home do not fully offset the drop in taxes abroad.

Lines 11. through 15. show this. Tax paid to the U.S. equals total

income times 46 percent (line 11.) minus foreign income times 46

percent (line 13.), since the credit limitation applies. Since foreign

income is lower, taxes paid to the U.S. (line 15.) increase. However,

line 16. shows that total taxes paid by the firm   decrease.
      In sum, total taxes paid by the firm fall by $2.20. Since re-

turn to capital rises by $100, there is an Implied subsidy rate to

capital of 2.2 percent. Although this result is highly sensitive to
                                         A3




         the assumptions, particularly relative U.S. and foreign tax rates,

         it is clear that the marginal tax rate on a purely debt financed,

         purely domestic project is not identically zero.

               The 861 regulations issued in 1977 mention some aspects of the

         shares allocation approach, as is discussed in the paper. Table A.2

         presents a simple example of how these aspects can affect the marginal

         tax rate on the same type of project. Lines 1. through 7. of this table

   i2    reintroduce   the experiment.
4G1-          The first difference between the tables is in computation of

        foreign taxable income, in lines 8. and 9. The arm's length approach

        is to be used for the basic allocation of incomes in this tax regime.

        Thus foreign gross income and deductions are computed separately, and

        foreign taxable income derived from them. Given the competitive assump-

        tions made here, and the assumption that no debt is used for foreign

        capital, foreign taxable income is simply equal to marginal product

        of foreign capital. Since this capital does not change, neither foreign

        taxable income (in line 9.) nor tax paid abroad (in line 10.) change.

              The only aspect of taxes that is affected by the project is the

        foreign tax credit, computed in lines 13. through 17. Specifically,

        a speci1 allocation of interest expenses, which are part of head—

        office charges, is required. Line 13. displays the allocation share;

        as in Table A.l, it declines from 0.33 to 0.25. Interest expenses,

        however, increase as a result of the project. Therefore, the required

        allocation (in line 14.) rises. Foreign tax base to be used in the

        credit limitation (line 15.) falls, and thus the limitation (line 16.)
                              A4


falls. Since the limitation applies in this example, foreign tax

credits (line 17.) fall, and taxes paid to the U.S. (line 18.) rise.

      In sum, the project affects total taxes paid, even though neither

domestic nor foreign taxable incomes are affected. As long as the firm

is in a situation where the credit limitation applies, requiring the

allocation of interest deductions will reduce foreign tax credits

and raise total taxes paid. Thus, U.S. multinational corporations in

this situation will face a positive marginal tax rate on purely domes-

tic, purely debt—financed investments. In this example, total tax

rises by $7.80, so that the marginal tax rate on a project of this

type is 7.8 percent.
                           TABLE A.l

                  EXAMPLE OF SHARES ALLOCATION



                                                   (1)     (2)

I.     Capital Stocks
       1. Domestic, equity financed                1000    1000
       2. Domestic, debt financed                  100()   2000
       3. Foreign (equity financed)                1000    11)00
       4. Total capital                            3000    4000
II.    Taxable Income
       5. Return to capital, 4. x 0.10              300     400
       6. Interest expense, 2. x 0.10               100     200
       7. Taxable income, 5. — 6.                   200     200
III. Taxes Paid
       8. Allocation share, 3.   4.                0.33    0.25
       9. Foreign taxable income, 7. x 8.            66      50
      10. Tax paid to foreign gov., 9. x 0.60      39.6    30.0
      11. U.S. tax before credit, 7. x 0.46          92      92
      12. Potential foreign tax credit, 10.        39.6    30.0
      13. Credit limitation, 9. x 0.46             30.4    23.0
      14. Foreign tax credit, lesser of            30.4    23.0
          12., 13.
      15. Tax paid to U.s., 11. — 14.              61.6    69.0
      16. Total taxes paid, 10. + 15.             101.2    99.0

IV.    Marginal Tax Rate on Return to Capital
      17. Change in tax, from 16.                          —2.2
      18. Change in return to capital, from 5.              100
      19. Marginal tax (subsidy) rate, 16. - 17            —2.2%
                            TABLE A.2

              EXAMPLE OF ASPECTS OF 861 REGULATIONS



                                                   (1)     (2)
 I.    Capital Stocks
       1. Domestic, equity financed               1000    1000
       2. Domestic, debt financed                 1000    2000
       3. Foreign (equity financed)               1000    1000
       4. Total capital                           3000    4000
II.    Taxable Income
       5. Return to capital, 4. x 0.10             300     400
       6. Interest expense, 2. x 0.10             _lO0     200
       7. Taxable income, 5. — 6.                  200     200
III. Taxes Paid
       8. Foreign return to equity, 3. x 0.10    100       100
       9. Foreign taxable income, 8.             100       100
      10. Tax paid to foreign gov., 9. x 0.60     60        60
      11. U.S. tax before credit, 7. x 0.46       92        92
      12. Potential foreign tax credit, 10.       60        60
      13. Allocation share, 3. - 4.             0.33      0.25
      14. Allocation of "headoffice charges",     33        50
          6. x 13.
      15. Foreign base for limitation, 9. — 14.   67        50
      16. Credit limitation, 15. x 0.46         30.8      23.0
      17. Foreign tax credit, lesser of         30.8      23.0
        • 12., 16.
      18. Tax paid to U.S., 11. — 17.             61.2    69.0
      19. Total taxes paid, 10. + 18.            121.2   129.0
IV.    Marginal Tax Rate on Return to Capital
      20. Change in tax, from 19.                         7.8
      21. Change in return to capital, from 5.           100
      22. Marginal tax rate, 20. - 21.                   7.8%
                                             Daniel J. Frisch




                            FOOTNOTES


 1.    Bergsten, Horst, and Moran (1978),p. vii.

 2.    Treas. Reg. 1.861—8, T.D. 7456, 1977—C, I.R.S. 6.

 3.    Recent simulation studies of international taxation include

      Bergsten, Horst, and Moran (1978), Chapter 6 and Appendix B, and

      Hufbauer and Foster (1976).


 4.   The 861 regulations are examined in Bergsten, Horst, and Moran

      (1978), Chapter 6. Musgrave (1973) and Surrey (1978) discuss

      more general questions but do not conduct revenue simulations.


5.    This description is, of course, highly oversimplified. McDaniel

      and Ault (1977) provides an overview of these issues.


6.    Feldstein and Hartman (1977), Horst (1980), and Dutton (1980) are

      examples of works that consider welfare implications.


7.    OIl—related activities must now use the per—country limitation;

      note that no oil—related industries are included in the simula-

      tions. In 1972, firms could choose the per—country limitation,

      but few did so.


8.    The numbers are computed from I.R.S., Statistics of Income, 1968—

      1977, Controlled Foreign Corporations, p. 93, and I.R.S., Statistics

      of Income, 1968—1972, Foreign Tax Credit, p. 77.


9.    Note that zY Is greater than actual dividends paid.     It equals

      actual dividends "grossed up" to reflect pretax profits of the

      subsidiaries.
        In 1972, U.S. firms did not have to "gross up" dividends received

        from less developed countries; the formulas are slightly dif-

        ferent for this income.


 10.   McDaniel and Ault (1977), Chap. 8, Nusgrave (1973), Surrey

        (1978). As an example, see Treas. Reg. l.482—l(b)(1), T.D. 6952,

       1968—7, C.B. 218.


11.    Musgrave (1973), Surrey (1978).

12.    Musgrave (1973), McLure (1980).

13.    McDaniel and Ault (1977), Chapter 8.


14.    Treas. Reg. l—861—8(e)(2), T.D. 7456, 1977—6, I.R.B. 6.

15.    For more information on this data, see Frisch (1980) and I.R.S.

       S tat is   tic s   of Income,   1968-1972, Controlled Foreig   nCoiporati

       Section      2, "Explanation of Terms."

16.    For examples, see Mervyn King, Public Policy and the Corporation

       (Haistead Press, N.Y., 1977), D. Bradford and R. Gordon, "Taxation

       and Corporate Finance," Princeton Univ. Financial Research Center

       Memo 31 (Jan., 1980), and N. Feldstein and J. Green, "Why Do

       Companies Pay Dividends?" NBER Working Paper 413 (December 1979).


17.    This process for computing marginal tax rates embodies all of

       the assumptions made up to this point. Frisch (1980), containing

       the empirical work, makes different assumptions about financial

       decisions and therefore uses different measures of the marginal

       tax rates. It would be interesting to rerun the empirical
      analysis using marginal tax rates as computed here; before

      this could be done, however, INTERSIM would have to be extended

      to include 1968 tax law and data.


18.   See Stiglitz (1973).

19.   For a more formal analysis of similar issues, see Frisch (1979).
                                                  Daniel J. Frisch



                               Bibliography



Bergsten, C. Fred, Thomas Horst, and Theordore H. Moran (1978).

          American Multinationals and American   Interests. Washington:
          Brookings Institution.



Dutton, John (1980). Optimal Taxation of International Investment

          Income. North Carolina State Univ. Working Paper.



Feldstein, Martin and David Hartman (1977). The Optimal Taxation of

          Foreign Source Investment Income. Harvard Institute of Economic

          Research, Discussion Paper No. 563.



Frisch, Daniel (1980). U.S. Multinational Companies, Taxation, and

          Technology: An Empirical Analysis.



_______    (1979).   Multinational Companies, Endogenous Innovation, and

          International Tax Policy.



Horst, Thomas (1980). A Note on the Optimal Taxation of International

          Investment Income. Quarterly Journal of Economics 94: 793—98.



Hufbauer, Gary and David Foster (1976). U.S. Taxation of Undistributed

          Income of Controlled Foreign Corporations. In United States

          Dept. of Treasury, Essays in International Taxations: 1976.

          Washington: Government Printing Office.
Internal Revenue Service (1977). Statistics of Income, 1972, Coiporations.

         Washington: Government Printing Office.



______   (1979).   Statistics of Income, 1968—1972, Foreign Tax Credit.

         Washington: Coy. Printing Office.



______   (1979).   Statistics of Income, 1968—1972, U.S. Corporations

         and Their Controlled Foreign Corporations. Washington:

         Coy. Printing Office.



McDaniel, Paul R. and Hugh J. Ault (1977). Introduction to U.S.

         International Taxation. Deventer, Neth.: Kiuwer.



NcLure, Charles E. (1980). The State Income Tax: Lambs in Wolves'

         Clothing. In Henry J. Aaron and Michael J. Boskin, eds.,

         Economics of Taxation. Washington: Brookings Institution.



Musgrave, Peggy B. (1973). International Tax Base Division and the

         Multinational Corporation. Public Finance: 394—411.



National Science Foundation (1978). Research and Development in

         Industry 1975. Survey of Science Resources Series. Washington:

         Gov. Printing Office.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1973). Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy,

        and the Cost of Capital. Journal of Public Economics

        2:1: 1—34.



Surrey, Stanley S. (1978). Reflections on the Allocation of Income and

        Expenses Among National Tax Jurisdictions. Law and Policy

        in International Business 10:2: 409—460.
