NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF TAXATION
WITH ENDOGENOUS FINANCIAL BEHAVIOR

Joel Slemrod

Working Paper No. 799

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

November 1981

This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on Behavioral
Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, January 25—27, 1981,
Palm Beach. I would like to acknowledge helpful comments on an
earlier draft from Daniel Frisch and Don Fullerton, and able
research assistance from Richard Rogerson. Financial assistance
was provided by NBER and a University of Minnesota Faculty Research
Grant. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Taxation and project in Tax Simulation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER CONFEPENCE

Papers Available from the Conference on
SIMULATION METHODS IN TAX POLICY ANALYSIS*
Palm Beach, Florida
January 25—27, 1981

Paper
Number

WP 497

"Alternative Tax Tratrrents of the Family: Simulation
and Results," by Saniel Feenberg and Harvey S. Rosen Methodolor

WP 788

"Stochastic

Problems in the Simulation of Labor Supply," by Jerry Hausman

"Alternatives to the Current Maximum Tax on Earned Income," by
Lawrence B. Lindsey

"The Distribution of Gains and Losses from Changes in the Tax

Treatment

of Housing," by Merrn King

WP 682

"Simulating Nonlinear Tax Rules and Nonstandard Behavior: An
Application to the Tax Treatment of Charitable Contributions,"
by Martin Feldstein and Lawrence B. Lindsey

WP 798

"Issues in the Taxation of Foreign Source Income," by Daniel Frisch

WP 583

"Modeling Alternative Solutions to the Long—Run Social Security
Funding Problem," by Michael Boskin, Marcy Avrin, and Kenneth Cone

"Domestic Tax Policy and the Foreign Sector: The Importance of
Alternative Foreign Sector Formulations to Results from a General
Equilibrium Tax Analysis Model," by Lawrence Goulder, John Shoven,
and John Whalley

WP 673

"A Reexamination of Tax Distortions in General Equilibrium Models,"
by Don Fullerton and Roger Gordon

Wp 799

"A General Equilibrium Model of Taxation with Endogenous Financial
Behavior," by Joel Slernrod

wp

68i

WP 729

Rules and Personal Savings Incentives: Microeconomic
Data and Behavioral Simulations," by Martin Feldstein and Daniel Feenberg
"Alternative Tax

"National

Savings, Economic Welfare, and the Structure of

by Alan Auerbach and Laurence Kotlikoff
WP 757

Taxation,"

"Tax Reform and Corporate Investment: A Micro—Econometric Simulation
Study," by Michael Salinger and Lawrence Summers

*It is expected that the papers resulting from this conference will be published
in a volume edited by Martin Feldstein.
Copies of these conference papers may be obtained by sending $1.50 per copy to
Conference Rapers, NBEB, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138.
Please make checks payable to National Bureau of Economic Research. Advance
payment is required on orders totaling less than $10.00

List of Participants
SIMULATION METHODS IN TAX POLICY ANALYSIS

The Breakers, Palm Beach

January 25-27,

1981

Affiliation

Name

Henry J. Aaron
Alan J. Auerbach

Martin J. Bailey
Michael J. Buskin
Daniel H. Feenberg
Martin Feldstein

Daniel J. Frisch
Don Fullerton
Harvey Galper

Hager H. Gordon
Lawrence H. Goulder
David G. Hartmari
Jerry A. Hausrnan
James J. Heckinan

Patric Hendershott

Thomas 0. Horst
Mervyn A. King

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Lawrence B. Lindsey

Charles E. McLure, Jr.

Peter Mieszkowski
Joseph J. Minarik

Richard A. Musgrave
Joseph A. Pechrnan

Michael Salinger
Robert
John B. Shaven

J. Shiller

Joel Slemrod
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Lawrence H. Summers
John Whalley
David Wise

The Brookings Institution
Harvard University
University of iry1and
Stanford University
National Bureau of Economic Research
Harvard University and NBER
University of Washington
Princeton University
U.S. Department of the Treasury
Bell Laboratories
Stanford University
Harvard University
Massachusetts Institute of Technolor
Unversity of Chicago
Purdue University
U.S. Department of the Treasury
University of Birmingham, England
Yale University
Harvard University
National Bureau of Economic Research
University of Houston

The Brookings Institution
Harvard

University of the University
of California at Santa Cruz
The Brookings Institution

Massachusetts Institute of Techno1o
University of Pennsylvania
Stanford University
University of Minnesota
Princeton University
Massachusetts Institute of Techno1or
University of Western Ontario
Harvard University

NBER Working Paper #799
November 1981

A General Equilibrium Model of Taxation
with Endogenous Financial Behavior

ABSTRACT

This paper presents and utilizes a new general equilibrium simulation
model of capital income taxation. Its chief advantage over existing models
of the effects of taxation is that it recognizes that agents may adjust
their financial behavior in response to changes in the way that capital
income is taxed. By integrating a structural treatment of portfolio choice
and financial markets into a standard multi—sector model of taxation, the
model can trace the general equilibrium impact of these financial adjustments
and calculate the tax—induced changes in the allocation of factors and output
as well as the distributional effects of any tax change.
The model is used to simulate the impact of completely indexing the
tax system for inflation. The results indicate there would be significant
financial adjustment in response to indexing. A large shift in the distri—
bution of private risk bearing accompanies a slight reallocation of the
capital stock away from owner—occupied housing toward its other uses and
a substantial change in the ownership of the housing stock by income class.
All in all, indexing the tax system of an economy like the U.S. in 1977
seems to lead to an efficiency gain, slightly hurts the lowest income
classes, and substantially improves the welfare of the highest income
groups. The simulation results should, however, be considered tentative
due to uncertainty about the values of several parameters and the relatively
simple formulations of the determinants of portfolio choice and the U.S.
financial structure.

Joel Slemrod
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1035 Business Administration
271 South Nineteenth Avenue

Minneapolis, MN 55455
(612) 373—3607

I.

Introduction

This paper presents and utilizes a new general eqtiflbrium simulation

model of capital income taxation. Its chief advantage over existing models
of taxation is that it recognizes that agents imay adjust their financial
behavior in response to changes in the way that capital income is taxed.
The model can trace the general equilibrium impact of these financial
adjustments and calculate the tax-induced changes in the allocation of
factors and production as well as the distributional effects of any tax
change.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides as background
a brief review of the important antecedent literature. In Section III I
describe the structure of the model, while in Section IV the parameterization

and control solution of the model is detailed, Section V uses the model to
simulate the general equilibrium impact of changing the present system of
taxing capital income under inflation to a perfectly indexed tax system.
Some conc1uding remarks are made in Section VI.

—2—
II. Review of the Literature

General equilibrium aniJ.ysis of the effects of taxation began with
the static, two—sector, two—factors--of—production model of Rarberger [1959,

1962, 19661.1 In the original version of the model, two competitive indus—
tries employ two factors which are perfectly mobile between the sectors, but
are fixed in total supply; the. factors are paid a return which, including

taxes paid, is equal to their respective marginal products. All consumers
(and the government by implication) have identical homothetic preference

functions as to the two goods. This formulation allows one to account directly
for the interdependence among all product and factor markets.2
The Harberger model is especially suited for the analysis of differential

taxation of either final outputs or factors. The effect of a differential
tax on factor returns and the commodity price ratio is shown to depend on

the relative factor intensity of production in the two sectors, the substitu—
tability of factors in production, and the extent of demand substitutability.

If all consumers and the government do not have identical homothetic preference
functions, then any shifting of income among these groups would also have

repercussions for relative prices since the composition of aggregate demand

would change. The personal incidence of a differential tax depends on the personal
distribution of factor endowments and consumption preferences. If all individuals
have identical factor endowments, then any changes in factor returns have no income

distributional effect from the sources of income side. If consumption preferences
do not vary, then relative price variations do not have any distributional
implications from the uses of income side.

HarbergerTs methodology was to solve the general equilibrium system
analytically, making the problem tractable by assuming linearity or using a

local approximation, and by limiting the dimensions of the problem. Shoven

-3and Whalley l972 showed that such a general equilibrium system could be
solved explicitly without sirnplifications, using an appropriate solution

algorithm. A variety of functional forms for production and demand func-

could then be

dons
change

specified. The comparative static effects of a tax

are found by simply coinpring the pre- and post—change equilibria.

The flexibility of this method of solution allowed Shaven and Whalley to
disaggregate

the general equilibrium model more extensively than had been

previously attempted. Disaggregation of production allows a more detailed
calculation of the inter-sectoral misallocation caused by, for example, dif-

ferential factor tax application. Disaggregation of consumers groups permits a detailed assessment of changes in the personal distribution of
income.

In the most recent use of this technique, 16 consumer goods (counting saving

as one such good) are distinguished. Using input—output information, a vector of consumer goods is translated into a vector of 19 produced goods,

which in turn are produced by labor and capital. Twelve consumer classes
are distinguished on the basis of differing marginal personal tax rates,

factor endowments, and consumption preferences. Although it is larger,
the Fullerton-Shoven--Whalley3 model has the same

basic

structure as the simple

Harberger model.

Some recent research, though, has focussed on a number of potentially
important aspects of the capital income tax environment which are outside

the scope of a Harberger-type model. For example, one characteristic of
the Harberger-type models is that in an equilibrium situation all individuals
face the same relative rates of tax on capital placed in the various sectors.
The pattern of marginal products of capital is such that

—4—

the

after—tax rates of return on capital in all sectors are equal for all

individuals; each individual can be thought of as owning a proportionate share

of all the economy's capital goods. Note that this kind of equilibriuni would be
impossible if the relative rates of tax on capital goods differed for different
individuals. Feldsteiri and Slemrod [19781 point out that this is in fact the case
in the U.S., where there is (i) progressive personal taxation with marginal
rates ranging from below the corporate rate to above the corporate rate, and
(ii)

the opportunity

retained

to substantially reduce personal taxation through corporate

earnings. In this situation corporate—source capital income may be

taxed more or less heavily than non—corporate
one'sax bracket.

If corporate

capital income depending on

equity and other capital

income sources were

perfect substitutes for other than tax reasons, then we would expect to observe
that in equilibrium any individual would invest entirely in corporate equity or
enitrely in the alternative asset, but never both; this specialization will occur
whenever the relative tax on two types of investment differs for different groups.
In order to explain the observed tendency for investors to hold diversified port—
folios, an explicit portfolio balance relationship is required.

Ideally, a model should specify the sources of risk in the economy, individuals'
attitude toward risk—bearing (expressed in the form of cardinal utility functions),

and the

will

opportunities for portfolio diversification. In such a model, portfolios

differ by consumer class. Therefore, for certain problems it may be incorrect

to assume that all capital owners bear the burden of tax changes identically.
The work of Stiglitz [1973] and King [1974], building on the classic paper
of Modigliani and Miller [1958), made clear that any analysis of corporation
taxation must consider the financial flexibility that corporations

—5have. Interest paid to debt-holders is deductible from corporate taxable
income, and dividends are taxed differently than retained earnings so that
the effective tax on equity earnings depends on the capital structure and the
payout policy of the corporation.

When Harberger and Shaven-

Whalley calculate the total effective tax on corporate-source capital income,
they consider the financial structure of the sector, but when the effects of

a tax change are simulated, financial policy is assumed to be unaffected.4
Papers by Balleritine and

McLure [l978 and Feldstein, Green, and Sheshinski

El979 have investigated the effects of corporation income tax in a world
of flexible corporate financial policy, but neither posed the question in

a gneral equilibrium model with differentially taxed wealth owners and
several production sectors.

This concludes the overview of the important antecedent literature. The
research since Harberger may, it seems, be divided into two categories. The
first category features highly stylized, usually partial equilibrium,models
that focus on one aspect of capital income taxation, such as the implications
of a progressive tax system or the role of corporate financial decisions.

In the second category is the work of Shoven and his collaborators, where

a large general quilibrium model is constructed as a framework for the
analysis of a wide range of taxation issues. However, the Shoven model,
being fundamentally identical to the smaller Harberger model, inadequately
treats several of the important issues raised in the first group of papers.
The remainder of this paper is devoted to the development of a new model

which is general equilibrium in the tradition of the second category of re—
search, but can also offer insight into the issues raised by the first category
of the recent literature.

LI I. Descr of the Model
111.1. Distinguishing Characteristics
In

this section, the structure of the general equilibrium model with

financial behavior (GEFB) is presented. Before proceeding to a more detailed
discussion of its features, its distinguishing characteristics are briefly
noted here.
1.

Explicit treatment of riskiness. Income from capital is not
certain, and individuals are risk-averse. Individuals allocate
their wealth among the available asset types on the basis of
optimal portfolio considerations.

2.

Portfolio choice under progressive taxation. Since different
agents face different tax rates, they willhold different port-

folios.5 Thus, for incidence results, it is not generally
true that all capital owners will be ideatically affected to the

extent that they own
3.

capital.

Endogenous tax rates. An individual's marginal tax rate is not
fixed, but rather depends on the amount of his taxable income.

This is an important consideration in the decision of how much
financial leverage to acquire, since the marginal tax saving from
borrowing declines with greater borrowing in a progressive tax

sys tern.
4.

Tax-exempt bonds. These securities are a potentially significant
outlet for the wealth of high tax bracket individuals, and are
included in the available asset menu.

5.

Rental and owned housing. The capital income from these two ways of
consuming housing are subject to very different taxation schemes. In

—7—
fhis model the two types of housing are treated separately.
6.

Corporate financial policy. The importance of the ability to alter
corporate financial decisions in response to the tax environment

has already been noted. The GEFB model can accomodate

endogenous

corporate decisions in a number of ways.
III. 2.

sk,RiskAvond Portfolio Choice

Each agent in the economy is endowed with
a fixed amount of capital
goods and a fixed amount

may

be

of

labor in efficiency units. The capital goods
used in the production of goods for
sale or in the production of

housing services to be consumed

by the owner. Labor is

inelastically hired

Thut to firms in return for a wage.
The production functions of all goods other than
owner-occupied housing
are stochastic. The stochastic
element, though, refers only to the contrj—
bution to production of the
capital input; thus the marginal product of labor
is Certain.6
In the standard Harberger

stage

model, the individual implicitly faces a two..

decision process. In the first stage, his endowment of factors is allocated

in order to maximize the flow of

income, or, equivalently, wealth at some point

in time. In he second stage, the income flow is allocated
goods in order to maximize

among consumption

utility. In the GEFB model, a similar but modi-

fied two-stage decision process is envisioned. In the first
stage, the

individual

constructs a portfolio to maximize

stream of income, or,

the expected utility of the

equivalently, the expected utility of some

period's wealth. Once the

future

uncertainty is resolved and actual income is
revealed, the income is allocated
among consumption goods to maximize the
utility obtained.

—8—
The following special form of the first—stage maximarid will be considered:
-

V

where y is the expected flow of after—tax income,

is a tradeoff coefficient,

V is the variance of after—tax income, and K is the capital endowment.

This for—

mulation has the desirable feature that the portfolio demand functions implied by
its maximization are identical to the optimal rules for an individual who has only
capital income and is faced with a frictionless capital market and aninfinitesimal

planning horizon.7
In the second stage, realized income is allocated among the consumption goods.

Since only homothetic utility functions are considered, maximizing the expected
utility of income in the first stage also maximizes the expected utility of
cons ump

tion.

111.3. Model Structure
In this section the overall structure of the model will be laid out. In
subsequent sections, more detailed attention will be paid to certain sectors of the
model and their parameterization.
The economy's agents are considered to consist of nine stylized types, each

representing a different income class. The agents vary in their (fixed) endowment
of capital and labor as well as their preferences for consumption goods. All mdi—

viduals are assumed to have the same coefficient of risk aversion. Because there
is a progressive tax system, the different categories of individuals, called "income groups" for convenience, will have different marginal tax rates and the after—
tax riskiness of assets will also differ among individuals.

The model'has production functions for each of four goods: food, rental
housing, owner—occupied housing, and a composite good produced by corporations.
Each income class has a demand function for each good, which depends on real income,
relative prices, and the tastes of the income group.

—9—
There are asset demand functions of each class for each of six assets:

food—sector capital, rental housing, owner—occupied housing, corporate equity, taxable debt, which is assumed to be riskiess, and tax—exempt debt, which has some un-

certainty of return. These functions are derived from the first—order conditions for
the maximization of expected utility, and include as arguments the capital endowment,

the after—tax expected real rate of returns on the available assets, the after—tax

variance—covariance structure, and the degree of risk aversion. The tax system is
assumed to regard net losses symetrically with net gains, and the marginal tax rate
is assumed constant in the calculation of after—tax variances and covariances.

There are market—clearing equations for all assets and all goods. The supply
equations of different assets have different characteristics. For housing and food—
sector capital, the supply simply equals the capital stock used in production. For
corporate equity, asset supply is the equity—capital ratio, which is endogenous,

multiplied by the corporate capital stock. The supply of tax—exempt debt is fixed
by state and local governments, and is exogenous to the model. The supply of taxable
debt is the sum of the exogenously given supply of federal government debt and
the amount of corporate debt, which is equal to the corporate debt—capital ratio

times the corporate capital stock. Since both the debt—capital ratio and the corporate capital stock are endogenous, the total supply of taxable debt is also endo—

genous. The market—clearing equations for goods simply state that demand equal
production.

The model also includes equations for the allocation of labor to sectors (equalization of marginal revenue product), factor supply identities, and determination of

real income and taxable income by income group. There is also a corporate earnings
exhaustion equation, which ensures that total corporate earnings net of corporation
income tax accrue either to corporate debt holders or to equity holders.

The basic structure of the model is thus similar to the standard general

—10-.

equilibrium model of

taxo tion,

except that the sinpie capital allocation equ3 Lions

are replaced by explicit portfolio demand equations and market clearing equations

for

each of several financial assets. Other distinguishing aspects of the model

are discussed further below.

111.4. E2genous Tax Rates

The total tax liability and marginal tax rates in the various kinds of income
are calculated by appropriately reducing the income flows of the group to a per tax
return basis, calculating taxable income, and applying the actual pattern of tax

brackets and rates that were applicable in 1977.8 Taxable income differs from
real income in a number of significant ways. First of all, certain deductions and
exemptions are allowed. The average value of all such deductions and exemptions
other than for interest and property tax payments is considered to be fixed and is

entered as a subtraction from income. The amount of allowable deductions for interest

and property tax paid is endogenously deteined using the simulated portfolios.9
Second, nominal interest received rather than real interest received (and paid) is

included in taxable income. Third, the imputed income from owned housing is not
included in taxable income, though a small fraction of the nominal rise in housing
values due to inflation is included in order to reflect the partial taxation of

capital gains on residences. Similarly, a fraction of the inflation—induced capital
gains on other assets is included.10 The income from equity, after corporation tax,
is only partially included in taxable income to reflect the fact that retained

earnings are virtually exempt from personal taxation. The fraction included in

taxable income is equal to d + (1 —

d)c

,

where

d is the payout ratio and c

is the ratio of the effective tax on capital gains to the tax on dividends. The

value of c will be less than one due to the exclusion of one—half of long—term
capital gains, then value of the deferral of tax payments until realization of the

gain, and the opportunity to avoid tax by bequeathing appreciated stock. For present

purposes the value of c is taken to be one--eighth. The income from state
and local securities is not part of the taxable income. Finally, there is an
addition to individual taxable income (for rental housing and food—sector capital
owned) and to corporation taxable income (for corporate capital) to reflect the
mismeasurement of capital income due to historical cost depreciation and certain

inventory accounting methods. Since depreciation on owner—occupied housing is not
deductible from taxable income, inflation does not thereby cause any additional
tax to be paid

due to consuming owned housing services.

Once the total taxable income is determined, the marginal tax rate on a dollar
of taxable income (call it 'tt" )

is

calculated by referring to the tax tables.

The real after—tax rate of return earned by the ith asset is then equal to

1_ t(r.t)

r. —

:1.

,

where

r. is the before—tax real rate of return and r. is the
1
1

addition to taxable income from holding one dollar of the ith asset. For all the

reasons mentioned above r1T may differ from r .

For example, the after—tax real

rate of return to holding a nominal debt security is rB —
a dollar of debt yields rB + 11
111.5.

t(rB

+ H) ,

since

(the nominal interest rate) of taxable income.

Tax—Exempt Bonds

In the modal there is a fixed supply of debt issued by state and local govern—

ments, the interest from which is exempt from federal income taxation. rney are
presumed here to be risky assets, though they are significantly less risky than
corporate equity, rental housing, or food—sector capital.

Individuals cannot borrow at the tax—exempt interest rate; that is, they must

hold a non—negative quantity of these securities. An important question is whether
individuals can simultaneously hold tax—exempt bonds and receive a tax deduction for

interest paid on their outstanding borrowing. The tax law states that individuals.
cannot borrow for the express purpose of buying tax—exempt bonds and still claim

the interest expense as a deduction. However, it is possible for an individual

— 12 —

to deduct luterest payments bi1e
IRS

position

at

the se time holding r3x—e<errpt debt. The

is apparently that whenever

an outstanding

obligation is not directly

connected with a personal or business loan, it will be inferred that its purpose

is

to carry tax—exempt assets, and therefore its interest expense will be disallowed

as a tax deduction. However, the Tax Court and other courts have ruled that in order

to be disallowed the debt and the tax-exempt property must somehow be related in
11

purpose.

For present purposes what is needed is an operational rule which approximately
captures the reglations' effective limitation on interest expense deductions when

a

portfolio includes tax—exempt bonds. We have chosen the rule that the IRS will

disallow that fraction of any individual's interest deductions equal to the ratio

of the value of tax—exempt bonds to total net wealth. Under this rule, the net
cost of borrowing depends on the amount of wealth invested in tax—exempt bonds;

also, the after—tax return of tax—exempt bonds depends on how leveraged one's
portfolio is.

111.6. Housing
It is assumed that the housing sector produces housing services from capital

with no labor input. Though the omission of labor is certainly a stylization of
the production process, it is not an unwarranted exaggeration. Aaron [1972] notes
that housing services require the combination of more capital per unit of labor

than does any major category of consumer or investment goods. Using a detailed
input—output raatrix, Fullerton, King, Shoven, and Whalley [1978] calculate the

capital—labor ratio of producing housing services to be approximately 20 times
higher than the economy—wide capital—labor ratio, and 15 times higher than any

other major sector.12
It is further assumed that the services from rented housing and the services from

— 13 —

owner—occupied housing are considered by consumers to be distinct commodities.
In actuality, though their characteristics tend to differ, the distinction is

not absolute. Which type of housing will be chosen by a given family unit
(they may in many cases effectively be mutually exclusive commodities), and the

quantity consumed given that choice, will depend on tastes as well as the
relative price of rented versus owner--occupied housing. If all the individuals
within an income group are aggregated, the aggregate relative consumption of the
two types of housing services may be represented as a smooth function of the relative price of the two goods and the distribution of tastes within the class (see
Rosen and Rosen [1980)).

The set of available assets includes rented and owner—occupied housing. It is
assumed that the production of services from rental housing capital is subject to
stochastic influences, and the production of services from owner—occupied housing

is not stochastic. In expected value terms, the two production functions are
identical. The model then has a market clearing equation for rental housing, where
the sum of the nine income groups' demand for it as an asset must equal the stock
necessary to supply the rental services demanded by consumers at the equilibrium

relative prices. For owner—occupied housing, the situation is somewhat different.
For each income class, there is an additional constraint that the desired stock
must produce a flow of services equal to the amount of services demanded by that

class. Thus, there is implicitly a separate market for each class in which each
individual rents the housing services from himself. For each class, there is a

shadow price of consuming housing. This price has three components: (i) the
pecuniary income foregone through holding capital in housing rather than another

asset, (ii) the cost of maintenance and depreciation, and (iii) any attendant
tax liabi]ities or rebates.

14

111.7. The Government Sector
One function of the government J.s relative price stabiUztion. In the
absence of government intervention, the market-clearing pattern of relative

prices would depend on the state of the world that obtains. In this economy,
though, the government
defend

maintains

stocks of all commodities, and

pledges

to

a particular relative price structure by buying all production at

these prices and selling that amount of each commodity such that these announced

prices

support markets that clear. The relative price structure that the govern-

ment supports is the one that would obtain if realized production was equal to

the expected value of production in each sector. Of course which prices are
supported depends on the allocation of capital and labor by sector. This
arrangement leads to market clearing with no intervention necessary if the
expected value of all sector's production obtain, and which may require some

use of the government's commodity stocks if they do not. Note that by doing
this the government does not insulate agents from the production uncertainty,
but rather confines the effects of the uncertainty to incomes, while making

relative prices nonstochastic)3
The government must also collect taxes to finance its expenditure,

which has three components. The first is spending on goods and services,

which is fixed. The second component is interest payments, which vary accord
ing to the equilibrium interest rates on government debt. The third component
is the cost of the price supports discussed above. Since uncertain capital
income comprises part of the tax base, total tax revenue is also uncertain.
The government constructs its tax schedules so that the expected value of

its tax revenues equals its expenditure commitments. Any

divergence

of actual

— 15 —

tax revenues from this expected value is made up by a special tax levied in

proportion to the
When the

longer

value of each

agent's tax liability.

economic environment changes so that expected revenues no

equal desired expenditure,

the government alters the tax rate schedules

to reestablish the equality. Thus the expected value of the stochastic tax
transfers will always be zero.

111.8. Corporate Financial Policy
Corporate financial policy represents another dimension of possible

behavioral response to changes in the tax environment. Modigliani and Miller
[1958] demonstrated the irrelevance to firm market value of corporate financial
decisions in the absence of taxes, and speculated that financial flexibility
would allow firms to avoid any corporation income tax by issuing debt instead
of equity and to avoid any tax on dividends by retaining earnings within the

corporation. Much recent work, some of which as alluded to earlier, has
re—examined the interaction between capital income taxation and corporate
finance taking into account, among other things, the personal taxation of

debt

interest, the effective capital gains tax on retained earnings, and progressive
taxation.

In •Slemrod [1980j14 I discuss several methods of introducing the financial

flexibility of corporations into a GEFB model. Because of the lack of a consensus
about just what characterizes a capital market equilibrium in the environment
described above, no simple procedure-will be

completely

satisfactory. Nevertheless,

in that work I utilized a procedure which is in the spirit of several theoretical
treatments of corporate financial behavior in the presence of taxes and is
consistent

with

the econometric evidence concerning financial policy

behavior. I will briefly describe in turn the procedure, its

- 16

theoretical

-

justification, and the relevant econometric evidence.

The suggested procedure is to set both inrportarit corporate financial

decisions (debt-equity and payout) to be functions of critical "tax cost"

values. Behind this procedure is a theory which envisions the corporation maxitniz-

ing

with

its
the

value by balancing the net tax advantages of its financial structure

other costs and benefits of the policy. For debt-equity policy,

the cost that offsets the tax advantages of debt may be real bankruptcy costs

or agency costs. For dividend policy, the tax advantages of retained

earnings must

be balanced against the transactions cost of receiving income in the form of
capital gains, the signalling value of dividends, constraints on firm growth,

and the law which inhibits the unwarranted accumulation of funds within the
corporation.

One common element of these non-tax factors is the difficulty of quantifying them and explicitly relating their magnitude to the financial policies

chosen. Rather than arbitrarily constructing such measures, I instead use
econometrically estimated responses of financial policy to the tax cost of

the policies involved. The presumption is that these measured responses are
the result of an optimal balancing of tax considerations with the othe-r
implications of the financial decision.

The estimated responsiveness of the debt-equity ratio comes from King
C1978], where he finds an elasticity of 0.8 with respect to the tax cost

variable tc(l_tBY , where

t

is the rate of corporation income tax and

(l_t)A is a weighted average of (one minus) the marginal tax rate of
equity holders. This value measures the cost of raising new capital through

debt versus new share issue. The estimated responsiveness of the payout ratio
is taken from Sleinrod rl930, where the work of Brittain [l966 was updated.

— 17

—

The estimated elasticity of the payout ratio with respect to the tax cost
of dividends, (tD -

tRE)

(the weighted average of the difference in the

tax rate on dividends minus the effective tax rate on retained earnings),
was found there to be —0.79.

- 18
IV.

-

Pararneterization and the Control Solution

IV.

1.

Parameterizin g

the Mode I

The model is parameterized to represent a stylized U.S. economy of

the year 1977. That year is chosen because it is the most recent year for
which detailed tax return information is available. Unfortunately, though,
the best iriforrciation available about certain key values refers to earlier

years. Thus, it is often necessary to update and adjust data to represent
the 1977 situation.

One crucial set of values for which the best data available is severely

outdated is the distribution of wealth. The most accurate source for this
as well as for the structure of portfolios by income and wealth class remains the
Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Financial Characteristics of Consuners (SFCC),
which refers to year—end ]962. The SFCC disaggregates the wealth and portfolio

information into nine income classes. In order to obtain a wealth distribution for 1977, it is assumed here that the relative distribution of wealth

by real income class has not changed since 1962. The SFCC income classes are thus
inflated by a factor of three, which is approximately the factor by which

per capita disposable personal income rose between 1962 and 1977.15 The resulting nine income classes for the 1977 model are as follows: $0-$9,000, $9,000—

$15,000, $15 ,000-$22,500, $22,500-$30,000, $30,000-$45 ,000, $45,000-$75,000,
$75,000-$150,000, $150,000-$300,000, and over $300,000. The nine stylized individuals in the economy represent average individuals of each of these income classes.
The relative distribution of wealth among these classes is assumed to be the same
16
as the relative distribution among the equivalent 1962 classes.

Under the model's assumptions the relative gross remuneration of labor

will equal the relative endowment of labor in efficiency units. To approxi—

- 19 mate this distribution, I use the 1977 Statistics of Income measure of wages
and salaries received by taxpaying units in each income class,
supplemented
by adding one-half of the net return to business,profession, farm, and partnership as an approximation to the labor input share in self—employment.17
The resulting distribution of labor is given in Table A-i of the Appendix.
In order to obtain the value of total private wealth, the ratio of private
wealth to labor units as of 1962 was calculated and then applied to the total labor

endowmEnt in 1977. That procedure yielded 4.24 billion units, or $4.24 billion
worth, of private wealth.'3 As mentioned above, the distribution of that wealth
is determined according to the relative ownership of wealth from SFCC.

The resulting wealth distribution is also shown in Table A-i of the Appendix.
Because the utility function of each class is assumed to be Cobb--Douglas,
knowing the share of consumption that goes to each good is sufficient for

parameterizing the function. The source for spending shares is the Bureau
of Labor Statistics' Consumer Expenditure Interview Survey, 1972-73. The
income classes delineated in the survey are inflated to refer to 1977.19
The food share is computed as the ratio of expenditure on food at home to
current consumption expenditures; the rental housing share is the ratio of

expenditure on rented dwellings to current consumption expenditures. The
appropriate

share for owner-occupied housing cannot be straighforwardly

obtained from the expenditure survey, since the

is

true

cost of this behavior

not correctly measured. To obtain the true cost of owner-occupied housing,

I apply a conversion factor to the reported spending equal to the ratio of

actual spencing to reported spending.2° The highest income bracket for which
results are reported in the expenditure survey is $50,000 and over ($75,000

and over in 1977 dollars). This blurs any possible distinction in the con-

— 20 —

sutnption preferences of the top three income classes. Rather than use the re—
ported expenditure shares of the over $75,000 group for all of the top three
classes (and implicitly assume an income elasticity of one in this range), the

shares of spending of the top three classes are found by extrapolating the share
21

of the sixth income class to higher incomes using estimated income elasticities.

The resulting shares for food, rental and owned housing and, as a residual, the
corporate good, are displayed in Table A—2 of the Appendix.

The effective corporation income tax rate is calculated by dividing 1977
corporate profits without inventory valuation or capital consumption adjustment
into toial 1977 corporate profits tax liability; this yields a value of .41.

The property tax rate of .0154 is calculated by dividing total property
tax payments in 1975 ($51.49 billion) by total assessed value of property in
that year ($1063.9 billion) and applying an estimated percentage of assessed value
to market value (.327).22
The aggregate corporate debt—equity ratio of .721 is calculated by dividing
the flow of funds estimate of the 1977 value of corporate debt by the value of
corporate equity ($749.7 billion divided by $1039.5 billion).
The payout ratio of .544 is found by dividing dividend payments in 1977 by
corporate profits after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustment
($42.1 billion divided by $77.3 billion).

The anticipated rate of inflation is taken to be 6 per cent, which is the
average annual increase in the CPI between 1975 and 1977.
The iaismeasuremant of corporate taxable income due to inflation is

calculated to be .00515 dollars of additional taxable income per dollar of corporate

capital for each percentage point of inflation. For example, a six per cent rate

— 21 —

of

inflation will cause a $46.33 billion (.00515 x 6 x 1.5 x 1012) overstatement

of corporate profits on a corporate capital stock valued at $1.5 trillion. This
coefficient was calculated using estimates of the overstatement of taxable profits
taken from Feldstein and Summers [1979] and values of corporate fixed capital and

inventories. The desired coefficient, call it d
E = dirK

,

should make the equation

correct, where E is the profit overstatement,

rate, and K

ir

is the inflation

is the value of corporate capital. Solving for d ,

comes to

.00512 for 1977, and as an average over the period 1970 to 1977, comes to .00519.

I therefore use .00515 to represent d for corporate capital as well as food—
sector capital and rental housing capital.
Since most government securities are not directly held by households, the
appropriate value of these stocks in a model with rio financial institutions is

problematic. I have chosen values of $100 billion of state and local securities,
$200 billion of federal government securities. These values are approximately
1.25 times the reported household holdings of these assets in 1977.

The measure of risk aversion,

,

is

taken to be three for all income groups.

This value was chosen since equilibria calculated using this value yielded simulated
risk premiums consistent with observed magnitudes, and because it is compatible with
some recent research.23 There is little empirical basis for choosing the variance—

covariance structure of the assets. For these simulations I will assume all covari—
ances to be zero, and the average after—tax variances of the assets to be .07 for
corporate equity, .05 for rental housing, .12 for food—sector capital, and .02

for tax—exempt bonds. Of course the methodology can handle any variance-covariance
structure, including one with non—zero off—diagonal elements.
The exponents on capital input in the Cobb—Douglas production functions
are set at .207 for the corporate sector and .111 for the food—related sector.

-

IV.2.

—

The Control Solution

With this parameterization, the model is solved for an equilibrium solu-

tion using a modified Gauss-Seidel algorithm. The equilibrium values of some
of

the

key variables are presented in Table 1.

Note that the expected real returns

in the table are net of any coi:porat ion income and property tax payments, but are before personal tax payments. The choice of simple function
given

specifications and realistic parameters makes it impossible to reproduce

all the actual 1977 pric:p.s and allocations, it is reassuring, though,
that the model solution yields an allocation of factors, production, and
exactly

relative prices which is close

to what the actual 1977 economy

looked like.

The calculated expected rates of return are compatible with actual

observations. The actual 1977 nominal interest rate on corporate debt was
.080 for Aaa bonds and .090 for Baa-rated bonds, compared to the model result

of .104. The difference may be attributed to the model's anticipated inflation rate of 6 per cent, which may be an overestimate of actual long-term inflation
expectations in that year. The predicted nominal rate on tax—exempt bond is .061,

compared to Standard and Poor's yield index in 1977 of .056, again a slight

overestimate. The expected real rate of return to equity that the model calculates

is .106. That is somewhat higher than the average annual rate of return on the
Standard and Poor's composite index of New York Stock Exchange equities over the
period 1926-1977, which is .OSi.24 However, .106 is substantially higher than the

realized real rate of return on equities in the decade preceding 1977. All
in all, .105 seems a not too unreasonable though perhaps optimistic reading of
the expected return on equity in 1977.

The equilibrium solution includes the portfolio holdings of each income

class. This information is not reproduced in detail here, though some

23 —

TABLE 1

EQUILIBRIlJ1 VALUES OF KEY VARIABLES IN SINULATED 1917 ECONOMY

Expected real rate of return on Corporate Equity

.106

Expected real rate of return on Food—Sector Capital

.082

Expected real rate of return on Rental Housing

.090

Expected real rate of return on Taxable

.044

Expected

Debt

real rate of return on Tax—Exeopt Debt

Corporate Capital Stock

.001

1439.8

Corporate Equity

865.6

Food-'Sector Capital Stock

260.0

Rental Housing Stock

170.5

Owner—Occupied Housing Stock

1418.1

Note: All rates of return are net of any corporation income tax and property
tax payments, but are before payIent of any individual income tax liability.
characteristics deserve note. As expected, the ownership of equity is skewed toward
the higher income classes. The top three income classes (over $75,000 income), which
are presumed to account for 27% of private wealth, own 43.9% of the equity. This

is consistent with available data on dividends received, which indicate that these

classes get approximately 37% of all dividends.25 Owner—occupied housing is much
less concentrated among the higher income classes, with 79.5% of the stock owned by

taxpaying units of $45,000 or less in income. The ownership of tax—exempt securities

is limited to the top two classes. The lower seven classes own positive amounts
of riskiess debt, while the top two classes are net borrowers of funds. In fact,
these highly—taxed classes have a debt position amounting to 26.2% of their net

wealth.

- 24
V.

Arilndexed Tax System -

V.1.

Constant

-

Simulation

Corporate

Results

Financial Policy

As is well knowr by now, the U.S. system of taxing capital income is

decidedly non-neutral with respect to inflation. The problem arises because
in the presence of inflation real capital income is mis-measured. Nominal
interest received is treated as income with no deduction for the real loss

in the value of the principal. Similarly, nominal interest payments are
fully deductible. Increases in nominal asset value that do not correspond
to real value increases are subject to capital gains tax if and when these

ga[iis are realized. Also, historical cost depreciation rules and certain
inventory accounting methods lead to an overstatement of real net earnings.26
The mismeasurement of capital income does not uniformly apply to all

assets. Thus inflation alters the pattern of real after-tax rates of return

available. This in turn causes a readjustment of portfolios and a shift in
the allocation of capital to production sectors, which affects the pre-tax

return on assets. The tax penalty (or benefit) from the mismeasurement of
capital also varies depending on the marginal tax rate of the agents involved.
Extra corporate taxable income due to inflation is subject to the corporation
income tax rate, as are the extra deductions of nominal interest payments.

For individuals, the tax cost varies with their tax bracket. Thus, the
overall impact of inflation depends on the tax—induced distortion of

rates of return and agents' financial response to these distortions. Clearly
'a general equilibrium analysis is well-suited to this type of problem.

An indexed tax system would eliminate the distortionary effects of infla-

2
don by correctly measuring real capital income.

In order to simulate the

effects of indexing, the GEFB model is re—solved for the equilibrium that would

- 25 -

obtain

in the presence of a zero rate of inflation. This effectively elimi—

nates any m5srneasurcment of capital income. Since the equilibrium under an
indexed
tax

tax system will be identical to

system

the equilibrium under an unindexed

which has a zero rate of inflation, the simulation results can be

interpreted in either of two ways. The difference between the two equilibria
can be seen as either the effect of an indexed tax system, or as the effect
of six per cent inflation under an unindexed tax system.
With no adjustment in tax rates, the total federal tax revenue declines
due to indexation by $28.2 billion, from $228.3 billion to $199.1 billion.28
This decrease consists almost entirely of a $27.8 decrease in individuaL income

tax liability. The other component is a surprisingly small $0.4 reduction in corporation income tax paid. This small change is the net result of a few offsetting

factrs. First, the elimination of the excess tax due to historical cost
depreciation and inventory accounting methods outweighs the elimination of
the deductibility of the inflation premium in nominal interest deductions,

amounting to a $3.7 billion tax saving. The increase in the amount of corpor-.
ate capital is approximately offset by the decrease in the marginal product of

capital. What

largely

offsets the $3.7 billion tax sving is a large decline

in the real riskiess interest rate. The reduced value of
interest

deductions due to this change causes the corporate tax bill to

increase

by over $2 billion. The combination of these factors yields the small

increase in corporate income tax liability.

In order to compare two tax systems with equal total yield, tax rates

must be raised under indexation. In the results reported below, all individual
income tax rates were multiplied by an identical factor; brackets were

unchanged as was the corporation

income tax rate. This procedure required a

— 26 —

21.1 percent increase in all personal tax rates, raising the first marginal
tax rate to .170 and the highest marginal rate to .848. This equi—yield procedure
is a crucial element in the simulation results reported below, since alternative
rate adjustments to make up the lost revenue would undoubtedly change the distributional impact of indexing, and could also affect its allocational implications.
The equilibrium solution under an indexed tax system is partially characterized

in Table 2. There is a substantial change in the pattern of rates of return in the
economy. First of all, there is a large decline in the real rate of return on

riskiess debt, from .044 to 035. Since inflation in an unindexed tax system
increases the personal taxation of debt relative to equity, indexation relieves
this excess taxation and thereby increases the positive demand for riskiess debt

by the lower—taxed classes, and also decreases the desired leverage of the

high income, high tax rate classes. Since the excess supply of riskless debt
by agents other than individuals is virtually fixed (government borrows a fixed
amount, and corporations borrow a fixed proportion of a slightly changing total
capital stock), the real rate of return on riskless debt must fall in order to

clear its market. The real rate of return on equity rises from .106 to.114,
indicating that the net effect of indexation is to render equity a relatively less

attractive investment, requiring a higher rate of return in equilibrium. That the
extra tax burden due to inflation is greater for debt than for equity is clearly
evidenced by the fact that the premium equity earns over debt is .062 without

indexing, and increases to .079 under indexationor, equivalently, in the absence
of inflation.
Another striking shift in the pattern of rates of return is the sharp increase
in the equilibrium yield on tax—exempt securities, which earn a real rate of return
of .0012 in the unindexed inflationary economy but whose real return would be .0236

— 27

—

TABLE 2

EQUILIBRIU2I VALUES OF KEY VARIABLES IN INDEXED ECONONIY

Change from

Un indexed

.114

+.008

Expected real rate of return on Food—Sector Capital

.082

.000

Expected real rate of return on Rental Housing

.088

—.002

Expected real rate of return on Taxable Debt

.035

—.009

Expected real rate of return on Tax-Exempt Debt

.025

+..024

Expected

real rate of return on Corporate Equity

1490.2

+0.4

Corporate Equity

865.8

+0.2

Food—Sector Capital Stock

259.2

—0.8

Rental Housing Stock

775.4

+4.9

1413.7

—4.4

Corporate Capital Stock

Owner—Occupied Housing Stock

in

the indexed, or non—inflationary, equilibrium. The differential between the real

return on taxable and tax—exempt debt decreases from .0428 to only .0102 in the
indexed equilibrium. The explanation here is

quite straightforward. The issuers

of tax—exempt debt benefit from the mismeasurement and subsequent overtaxation of
the

real return on iaxable debt; this enables them to sell debt to high—tax bracket

individuals while offering nearly a zero real return. When this raismeasuretnent is
eliminated, state and local governments must increase their real interest payments
by more than two percent in order to have their outstanding debt willingly held.
These

shifts

changes in

the pattern of real returns are accompanied by substantial

in the portfolios of the income groups. Since the tax advantages to the

highly taxed groups of equity relative to debt diminish under indexing, the con-

centration of equity holdings might be expected to decline. This does in fact
occur, with the proportion of equity held by the top three income classes falling

— 28 —

from 43.9% to 37.5%. Another striking change in the portfolios of the high
income groups is the sharp decline in the amount of owner—occupied housing held.
Remember with nominal interest payments fully deductible from taxable income,

the opportunity cost of housing becomes very low under inflation in an unindexed

system. Individuals in high tax brackets respond by holding large amounts of

owner—occupied housing. Under indexing, even though the real rate of interest
declines, the opportunity cost of owned housing services increases significantly

for individuals in high tax brackets. In response, the amount of wealth put
into owrier-.occupied housing under indexing is just 69% of what it would be

under an unindexed system for the highest two income groups. On the other hand,
the low income groups experience a decline in the cost of owned housing services,

since the decline in the real interest rate more than compensates for the reduced

ialue of interest paid tax deductions. In response, they increase the amount that
they hold.

The decline in the high income groups' holdings of equity and owner—occupied
housing is offset primarily by a decline in their indebtedness and slightly by

increases in the position in the other risky assets. As noted above, in the
unindexed six percent inflation equilibrium, the top two income classes borrowed
an amount equal to 26.2% of their net wealth; in the equilibrium under indexing
-

the borrowing is reduced to 9.9% of net wealth.

According to this simulation, the allocational impact of indexing would be
minimal, causing a slight decrease in the amount of capital in the owner—occupied

housing, largely at the expense of rental housing. This aspect of the simulation
results is especially sensitive to the specification of the model; in fact, in
earlier versions of this model (see Slemrod [1980]) indexing caused a much larger

— 29 —

shift

of capital away from owner—occupied housing. This earlier result

seems consistent with intuition, since indexing eliminates the deductibility
of nominal interest payients, and thus apparently raises the cost of housing.
Although in a model of this complexity it is difficult to trace a result to a
particular aspect of the model, the absence of such a shift in the present

version seems due to the following facts. First of all, the substantially lower
real rate of interest under indexation means that, for the lower—taxed groups
who make up the bulk of owner—occupied housing demand, the opportunity cost of

owned housing declines. In fact, a comparison of the two equilibria shows that
the five lowest income groups find owned housing less expensive in the indexed
equilibrium; these five groups own

about

85% of all owned—housing. Thus the

ownership of housing shifts from high income to low income individuals, but the

total does not significantly decrease. A second reason is the fact that the
increased tax rates under indexation tend to lower the cost of owned housing
to all individuals, especially the highly—taxed groups who experience the

greatest absolute tax rate increase. Since this increases the value of deducting
interest payments from taxable income, the effect is to increase the demand
for owned housing.

The welfare effects of indexing are presented in Table 3. The numbers in
the first column refer to the dollar compensation that must be paid before

the resolution of the uncertainty in order to make the non—indexed inflationary
situation indifferent to the indexed situation. The usual, index number probleta

applies here, since the value of the required compensation depends on whether
it is to be paid (or received) in the pre—indexing or post—indexing situation..

The values represented in Table 3 are the simple average of these two compensation
figures.

— 30 —
TABLE

3

SIMULATED WELFARE EFFECTS DuE TO INDEXING
Welfare Change as
a Percentage of
Income Class

Welfare Chaiig

($billions)

Pre—Indexin Income

9,000

—0.38

—0.15

9— 15,000

—1.48

—0.60

15— 22,500

—3.35

—1.06

22,500.- 30,000

—2.09

—0.90

30— 45,000

+0.10

+0.08

45— 75,000

+0.93

+1.24

75— 150,000

+3.71

+8.02

150— 300,000

+6.82

+42.78

Ilore than 300,000

+2.13

+28.93

+6.39

+0.48

$0—

Total

The simulation results indicate that a system of indexation, with lost

revenue made up by adjusting all personal tax rates upward by a multiplicative
factor, would cause an increase in welfare for the highest five income groups,
and a decrease in welfare for the lowest four income groups, with the dividing

income level being approximately $30,000 in annual income. Without an
explicit social welfare function to balance the gains and losses, it is
impossible to say whether this would be a desirable change to make. However,
the sum of the compensation values is clearly positive ($6.4 billion, or about
one—half of one percent of national income adjusted for the disutility of
risk) indicating that a compensation system could be arranged so that indexation

would be a Pareto—optimal improvement. In that sense, indexation would reduce
the distortionary cost of the tax system. Note that this result does not

— 31 —

consider

any dynamic efficiency effects of indexation.

There are several aspects to this increase in efficiency. First, there
is a small efficiency gain from the slight shift of capital away from owner—

occupied

housing, which is over—supplied, due to the tax advantages it receives

even in the absence of inflation. Second, indexation tends to reduce the dispersion in the cost of owner—occupied housing, and thus reduces the inefficiency

that results from individuals facing different prices for the same good. In
the unindexed inflationary economy, the total cost of owner—occupied housing
ranged from $.094 per unit of housing service (where one unit of service is
produced by one unit of capital) to the lowest income group to $.029 for the

highest taxed group. In the indexed equilibrium, the range of prices is $.085
to $.047. Thus the owner—occupied housing stock is more efficiently distributed
under indexation, as there is less incentive for the high income groups to borrow
in order to hold housing.

A third source of the efficiency gain under indexation is the improved

allocation of risk—bearing. Since after—tax risk premiums are not the same
for all individuals, risk is not borne optimally. Inflation in an unindexed
system exacerbates this problem since it widens the dispersion of risk premia,

due to its differential impact on risky and riskiess assets. Thus under indexing,
this dispersion is reduced and risk is borne more efficiently.

The pattern of the distributional impact of inflation also has several

sources. First, indexation tends to reduce the total taxation of capital income.
In order to make up the lost revenue, all personal tax rates were increased.

Since labor income comprises the bulk of personal taxable income, the indexing
scheme is accompanied by a not insignificant shift in the tax burden from the

— 32 —

high

income classes to the low income classes, who have a much higher relative

endowment of labor versus capital. Thus the lowest four income classes, the
ones who apparently suffer under indexation, find their federal tax burden
increased by $6.44 billion under the indexed system, or an increase of 8.8%.

The highest two income classes of course face the highest increase in
tax rates under the general tax increase scheme, but their reduced taxable

income under indexation almost entirely cancels out this effect, so that in the
end they pay only $0.93 billion more in federal taxes, just 3.1% of their initial.

tax payments. However, it is important to keep in mind that the increased tax
rates also serve to reduce the after—tax variance of their risky capitalinvestments.
This plus the fact that under indexation these two classes hold a much less
levered portfolio implies that the disutility from risky income is substantially

lower in their optimal portfolios under indexation. These individuals also
substitute income—earning assets for a large chunk of their owner—occupied housing,

the marginal utility of which was very low. Finally the top two classes benefit
greatly from the increased real return earned by tax—exempt securities, which are

held almost exclusively by these individuals. The increase in their real yield
from .001 to .025 provides a transfer of approximately $2.4 billion from the
general public to these two classes.
At this point it is important to alert the reader that the results of
these simulations are meant to be illustrative of the kind of analysis this

kind of model can provide. The results are not seen as the final word on
the effects of indexation on the U.S. economy, owing to our lack of knowledge
about certain of the parameters and functional forms of the model, and also to

the sensitivity of the results to certain aspects of the model itself. For
example, sensitivity analysis not reported here indicates that the allocational

— 33

—

impact of indexation is sensitive to the modelling of the housing sector
and the distributional implications depend on the kind of equal—yield tax
adjustment that is assumed to be used as well as the relationship of the after—

tax variance of assets to the marginal tax rate. This model has a multitude
of dimensions to which sensitivity analysis could conceivably be applied. This
warning is meant to serve as a less cumbersome

substitute

to reporting these

results.
V.2.

With

Responsive Corporate Financial Policy

Now the simulation of an indexed tax system is repeated, this time
allowing corporations to adjust their financial policy in response to the

changing tax environment. An earlier section discussed the methodology to be
used in calculating the corporate behavioral response. Note that the optimal
financial policy on which this methodology is based is independent of the rate

of inflation, and is therefore unaffected by indexing.29 Nevertheless, although
the indexing (or inflation) itself does not matter, certain changes in the
economy caused by the indexation scheme may cause corporations to alter their
financial decisions.
alter the. tax

cost

Changes in the ownership of equity by income class will

of a given financial policy; indexation tends to reduce

the concentration of equity ownership among the higher income classes, and

thus reduce the tax advantage of debt and retentions. Other relevant factors
are any changes in the marginal tax rates on dividends, debt interest,

and capital gains. These changes may result either from changes in the
taxable income of the individuals or from changes in the tax

rate

schedule

needed to keep total tax revenues unchanged. The net effect of these influences will determine the direction and magnitude of the corporate financial
response.

— 34 —

The simulation results indicate that there would be very little adjustment in corporate financial policy. The ownership of equity shifts toward
individuals with lower marginal tax rates, but the upward adjustment of all

tax rates to maintain equal yield offsets that to a large extent. In the
indexed equilibrium, the

aggregate

corporate debt--capital ratio falls from

.419 to .378, and the payout ratio does not change at all.

The equilibrium looks very similar to that which is depicted in Table 2.
The only significant difference is that the real rate of return on equity is

.108 instead of .114. This difference is due to the fact that with a reduced
debt—equity ratio equity shares are less risky and therefore earn a lower risk
premium in equilibrium.
The distributional implications of indexing are also not substantially

changed by allowing corporations financial flexibility. The shift toward
equity and away from debt would be expected to benefit the higher—taxed
individuals, for whom the retention of earnings at the corporate level has

a sheltering effect, at the expense of the lower—taxed individuals. This is
exactly the pattern that the simulation results reveal. The top two income
classes benefit even more from indexing than Table 3 indicates, and the

lower seven classes fare slightly less well than that table suggests. In all
cases, since the corporate financial adjustment is not large, the difference
in results is not great; for that reason, the detailed results are not presented
here.

VI. Concluding Remarks
This research demonstrates the feasibility of integrating a structural
treatment of portfolio choice and financial markets with the standard multi—

— 35 *

sector

general equilibrium model of taxation. The model developed here takes

account of the unsurprising fact that when there are changes in the taxation
of capital income, individuals will adjust their financial behavior in

response. A correct understanding of the effects of a tax change, including
its implications for total tax revenue, the allocation of production, and the
distributional impact, requires consideration of the general equilibrium impact
of this financial behavioral response.
The GEFB model is used to simulate the impact of a completely indexed tax

system. The simulation results should not be regarded as disposing of the
policy questions involved, owing to uncertainty about the values of several

parameters and the relatively simple formulations of the determinants of portfolio

choice and the U.S. financial structure. Nevertheless, the simulation results
point to significant financial adjustment in response to indexationor, conversely,
to inflation in an unindexed economy. A significant shifting of the location of
private risk—bearing accompanies a slight reallocation of the capital stock away
from owner—occupied housing toward its other uses and a substantial change in the

ownership of this stock by income class. All

in

all, indexing the tax system of

an economy like the U.S. in 1977 seems to lead to an efficiency gain, slightly
hurts the lowest income classes, and substantially improves the welfare of the
highest income groups.
Further research is needed for a more complete understanding of the

relationship between taxation on the one hand and financial behavior and markets

on the other hand. The role and behavior of financial institutions should be
integrated into the modelling of individuals' behavior presented here.3° The
dynamic implications of introducing financial behavior into tax models is also
a promising topic for future investigation.

Jo1 )1LtUd
—

36 —

TABLE A—i

ENDOWMENT OF CAPITAL AND LABOR BY INCONE CLASS, 1977
Income Class

Caal1i

Labor 1 ion

0-

9,000

440.3

140.2

9-

15,000

405.8

186.7

15- 22,500

572.0

259.6

22,500- 30,000

611.4

187.0

30-

45,000

615.7

111.7

45-

75,000

447.0

63.1

75-150,000

517.3

35.5

150-300,000

463.7

11.4

162.7

6.2

4238.5

1001.4

$

More than 300,000
Total

TABLE A-2
SRARES OF SPENDING ON FOOD, RENTAL, AND OWNED HOUSING

Food

Rental Housing

9,000

.206

.152

.070

9- 15,000

.176

.114

.059

15- 22,500

.167

.070

.081

22,500- 30,000

.159

.044

.095

30- 45,000

.145

.028

.091

45- 75,000

.128

.023

.085

75-150,000

.101

.020

.085

150-300,000

.076

.018

.085

.058

.016

.085

Income Class
$

0-

More than 300,000

Owned Housing

Joel SleEnrod

— 37 —

F OOTN DIES

For earlier uses of this type of model, see Meade [l955 and Johnson

[l956.

2

For a discussion of the relative merits of general versus partial

equilibrium analyses of taxation, see McLure [l975.

The later versions of the model are the work of Don Fullerton, Shoven,
and Whalley.

In Fullerton, King, Shoven, and Whalley [19791, corporations can adjust
their dividend policy in environments where dividends get preferential tax
treatment, but only the extreme alternative of 100 percent payout is considered.

Compare this to the result of standard general equilibrium models that
all individuals hold exactly the same mix of capital goods, which is clearly

counterfactual.

6

An example of such a production function is Q

K?LI'' ÷ 9K

,

where

is stochastic.

In the case of a portfolio choice between one risky and one riskless
asset, the demand for the risky asset is given by:
K(rE_rB)
KE

9

— 38

where E refers to the risky asset and B to the riskiess asset. The
coefficient
The

is proportional to Pratt's measure of relative risk aversion.

generalization

to many assets is straightforward. See Friend and Blurne

[19]5].

8

Since the discontinuous marginal tax rates of the actual tax system cause

problems for the solution algorithm, a smooth approximation of the tax table is used.

Of course not all taxpayers itemize deductions. To reflect this fact, the
average exogenous deduction amount is calculated including the standard deduction
for itemizers, and only a percentage of property tax and interest payments are

alloweds additional deductions. The percentage is chosen to approximate the
fraction of such payments which are made by itemizers, and varies by income class.

10

Nominal capital gains on all assets other than corporate equity are assumed
to be equal to the rate of inflation. The real value of corporate stock also
increases to the extent that earnings are retained within the corporation.

See Iiternal Revenue Service Proceedings 72—18 and James [1979].

12

Aaron and others have pointed out that although the production of housing

services is capital—intensive, production of the housing stock itself is
relatively labor—intensive; of all the major private sectors of the economy,
only finance and insurance had as high a fraction of direct labor requirements.

Analysis of this issue would require expanding the model to include the demand
for and production of capital goods; this looms beyond the scope of current
research aims.

— 39 —

13

Two considerations
.

motivate the introduction of this role for government.

The first is that in the absence of such a role, the individual must consider
the covariation between asset returns and relative prices in making his port-

folio decision. This is a significant complication the assiption of no
relative price uncertainty avoids. Second, and related, in the presence
of price uncertainty there is some ambiguity about how "risky" an asset is.
As Stiglitz [1969) has pointed out, even if the real output froni an invest-

ment were perfectly certain, fluctuations in outputs of other commodities

would still make the given investment risky, since both its relative price

and the marginal utility of income would vary. Under certain conditions a
sector with no technological uncertainty may experience greater uncertainty
in return than an industry which does have a stochastic production function.
Assuming no price uncertainty avoids this ambiguity.

14

See pp. 69—97 for a more detailed treatment of the issues raised in

this section, and for alternative treatments of financial policy in this
model.

15

16

-

The exact factor of increase is 2.92.

In Harberger's original treatment and in the subsequent Shovenet.

papers, the unit of capital was defined as that amount which (in the assumed

equilibrium) earned one dollar of income net of all taxes. This procedure is
perfectly consistent with their model which ignores the differential riskiness

— 40 —

of

capital, since then it is a condition of equilibrium

that the net return of each unit of capital be equalized. However, when risk
(and any other) differences in particular forms of capital are recognized,

this procedure is no longer valid. For example, the quantity of risky
capital which produces a given expected net return will be less than the
required quantity of riskless capital.
The long run equilibrium condition that would be observed in a
world with differential riskiness of capital is that each unit of capital be

valued the same. Since capital can move between sectors, any difference in
value would be incompatible with equilibrium. Thus, I have chosen to
represent a unit of capital as that quantity which in 1977 was valued at
one dollar.

17

This is an imperfect measure of the appropriate return to labor since

it does not include employer contributions for social insurance programs.

18

A more direct method of calculating private wealth yields a similar

figure. The 1977 net stock of fixed non—residential capital was valued by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis at $1.616 billion, residential capital at

$l.713 billion, and inventories at $0.506 billion, for a total of $3.835 bil-

lion. The value of federal, state, and local securities held by households
was reported by the Federal Reserve Board to be $0.234 billion, while the
amount held by private domestic non-government agents was $0.680 billion.

Since the procedure for precisely calculating private wealth in our
stylized model without financial institutions is not obvious, it must suffice
to show that a synthetic calculation using these figures will yield a number
not far from the $4.24 billion used in the model.

— 41

19

—

The 1972-3 brackets are inflated by a factor of 1.5, which is approximately

the factor of increase in per capita disposable personal income between 1977

and 1972-3. (The figure for 1977 is $6017 and the average of 1972 and 1973
is $4061).

20

The primary components of spending on owned dwellings as recorded by the

Consumer Expenditure Survey are interest on mortgages, property taxes, and

expenses for maintenance. This is a highly imperfect measure of the real
cost of owned housing services, since it ignores the opportunity cost of any
equity in the house,

taxes,

the tax deductibility of mortgage payments and property

the depreciation of the stock, and any increase in the nominal value

of the house. The reported cost of owned housing and the actual cost may
be compared at follows:

+ t

Reported Cost:

HEV(rB+rT) ÷ M

Actual

H[rB_t(rB+1T) + N ÷ D

Cost:

÷

t(l-t)

Here H is the value of the house, y is the debt-capital ratio, rB is the
real riskless interest rate, -r

is the anticipated rate of inflation, M is

the maintenance rate, D is the rate of depreciation, t is the property
tax rate, and t is the marginal rate of personal income tax.
By using estimated values of these parameters, we can find the ratio of

actual cost to reported cost for each income group. For y we use the ratio of
the value of outstanding household home mortgages to the net value of residential

housing in 1972, which is 0.527. We set rE to be .03,

D at .0225 and t
p

at

11

at

.0154. Using these values we find that:

.045,

14 at .0125,

— 42 —

Actual

Cost
Reported Cost

.0804 —

.0904t

.0674

By using the average marginal tax rate for people in each income class,

we can compute the conversion ratio above. This ratio applied to the CES
reported share of spending on owned dwellings yields the numbers reported in
Table A—2.

21

The income elasticity of food is taken to be .51, as estimated by

Houtthaker and Taylor [1970]. The income elasticities of rental and owner—
occupied housing in the upper income classes are assumed to be .70 and 1,

respectively. These numbers are compatible with the findings of Rosen [1978]
that the income elasticities of rental and owned housing were both .76, given
tenure choice, but that the probability of being an owner increased with income.

22

The source for the property tax payments and total assessed value is

Facts

and Figures on Government Finance (The Tax Foundation, 1977). The

assessment ratio is from the 1972 Census of Governments.

23

A value for

aversion

of three is comparable to a coefficient of

relative

risk

of six. This is consistent with the recent findings of Friend and

Hasbrouck [1980], although earlier research (see Friend and Blume [1975]) found

values ox the order of two.

24

This calculation is derived by updating the average nominal rate of return

for 1926—1971 presented in Friend and Blume [1975], and subtracting the average

annual

increase in the consumer price index over the period.

— 43 —

25

Since the higher income brackets tend to own

lower

dividend—yielding

stocks, 37% of dividends received is certainly compatible with owning (at
least) 43.9% of all stock.

26

As time passes, inflation also pushes taxpayers into higher personal

tax brackets, increasing both marginal and average tax rates. This dynamic
aspect of an unindexed tax system is not treated in this exercise in comparative
statics.

27

The details of an indexing system need not concern

us

here.

For this exercise the shortfall in revenue is made up by a levy on individuals
that is proportional to their federal tax payments and is assumed to have no
substitution effects.

29

King [1978], PP. 111—112, shows that in models with one type of investor,

no bankruptcy costs, and no constraints on individual portfolios, the conditions
determining whether a firm should prefer debt or equity are unaffected by the

rate of inflation. However, this formulation is not compatible with the existence
of an optimal debt—equity ratio, either for the firm or for the economy as a whole.
In models of capital market equilibrium which feature optimal non—extreme financial
policies, the rate of inflation may have a direct impact on the equilibrium financial

structure of the firm and/or economy. (See for instance Auerbach and King [19801
and Gordon [1980]). However, at the moment there is no econometric evidence on the

44 —

relationship

between inflation arid

financial

structure that can be invoked

in this simulation model, and explicitly modelling the conditions which lead
to an interior equilibrium, such as constraints on borrowing or the existence
of bankruptcy costs, is beyond the scope of this present study.

30

A first step toward a model with financial institutions is made in

Slemrod [1980], pp. 165—204.

Joel Slernrod

References

Aaron, Henry, Shelter and Subsidies

(Washington, D.C.: The Brookings

Institution, 1972).

Auerbach, Alan, "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,
Quarterly Journal of Economics XCIII (August 1979), PP. 433—466.

__________

"Share Valuation and Corporate Equity Policy," Journal

of Public Economics VIII (June 1979), pp. 291—305.

_________ and Mervyn King, "Taxation, Portfolio Choice, and Debt—
Equity Ratios: A General Equilibrium Analysis," NBER
Working Paper #546, 1980.

Ballentine, J. Gregory and Charles McLure, Jr., "Corporate Tax

Integration: Incidence and Effects on Financial Structure,"
in 1978 Compendium of Tax Research (Washington, D.C.:
Department of the Treasury, 1978).

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Flow of Funds Accounts:
Assets and Liabilities Outstanding, 1967—1977, (Washington,

D.C.: August 1978).

Bradford, David F. ,

"The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a

Tax on Corporate Distributions," National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 349 (May 1979).

Brittain, John A., Corporate Dividend Poliy (Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution, 1966).

Feldstein, Martin S., "Inflation, Taxes, and the Rate of Interest:
A Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review LXVI
(December 1976), pp. 809—820.

Feldstein, Martin S., Jerry Green, and Eytan Sheshinski, "Inflation
and Taxes in a Growing Economy with Debt and Equity Finance,"
Journal of Political Economy LXXXVI (April 1978, Part 2),
pp. 553—570.

______________

"Corporate Financial Policy and Taxation in a Growing

Economy," Quarterly Journal of Economics XCIII (August 1979),
pp. 411—432.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Joel Slemrod, "Personal Taxation, Portfolio
Choice, and the Corporation Income Tax," Journal of Political
Economy, LXXXVIII (October 1980), pp. 854-866.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Lawrence Summers, "Inflation and the Taxation
of Capital Income in the Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal
XXXII (December 1979), pp. 445—470.

Frriend, Irwin and Marshall E. Blume, "The Demand for Risky Assets,"
Anierican

Economic Review,

LXV (December 1975), pp. 900—922.

Friend, Irwin and J. Hasbrouck, "Effect of Inflation on the Profitability
and Valuation of U.S. Corporations," University of
Pennsylvania, 1980.

Fullerton, Don, John B. Shoven, and John Tha11ey, "Dynamic General
Equilibrium Impacts of Replacing the U.S. Income Tax with a
Progressive Consumption Tax," (July 1978, mimeo).

__________, A. Thomas King, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, "Static
and Dynamic Resource Allocation Effects of Corporate and

Personal Tax Integration in the U.S.: A General Equilibrium
Approach," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 337 (April 1979).

Gordon, Roger, "Inflation, Taxation, and Financial Behavior," mimeo, 1980.

Harberger, Arnold C., "The Corporation Income Tax: An Empirical
Appraisal," in House Committee on Ways and Means, Tax Revision
Compendium (1959), pp. 231—250.

________ "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax," Journal of
Political Economy LXX (June 1962), pp. 215—240.

"Efficiency

____

Effects of Taxes on Income from Capital,"

in Marian Krzyzaniak (ed.), Effects of_Coporation_Income
Tax (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1966).

Houtthaker, Hendrik S., and Lester Taylor, Consumer Demand in

the

(Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1966).

James, Brandon C., "Ownership of Tax—Exempt Assets May Endanger
Deduction for Otherwise Allowable Items," Taxation for Accountants
XXIII (November 1979).

Johnson, H. C., "General Equilibrium Analysis of Excise Taxes: Comment,"
American Economic Review, XLVI (March 1956), pp. 151—156.

King, M.A., "Taxation and the Cost of Capital," Review of Economic Studies
XLI (January 1974), pp. 21—35.

_________

Public

Policy and the Corporation (London: Chapman and

Hall, 1978).

McLure, Charles E., Jr., "General Equilibrium Analysis: The Harberger
Model After Ten Years,"

Journal

(February 1975), pp. 125—162.

of Public Economics IV

Meade, J. E., Mathematical Supplement to Trade and_Welfare (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1955).

Mieszkowski, Peter, "On the Theory of Tax Incidence," Journal of

Political_Econon LXXV (June 1967), pp. 250—262.

Modigliani, Franco and Merton Miller, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation
Finance, and the Theory of Investment," American Economic_Review
XLVIII (June 1958), pp. 261—297.

Projector, Dorothy S., and Gertrude S. Weiss, Survey of Financial

Characteristics of Consumers (Washington, D.C.: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1966).

Rosen, Harvey, "Housing Decisions and the U.S. Income Tax: An Econometric
Analysis," The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Institute for
Advanced Studies Report No. 20/78 (1978).

_______ "Owner—Occupied Housing and the Federal Income Tax: Estimates and
Simulations," Journal of Urban Economics VI (April 1979),
pp. 247—266.

Rosen, Harvey S., and Kenneth T. Rosen, "Federal Taxes and Homeownership:

Evidence from Time Series," Journal of Political Economy LXXXVIII
(February 1980), pp. 59—74.

Shoven, John B. , "The Incidence and Efficiency Effects of Taxes on

Income from Capital," Journal of Political Economy LXXXIV
(November/December 1976), pp. 1261—1283.

Shoven, John B., and John Whalley, "A General Equilibrium Calculation of
the Effects of Differential Taxation of Income from Capital
in the U.S.," Journal of Public Economics I (November 1972),
pp. 281—321.

________

"Equal Yield Tax Alternatives: General Equilibrium Computational
Techniques," Journal of Public Economics VIII (October 1977),
pp. 211—224.

Slemrod, Joel, "A General Equilibrium Model of Capital Income Taxation,"
Ph. D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1980.

Stiglitz, Joseph, "Taxation, Risk Taking, and the Allocation of Investment
in a Competitive Economy," in N. Jensen (ed.) Studies in the

Theory of Capital Markets (new York: 1969).

_______

"Taxation,

Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of Capital,"

Journal of Public Economics II (February 1973), pp. 1—34.

Tobin, James, "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,"
Journal

of

Money, Credit, and Banking I (February 1969) PP. 15—29.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer

Expenditure_Interview_Surv,

1972—1973, BLS Bulletin 1985 (Washington, D.C.: January 1978).

U.S. Department of the Treasury, Statistics of Income— 197, Individual
Income Tax Returns (Washington, D.C.: 1980).

