                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MACROECONOMI C DETERMI NANTS
                     OF REAL EXCHANGE RATES



                       William H. Branson


                      Working F.per No. 801




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          November 1981




This paper was prepared for a Wharton Conference on Managing
International Risk, October 25—27, 1981. Research was supported by
the NSF, and I wish to thank Josh Felman for research assistance.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NEER Working Paper #801
                                           November, 1981




      MACROECONOMIC DETERI'{INANTS OF REAL EXCHANGE RATES




                          Abstract



     This paper presents a model that integrates money, rela-
tive prices, and the current account balance as factors ex-
plaining movements in nominal (effective) exchange rates.
Thus money and the current account are the proximate deter-
minants of changes in real (effective) rates. The basic model
is first analyzed under static expectations. It is an exten-
sion of Branson (1977) to include explicitly exogenous dis-
turbances to the current account. Next, rational expectations
are introduced, and it is shown that the nominal (and real)
rate should be expected to jump instantaneously in response to
new information or "innovations" in money, the current account,
and relative prices.

     The model is applied to the quarterly data on effective
exchange rates, relative prices, money and the current account
for four countries——the U.S., the U.K., Germany and Japan——
since 1973. First the time—series properties of the data are
described. All are approximately first—order autocorrelations
except all relative prices and Japan's effective exchange rate
and current account balance. These are second—order autocor—
relations. Then vector autoregressions (VARs) are estimated
among the four variables for each country. The residuals from
these equations are the "innovations" in the data——the current
movements not predicted by the past. The correlations amongst
these innovations are consistent with the theory.

     Thus the broad conclusion from the paper is that the theo-
retical model which integrates money, the balance on current
account and relative prices, is consistent with movements in
these variables since 1973. Real exchange rates adjust to real
disturbances in the current account, and time—series innovations
in the current account seem to signal the need for adjustment.



                                          William H. Branson
                                          Woodrow Wilson School
                                          Princeton University
                                          Princeton, N.J. 08544
                                          (609) 452—4828
  Macroeconomic Deterininants   of Real Exge Rates                 Wm. H. Branson
                                                                   October 16, 1981
  I. Introduction and Summary

      In 1973 the international monetary system began a period of Continuous

  movement of exchange rates among major currencies. Rather than moving

  smoothly following the paths of relative national price levels, exchange

 rates have exhibited the volatile movements that are generally associated

 with asset market prices. This has been amply documented by Jacob Frenkel

  (l98la,b). Sharp movements of the exchange rate relative to relative price

 levels are fluctuations in "real exchange rates."   This term is defined here

 to mean the nominal exchange rate adjusted for relative price movements.


     During the period since 1973 theory about the determinants of exchange

 rate fluctuations has undergone a transformation. We began with alternative

 models in which rates moved to clear the current account balance (the "elas-

 ticities" approach) or responded to movements in relative money stocks (the

 "monetary" approach). These have been integrated into a more general frame-

 work in which exchange rates are determined in the short run by conditions

 of asset—market equilibrium, in the same way as asset prices or interest rates,

and in the long run by real conditions affecting the current account.

This integrated theoretical view is expressed, for example, in Dornbusch

 (1980). In this view, monetary disturbances generally do not change the

equilibrium real exchange rate, but real disturbances to the current account

do. This theoretical view has been accepted widely enough that the OECD

Economic Outlook reports it as the conventional wisdom:


        The main economic variables generally thought to explain exchange
        rates are monetary conditions (and especially interest rate dif-
        ferentials), current account developments, and relative price per-
        formance. But over recent months the influence of inflation dif-
        ferentials has been uncharacteristically small, or operated with
        considerable delay, the dominant role being played by monetary
        conditions and current account developments.—'



—'OECD, Economic Outlook no. 29, July 1981, p. 59.
                                                                       2.



    Since the variables cited in the quote are generally thought to determine

movements in exchange rate, one would expect new information about these

variables to move exchange rates in the short run through expectations.        Some

initial evidence that "news" or "innovations" in the relevant variables moves

exchange rates is reported in Dornbusch (1980) and Frenkel (198lb). More

evidence is presented in section VI below.


       This paper presents a model that integrates money, relative prices,

and the current account balance as factors explaining movements in nominal

(effective) exchange rates. Thus money and the current account are the

proximate determinants of changes in real (effective) rates. In section II

we present the basic model with static expectations.      It is an extension

                                                      disturbances to the current
of Branson (1977) to include explicitly exogenous

account.—' The result is gradual adjustment of the real exchange rate fol-

lowing a current account disturbance. In section III we introduce (rational)

expectations, and see that the nominal (and real) rate should be expected to

jump instantaneously in response to new information or "innovations" in

money, the current account, and relative prices.

       In sections IV —   VI we study the quarterly data on effective exchange
                                           current account for four countries ——
rates, relative prices, money and the

 the   U.S., the U.K., Germany and Japan ——   since 1973. Section IV describes
 the time—series properties of the data. All are approximately first—order

 autocorrelatiOnS except all relative prices and Japan's effective exchange

 rate and current account balance. These are second—order autocorrelationS.
                                                      does not hold in the short
 We see in section V that purchasing power parity

 run. This confirms evidence presented, for example, by Frenkel (1981a).


 —'Readers familiar with that model can easily skip the first seven pages
   of section II.
                                                                      3.


    Finally, in section VI we see the results of estimation of vector

autoregressions (VARs) among the four variables for each country. The

residuals from these equations are the "innovations" in the data ——   the
current movements not predicted by the past. The correlations amongst

these Innovations provide a test of the theory; we would expect a system-

atic relationship between innovations in money, current account balance,

relative prices and the effective exchange rate. These correlations are

shown in Tables 10 and 11. They are generally consistent with the theory

of sections II and III.


    Thus the broad conclusion from the paper is that the theoretical consen-

sus expressed by the OECD, which integrates money, the balance on current

account and relative prices, is consistent with movements in these variables

since 1973. Real exchange rates adjust to real disturbances in the current

account, and time—series innovations in the current account seem to signal

the need for adjustment.
                                                                      4.




II. The Asset—Market Model with Static Expectations.


II.A.      Introduction

        The literature of the 1970s has identified three macroeconomic vari-

ables that influence movements in exchange rates. These are money sup-

plies, relative price levels, and current—account balances. Here I de-

velop a representative model that explicitly includes all three elements.

We begin by specifying the underlying economic structure with static ex-

pectations. Then in section III below rational expectations concerning

movements in the exchange rate are introduced.

        The model is an extension of the asset—market model sketched in

Bransori (1975), and developed in full in Branson (1977, 1979a). There the

focus was on the roles of relative prices and asset markets, mainly in

the short run. Here the model is extended to study the effects of under-

lying "real" disturbances influencing the current account balance, with

price dynamics specified explicitly.

II.B. Asset—market equilibrium in the short run.

        To make the analysis manageable, let us consider one country in a

many—country world. We can aggregate the assets available in this coun-

try into a domestic money stock M, which is a nonearning asset, net hold-
                                         which are denominated in home cur-
ings of domestically—issued assets B,

rency, and net holdings of foreign—issued assets F, which are denominated

 in foreign exchange.—' B (for bonds) is essentially government debt held


  /Since the analysis here applies to any single country in the interna-
 tional financial system, I use the terms 'home' and 'foreign' to denote
 the country being discussed and the rest of the system, respectively. At
                                               damage would be done if the
 the level of generality of this discussion no
 reader substituted "US" for 'home country', 'dollar' for 'home currency'
 and 'Fed' for 'central bank'.
                                                                       5.




 by the domestic private sector. F (for foreign assets) is the net claims

 on foreigners held by the domestic private sector. The current account

 in the balance of payments gives the rate of accumulation of F over time.

 The rate of accumulation of B is new government debt issue sold to the

 private sector, and the rate of accumulation of N is given by home central

bank (Fed) purchases of government debt.

      The rate of return on F is given by ,   fixed   in the world capital

market, plus the expected rate of increase in the exchange rate, .

The rate of return on B is the domestic interest rate r, to be deter-

mined in domestic financial markets. Total private—sector wealth, at any

point in time, is given by W = M + B + eF, so here the exchange rate e,

in home currency per unit of foreign exchange (e.g. $0.50 per DN), trans-

lates the foreign—exchange value of F into home currency.


     The total supplies of the three assets, N, B and F, to domestic

holders are given at each point in time. Each can be accumulated only

over time through foreign or domestic investment.—' These interact with

demands for the three assets in determining equilibrium values for the

home interest rate r and exchange rate e. The demand for each asset



—'Since F is home claims on foreigners less home liabilities to foreign-
ers, an asset swap which exchanges a claim and a liability with a foreign
asset—holder is a transaction within F, changing claims and liabilities
by the same amount. This transaction would leave F and B unchanged.
The reason for using this particular aggregation will become clear when
we study dynamic adjustment below. Basically, we want to define net for-
eign assets consistently with the balance of payments and national income
and product accounts, which record the capital account balance as the
change in U.S. private holdings of net foreign assets. The assumptions
outlined above make N and B non—traded assets. This implies that the
total stocks of N, B, and F in domestic portfolios are given at any point
in time.
                                                                              6.




                                                              and r + .
depends on wealth, W = M + B + eF, and both rates of return,r
                                              increase. The demands for
As wealth rises, demands for all three assets
                                                    of return and negatively on
B and F depend positively on their own rates

those of the other assets. The demand for money depends negatively on
                                         asset—holders attempt to shift from
both r and r + &; as either rises,

money into the asset whose return has gone up.

                                                              summarized in equa-
        These asset—market equilibrium conditions are

tions (1) —     (4).

(1)     M =   m(r, r + ).W

(2)     B =   b(r,     + ê)W.

(3) eF =      f(r,   r + ê)W.


 (4)    W=M-1-B+eF.

Equation (4) is the balance sheet constraint, which insures that

in   + b + f = 1.      The three demand functions give the desired distribution

                                                 the three assets. Specifying the
 of the domestic wealth portfolio W into
                                             in wealth eliminates the price level
 asset demand functions as homogeneous
                                         conditions. Given the balance sheet con-
 from the asset—market equilibrium
                                                 of the three assets, we have the
 straint (4), and gross substitutability

 constraints on partial derivatives of the distribution functions:

               + f1 =         <   0:              f2 <   0.
                         b1            m2 + b2

                                           derivative. The three market equili-
 Here a subscript denotes a partial
                                             independent equations in e and r,
 brium conditions (i)—(3) contain two
                                                                     with W
  given the balance sheet constraint. Any pair of (l)—(3),
                                                                        7.



 substituted from (4), can be used to determine short—run equilibrium

 values for e and r.


         In this section the assumption of static expectations means ê = 0.

 In section III we will see the important difference that expectations

make for the dynamic path to the long—run equilibrium.




     We can study short—run equilibrium determination of the exchange

rate and the interest rate holding r + ê constant, using Figure 1.

There we show the pairs of interest rate r and exchange rate e that al-

ternatively hold the demand for money equal to its supply (MM), the de-

mand for domestic assets equal to their supply (BB), and the demand for

foreign assets equal to their supply (FF). To obtain the slopes of MM

and BB, consider what happens as e rises. This increases the home cur-

rency value of wealthW, increasing the demand for both N and B. As

the demand for money rises, the equilibrium r that maintains demand for

money equal to the fixed supply rises, giving the positive slope to MM.

As the demand for domestic assets rises, this pulls up their price, de-

pressing the equilibrium interest rate. This gives the negative slope

to BB.


     For the slope of FF, consider what happens as the home rate of re-

turn r rises. As the domestic r rises, the demand for foreign assets

falls, and e falls as asset—holders attempt to sell F. This gives FF a

negative slope. Since a given increase in r reduces the demand for F by
                                               8.




e         B
                                   N



      F




                                           F




      N                           B
                                           r


    Figure 1:   Short—run equilibrium in
                asset markets.
                                                                        9.



 less than it increases the demand for B, a smaller drop in the exchange

 rate is required to restore equilibrium in the foreign asset market than

 would restore equilibrium in the domestic asset market. This makes BB

 steeper than FF.


       Movements of equilibrium r and e can be analyzed by asking how the

market—equilibrium curves of Figure 1 shift as monetary policy or the

world rate + ê or F shift for example. This analysis can be done by

using any two of the three curves. Since the three assets sum to

 total wealth, if a given change in e and r restores equilibriuu. in two

markets, it must in the third. Thus, since all three curves go through

the same equilibrium r, e point (the one that yields equilibrium in all

three markets simultaneously), we need to use only two to analyze changes

in short—run equilibrium; the third will follow imlicitly.

       Short—run stability and comparative statics of the asset—market model

in (l)—(4) are discussed in detail in Branson (1979a). There we see the ef-

fects of changes in the stocks of N, B, or F on equilibrium e and r using

Figure 1.—I The comparative static results are summarized in Table 1.



  Table 1. Effects of increases in asset stocks on short—run equilibrium
                interest rate (r) and exchange rate (e).

                    Effects of Accumulation     Effects of open—market
                           of stocks                  operations

Effects on           LN     L,B    F            B = —N      eAF =   —




   r                  -      +      0               -           -
   e                  +             -               +           +




—"Technically, we can put (4) for W into (l)—(3), totally differentiate
any pair of these three, and solve for de and dr. This is done in the
Appendix in Branson (1979a).
                                                                            10.




       The entries in Table 1 give the direction of change of the interest

rate and the exchange rate following (a) an increase in any one of the

asset stock, holding the others constant, in the first three columns, and
                                                          exchanged for B or f or
(b) an expansionary open—market operation, with N

F, in the last two columns. One important implication of Table 1 is that

an increase in the domestic money stock M, either through a budget defi-
                                                         the exchange rate e.
cit or an open—market operation, directly raises

The increase in e is required for financial market equilibrium and should

come quickly before any effects on the price level are seen. Thus, in

the short run the exchange rate is determined by financial market equili-

brium, not only by relative prices. A second important implication of

Table 1 is that if the country is running a surplus on current account,

so that net foreign assets F are increasing, this tends to reduce the ex-

change rate; a deficit in current account, with F falling, raises the ex-

change rate. This is the key to dynamic adjustment of the exchange rate

as we move from short run to long run.

       The short—run comparative statics of Table 1 yield an implicit re-

duced—form equation for the exchange rate:


 (5)     e = e (F, N; B); eF <   0;   eN >   0.

                                                  value for e as a function of the
This gives the instantaneous equilibrium
                                                             and eF
 supplies of the relevant assets. The partial derivatives eN

 comparative—Static solutions de/dN and de/dF.—' An increase in N raises
                                                                                  11.




—'The precise equation for de from the comparative statics can be ob-
  tained by total differentiation of (1) and (2) and inversion to solve
  for de:


                                       —              —
                                           [b2(l—m)       m1b]dN

(5)    de =
              [F(bm1
                       -
                           mb1)}   .   +   [b2m - m1b]edF


                                       + [b2m + m1(l—b)]dB

  eF from (5) is the coefficient of dF in (5), and                   is the coefficient
  of dM. See Branson (1979a), Appendix equation (A.ll).


instantaneous equilibrium e, and an increase in F reduces it. Inspection

of the system (l)—(4) with ê = 0 (static expectations) shows that the

elasticity of e with respect to F, eF F/              ,   is   —1. The variables e and
F enter only multiplicatively.
                                                                   12.




II.C. Dynamics and Long-run Equilibrium

II.C.1   The Adjustment Mechanism

     In the short run the exchange rate is determined by requirements

of asset—market equilibrium, giving existing stocks of money, domestic

assets, and foreign assets. But this is not the end of the story. The

value of the exchange rate at one point in time, t(O), given income, the

domestic price level, and other real variables, may yield a nonzero

balance on current account. With flexible exchange rates and no cen-

tral bank intervention in foreign exchange markets, the sum of the bal-

ances on capital account and current account is identically zero. Thus,

a nonzero current account balance implies an equally nonzero capital ac-

count balance of the opposite sign. If the current account shows a sur-

plus, the capital account is in deficit and the private sector is ac-

cumulating foreign assets; F is increasing. If the current account is

in deficit, F is decreasing. As F changes, the exchange rate changes

through the short—run mechanism of subsection B. Thus, if the initial value

of the exchange rate e(O), yields a nonzero current account balance, F

is either increasing or decreasing, moving e from e(O).   The point of

this section is to study the dynamic adjustment through the current ac-

count, and to show the condition under which it leads to a stable long—run

equilibrium value for e where the current account balance is zero and the

stock of net foreign assets is not changing.

      In addition to the exchange—rate dynamics, the price level presumably

 responds to changes in the domestic money stock, but with a lag. For

 price dynamics, we follow Dornbusch (1976) in assuming slow adjustment
                                                                                13.



of the price level to monetary shocks. We also assume that in the long

run, the price level changes proportionately to the money stock; the

economy is homogeneous in monetary variables. Rather than specify the

entire domestic economy, I will assume long—run homogeneity and gradual

adjustment of the price level.—'



—'Readers interested in the underlying model of the economy might
  consult Branson (l979h, ch. 7).

         The technical analysis of dynamic adjustment il1 be presented in

this subsection. Then in subsections II D and II E we will describe the

response of the system to monetary and real shocks.


         The assumption on price dynamics is captured simply by

(6)      •4p
         dt        A(m_m*).
                           *
Here m = M/p,     and in       is   the equilibrium value of real balances corres-

ponding to long—run equilibrium output. Equation (6) says that if it
                                          *
is    increased, raising.tn above in ,        the price level will rise to restore
m = In
         *1

—'This is a formalization of the argument on price—level adjustment in
  Branson (1977, l979a).



       The other dynamic equation is provided by the balance—of—payments

identity. With no central bank intervention, and thus zero change in re-

serves, the capital account and current account must sum to zero:

          OEX+rF-F
                                                                            14.



Here X is net exports of goods, F is income on net foreign assets, and

i         dF/dt is the rate of accumulation of net foreign assets, the rate of

capital outflow. This gives us an expression for F:


             FEX+rF
          Net exports, in turn, depend on the real exchange rate e/p, and an

exogenous shift factor z. The real exchange rate here is the relative

price of foreign to home bundles of goods, ep/p, with the foreign price

level p set equal to unity. An assumption of purchasing—power—parity

(PPP) would impose constancy on e/p, as e follows exactly the path of

p/ .         This     assumption has not held in the 1970s, but we will see below

that it may be a reasonable description of the average long—run path of e.—


—'See Katseli (1979) and Frenkel (198la) for the breakdown of PPP in the
     1970s.


           The exogenous shift factor z represents real events such as changes

in tastes or technology, oil discoveries, etc., that increase net exports

 (in foreign exchange terms) for a given value of e/p. Thus we write


             X   = x(elp,z);   X   >0;X>0

An increase in e/p is a real devaluation; Xe >
                                               0 assumes the Marshall—

Lerner conditions held in the short run.

           With the reduced—form expression for e and the exports function both

 included, the dynamic equation for F is now


    (7)
                 =   X[e(F,M;B)/p,z]   + F
                                                                           15.




 The variable B is not of interest here. N and z are exogenous to the

 dynamic system given by (6) and (7). F and p are the slowly—adjusting

 state variables, and e can jump in the short—run in response to changes

 in F and N.



 II.C.2   Long—run Equilibrium

      The long—run equilibrium Conditions are    and   = 0 in equations

 (6) and (7). The implication for long—run movements in p have already

 been assumed. The price level moves proportionately to changes in N.

      The effect of an increase in z is more interesting. From (7), an

increase in z initially generates a current—account surplus, F > 0

As F accumulates, e falls as shown in the short—run comparative statics.

This reduces X and f' .   When X has fallen to its initial value, t   is
still positive, since F has increased. Therefore e must fall further,

until the reduction in X just outweighs the increase in F.    Thus

because income on foreign assets is part of the current—account balance,

the exchange rate must appreciate enough to offset the original increase

in z plus the increase in investment income due to accumulation of F

between equilibria.
                                                                            16.




II.C.3. Dynamic Stability

      Equations (6) and (7) for f and F can be combined and linearized

into the system:

                        SN


      /
           F    [XeF + r     —
                                 X] (
                                        F -
                                              F0\
                                                     X X -
(8)                               II
      (        =1
                L   o
                             _xJ0)                  Lo   xi N-N0
A sufficient condition for stability is that XeeF +        <0   .   This   is

the "super Marshall—Lerner" condition in Branson (1977). Xe is

positive and eF is negative. Their product is the effect of F accumula-

tion on X, through the normal Narshall—Lerner effect. This must be

large enough to offset the effect of rising F or F to ensure stability.

       If this super Narshall—Lerner condition holds, this system moves

towards its long—run equilibrium monotonically after a disturbance to

N or z. This can be seen from the form of the stability matrix SM in (8).

The roots of the system that govern its dynamics are simply the diagonal

elements, both real and negative. This insures monotonic stability.—'


—'I did not see this when I said in Branson (1977, 1979a) that adjustment
  is not necessarily inonotonic.



          Thus the super—Narshall—Lerfler stability condition insures long—run

stability. Thus reassured, we can move on to describe adjustment in

reaction to monetary shocks on N or real shocks to z.
                                                                     17.




II.D. The Effect of a Monetary Disturbance

     The analysis of short—run comparative statics of section II.B

and of the dynamic adjustment in section II.C, can now be combined to

study the effect of monetary disturbances. We will follow the path of

adjustment of the exchange rate following a one—time shift arising in

the monetary sector. Such a disturbance could originate on the supply

side, owing to a shift in monetary policy or the supply behaviour of

the banking svsten, or on the demand side, owing to a shift in the

public's demand for money. A sudden decrease in the demand for money,

at initial values for exchange rates and interest rates, should produce

the same results as an increase in the supply of money, due to monetary

policy, for example. In the discussion below, we will focus on the ex-

ample of an increase in the money supply (expansionary open—market

operation). The result would be equally applicable in the event of a

reduction in money demand.

     We begin with the effects on the domestic price path of a monetary

shift. This is the underlying path about which the exchage rate is mo:—

ing as the current account adjusts. Then we move on to study the impact

and adjustment effects on the exchange rate, relative to the price path.

    Following equation (6), the price level will rise in response to

the excess level of real balances, moving to a new equilibrium where the

price level has increased proportionately to the increase in the money

supply. This is shown in Figure 2. The domestic price level begins at

an initial equilibrium value p*(O), indexed to 1.0 at time t(0). It rises
                            **
to a new equilibrium value p , where dp/p dN/M. This is the price
                                                                18.




        P




 **
p                                                  /4




                                                    'PaiN
 *
P (0)




                                                                      Time
                     t (0)

            Figure 2: Adjustment of the domestic price level.
                                                                    19.




path around which the exchange rate e adjusts.

     Next we turn to the path of exchange-rate adjustment. We begin

with the system in full equilibrium, with the current account balance

zero, so that X(e/p,z)   —rF, with given initial stocks of M, B, and F.

We want to trace the path of the exchange rate following an initial in-

crease in the money supply, through an open—market operation. To avoid

the second—order complications that came from a reallocation of invest-

ment income on foreign assets between the private sector and the govern-

ment if the open—market operation is done in the foreign exchange market,

we will focus on the case where AB = —LN: an open—market operation in

government debt. Again, the effects of a downward shift in the demand

for money would be the same. The result of a contraction of supply or

increase in demand would be symmetrically opposite.

     The initial effect of the increase in the money stock is an upward

jump in the exchange rate, to maintain asset market equilibrium. This

is the increase shown in Table 1. Figure 3 shows the adjustment path of

the exchange rate, superimposed on the price path of Figure 2. Initially,

e* and    are normalized to 1.0. The increase in the money stock pushes

the exchange rate up to e1 instantaneously. The next step is to trace

the dynamic adjustment path as net foreign assets accumulate.
                                                           20.




            — 1-..
               +     —
                                       ____p**

                                         —




 PS




                                                     ime
              t(C)          t(i)


Figure 3:   Adjustment of price level and exchange rate
            to an increase in M.
                                                                            21.




     At e1 in Figure 3, the price ratio (e/P) has risen above the eIP*

value that gave F = 0 at the original value of F at time t(0). In the

initial equilibrium at t(O), the current account balance was zero.

After the increase in the money supply, with F still at F(O), the price

ratio rises to e1/P*) >   (e*/P*).   Assuming the Marshall—Lerner condition

holds, the movement on the price ratio increases net exports, so that the

current account becomes positive at t(0), and net foreign assets F be-

gins to accumulate. As F increases, e falls and X falls, following the

dynamic adjustment path discussed in section II.C, and shown in Figure 3.

     With F accumulating, at a decreasing rate since the current account

surplus is shrinking, the exchange rate follows the e(t) path in Figure 3

converging toward the rising p(t) path. At the point t(i) where the
                                                             * *
paths cross, the price ratio elp is the same as the original e /p = 1.
This implies that at the crossing point t(i) where e(t) =     p(t),   net ex-

ports have fallen to their original value. But since F has accumulated

in the interval between t(0) and t(i), the current account balance is

positive at t(i) due to the increase in investment income from rF(O) to

rF(i). Thus, at t(i), where e(i) =    p(i),   F is still accumulating and e

must fall further. It falls until the price ratio e/p reaches the valu—

where X(e/p,z) = —rF once again. At that point the current account bal-

ance is zero, and the adjustment process is completed. There has been

an accumulation of foreign assets and a concomitant increase in invest-

ment income, and the ratio e/p has decreased so that the net export defi-

cit just offsets the investment income in the balance on current account.
                                                                          22.


                                           **
Given the long—run equilibrium value P          in Figure 3, the exchange rate

has settled at e
                **                 ** **
                         such that e /P    <
                                                * *.
                                                e   /P
                     ,
                                                                        23.



 II.E. The Effect of a Real Disturbance (in z)


     Let us now consider the effect of an increase in the current—account

balance due to exogenous real factors, represented by z in the net export

function. Beginning from an initial equilibrium, the current account

balance suddenly increases, making F positive.   Foreign assets accumu-

late, since the current—account surplus is net foreign investment.      The

accunnilation of F drives e down; the real exchange rate appreciates.

This in turn reduces the current account surplus.

     Movement of e around the original (and unchanged)
                                                         equilibrium p
is shown in Figure 4. The increase in z at time t(O) makes F positive.

This causes e to begin to fall (an appreciation). At some point t(j), e

has fallen enough to restore X to its initial value, but because F has

accumulated, e must fall farther. It falls to the new value **
                                                             e where

the current—account balance is again zero. The appreciation of the real

exchange rate e/p must reduce X enough to offset the initial impulse

from Z plus the accumulation of F between equilibria.
                                                                               24.




          e, p




p
 **
 ,e       1
                                                     p (t)




      **
      e
                 --—i----- —-- - - -
                                                                                       time
                          t(O)           t(j)

                 Figure 4: Adjustment of the real exchange rate to an increase in z.
                                                                      25.




II.F. Conclusions from the Theory with Static Expectations.


     The patterns of relationships between the key variables as the

system is disturbed by random monetary and real shocks can be summarized

easily. Since we are assuming static expectations, it does not matter

whether disturbances are anticipated.

     1. Monetary disturbances cause an initial jump in the

         nominal and real exchange rates, which is reversed

         as the accumulation dynamics take over. The long—run

         effect of any single shock is a movement in the real

         exchange rate e/p due to the change in the foreign as-

         set position between equilibria. If monetary shocks

         are repetitive and random, this will produce random

         movement in the real exchange rate, related to F.

    2. Real disturbances to the current account, represented

         by z, will cause a gradual adjustment of e relative to

         p, with static expectations. The adjustment must not

         only offset the initial effect on X from dz, but also

         offset the resulting accumulation of F.   If real dis-

         turbances are repetitive and random, this will also

         generate random movement in the real exchange rate.

    3.   Current—account surpluses will generally be associated

         with an appreciating currency, and deficits with a de-

         preciating currency, under either source of disturbance.
                                                           26.



4. The PPP path /p will be the long—run average around

   which the exchange rate e moves as the system is hit

   by monetary or real disturbances. The PPP path does

   not determine short—run movements in e, but may serve

   as a   long—run anchor in the absence of "permanentt
    structural change.
                                                                        27.




 III. Rational Expectations and the Current Account

 III.A. Introduction

      In section II we saw that with static expectations the nominal and

 real exchange rates adjust gradually to a current—account disturbance.

 The path of the exchange rate follows the accumulation path of net for-

 eign assets. Technically, the exchange rate can be solved in short—run

 equilibrium as a function of the levels of the asset stocks. This was

possible because the assumption of static expectations eliminates the

 term in expected change in the exchange rate ê from the asset—demand

functions.


     When we move to the assumption of rational expectations, we restore

the ê term, and obtain a separate equation for the path of the exchange

rate. This will result in a model with two dynamic equations——for F and

ê. The rational expectations assumption——here literally perfect fore-

sight because the model is non—stochastic——imposes the condition that

the expected change in the rate is the actual change.


     The main characteristic of the rational expectations version of the

model is that since the market looks ahead to the consequences of a cur-

rent account disturbance, the exchange rate jumps at the time when the

change is perceived. Some of the gradual adjustment of e is pulled

forward into a jump in the present with rational expectations.


     In the next subsection we go through the technical aspects of solu-

tion of the rational expectations version of the model. Then, using the

basic diagram in Figure 8 below, in subsection III.C we will discuss the
                                                                              28.




implications of the model for the effects of current—account disturb-

ances on the nominal and real exchange rates.

III.B. Solution of the Model

      The model begins with the original equations for the financial

sector plus the dynamic adjustment equation   for $'.    These are repeated

here for convenient reference.


(1)    M =   m(r,     + )W

(2)    B =   b(r,   r + e).W


(3) eF =     f(r,     + e)

(4)    W=M+B+eF
(7)
         =   X(e/p)   + rF.


The dynamics with separate equations for ê and '
                                                    are sufficiently compli-
                                                    equation and take p as
cated that in this section we will suspend the
                                                                    the
exogenous. This will permit us to focus on the relationship between

current—account and the exchange rate (real and nominal).

                                                        First, the rational
      Solution of the model proceeds as follows.

expectations assumption is that ê is the rate of change of e. Then two
                                    substituted from (4) can be used to
equations of (i)—(3), with wealth

 solve for r and 8 as functions of N, W, eF. The ê and F equations then

                                  and F that can be solved for the movement
 are two dynamic equations in e

 in these two variables.
                                                                            29.




           Divide equations (1) and (3) by W and differentiate totally, holding

    r constant:


              M
            d(—) = m dr + m,de
              W     r      e


            d(L)
              W =      f r dr   + fdê
                                  e


These can be solved in matrix form as:


                                        r
             (d
                      rme mrfê) Lm          f:J
The solution for dê is then


                  =
                      y {_md()          +


The coefficients of eF/W and M/W are the partial derivatives of the ê

adjustment function.



                                1>0;2<0.
This is the dynamic equation to be solved along with (5) for F to obtain

equilibrium e and F.


        In the e, F space of Figure 5, the ê = 0 locus is a rectangular

hyperbola. This can be seen by observing that in q, eF enter multiplica—

tively (in W as well as the numerator eF), so changes in e and F that

hold the product eF constant will hold ê constant. Combinations of e and

F off the locus move e away from it, as the arrows show. for example,

since        > 0 an increase in e or F from a point on the locus makes

e   > 0.
                                                                           30.


e                                            e




            +
                                                                        =0

                            ê=0
                                     F                                         F

Figure 5:       Locus where ê    0               Figure 6: Locus where F = 0




e




    \ç
                                A.

                    T
                                         F

    Figure 7:   Equi1ibriuii path
                for e, F
                                                                              31.




          The F = 0 locus in Figure 6 gives e, F pairs from equation (7) that

 hold F constant. Total differentiation of (7) gives the slope

                de
                                x
                     F=O         e

 Combinations off the F = 0 locus move F away from it. In (7) we see that

 an increase in F from a point on F = 0 results in F > 0.


      The equilibrium is shown in Figure 7. With the F = 0 locus flatter

 than ê =       0, the equilibrium is a sadd1epoint." There is one path into

 the equilibrium point, shown as the dotted line. Any initial e, F choice

 will lead away from equilibrium, as indicated in the figure. A basic

 assumption in rational—expectations models is that following a disturbance

 the market will pick the value for e that puts the system on the stable

 path to the equilibrium.



     If the F = 0 locus is steeper than ê =          0, the system is completely
unstable. The slope of F = 0 is _rIXe, and since             = 0 is a rectangular

hyperbola, its slope is given by

                de
                dFé=O
                            =_eF

Saddle—point equilibrium therefore requires


                -< -.X
                 F
                            e


Since along t        = 0,   rF = X, this condition for stability in the rational—

expectations version of the model is the ordinary Marshall—Lerner condition,

      >    1.    If this condition holds, following a disturbance the exchange

rate will initially move in the right direction.
                                                                           31a




     Now consider the effect of an increase in z, the real current—account

disturbance in (5) for f.   In   Figure 8 the rise in z shifts the f   0

locus down. Why? The rise in z requires an offsetting fall in e or F

in equation (5) to hold '   =0   .   The new long—run equilibrium is at point

E2, with a saddle path running to it as indicated by the dashed line. To

put the system immediately on that path with initial F0, the market appre—

dates the currency from E0 to point E1 in a jump.      Then the e, F dynamics

carry the system to E2, with F accumulating and e appreciating further.
                                                          32.




e




                                                '=0


                               I
                               I
                               $

                               I
                               I                      F
           F0


    Figure 8: Effect of Current—account Disturbance
                                                                       33.




    Referring back to the financial market equations (l)—(4), we see

that the jump in e reduces eF, while the expectation of further appre-

ciation, ê <   0, reduces demand for eF. Thus the jump in e is needed
to maintain market equilibrium with (rational) expectations of appre-

ciation of e in the adjustment process.

     In the new long—run equilibrium e has fallen relative to p enough

to offset the effect of the exogenous disturbance z on net exports X

plus the increase in foreign earnings r(F2—F0).    Thus the real distur-

bance to the current account causes an adjustment in the real exchange

rate e/p that comes in an initial jump, then a continued gradual move—

inent to long—view equilibrium.

     The same figure can be used to analyze the effects of an (exogenous)

change in the domestic price level p. A fall in p (relative to the for-

eign price level) will shift the P = 0 locus down by stimulating net ex-
                                                                     and fur-
ports. This will then give a      jump appreciation from E0 to E1,

ther appreciation to E2. Again, the value of the real exchange rate at

   is lower than it was at the initial equilibrium, in order to increase

the trade deficit enough to offset the rise in investment income


r(F2—F.).

III.C. Current Account Disturbances and Exchange Rate Fluctuati2

                                                  expectations model is not
      The important implication of the rational
                                          market chooses the saddle point
 the necessary precision with which the

 path. Rather, it is the result that disturbances with foreseeable impli-
                                            the rate to jump when the dis-
 cations for the exchange rate will cause

 turbance appears. Thus in addition to jumps when unanticipated changes
                                                                        34.




in monetary policy appear, their rate will jump in reaction to real

disturbances to the current—account balance.


     This modifies the conclusion from section II concerning real dis-

turbances and the exchange rate. An unanticipated increase in the

current account balance creates an expectation of appreciation of the

nominal and real exchange rate to move the current account back to

equilibrium. The expectation itself causes a jump appreciation of the

nominal rate, which is also an appreciation of the real rate. After

the jump, there is further movement to long—run equilibrium.


     Thus unanticipated changes in the current account balance, as well

as the money stock, are likely to generate jumps in the exchange rate.

In the case of the current account, the jump is not reversed, however.

If disturbances are random, we still expect the exchange rate to fluc-

tuate around the PPP path. This would make the real exchange rate roughly

follow a random walk. Jacob Frenkel (l981b) provides evidence supporting

this view.


     In addition, major structural shifts in the world economy, such as

the recovery of Europe and Japan after World War II, or the rise of the

newly industrializing countries (NICs) in the developing world, would b—

expected to cause permanent shifts in the equilibrium real rate. In

Branson (1980) it is argued that the major real devaluation of the

U.S. dollar in the l970s resulted from the change in the structure of

the system as Europe and Japan recovered and grew relative to the U.S.
                                                                       35.




IV.     The Data

IV.A.      Introduction.

        The asset—market model of sections II and III implies that unantici-

                                                            balance, and rela-
pated movements in the money stock, the current—account

tive price levels will cause unanticipated jumps in the exchange rate. In

this and the following two sections of the paper, we show that the model is

consistent with the data on these variables for four major currencies——the

U.S. dollar, the Deutschemark, sterling, and the yen.      We study movements

in the effective exchange rate of each of these countries, as calculated

by the IMP. For each country, movements in the effective rate are related to

movements in Ml or M3, the balance on current account, and an index of

relative prices, measured by the Wholesale Price Index and weighted by the

IMF. The data are described in detail in Table 2.

        The first step in analyzing the data is to investigate their time—

series properties. This provides a compact description of the "facts,'t and

an initial indication of whether the facts are roughly consistent with the

 theory. The time—series analysis of the data is done in this section.

Then in section V we focus on the PPP relationship between relative prices

 and exchange rates. In section VI we study systems of vector autoregres-

 sions, one for each country, to test the relations between unanticipated

 changes, or "innovations," in the variables.


 IV.B. Time Series Analysis.

                                                        of each time series is
         In this section the autoregressive structure

 described by regression equations of the form:

                             I          3
          (10) X =         + E i—± + E 6.D. + yt + u
                                       J=l
                                                                                36.
                             Table   2: VARIABLE DEFINITIONS AND DATA


  I. Variable Name

                 e                          effective exchange rate, in units of foreign
                                            currency per unit of home currency

            P/P                             relative wholesale prices (ratio of home to
                                            competitors indices)
            Ml                              narrow money, as defined by the IMP in the
                                            International Financial Statistics (IFS)

            M3                              broad money, as defined by the IMP (Ml
                                            plus quasi—money) in the IFS

            CAB                             current account balance

 II.   Countries

            United States
            United Kingdom
            Federal Republic of Germany
            Japan


III. Data

       1. All data are quarterly, from IMP sources (in most cases from IFS) and
           cover 1973:IV to 1980:IV.

       2. Exchange Rates: e is the log of the average effective exchange rate
           during quarter t. The units are foreign currency per unit of domestic
           currency. The index is based on a geometrically weighted average of
          bilateral rates between the home and 13 other industrial countries.
          The weights are the same as those used to calculated P/P.   Base:
           1975 = 100. Source: IMF. Note that these are not the MERN rates pub-
            lished in IFS.

       3. Relative Prices: The index is a log of the ratio of home to foreign
           quarterly wholesale prices indices.   P is a composite and uses the
           same weights as e does (see above). Base = 1975. Source: IMF. This
           index is not the same as that published in the IFS. Our data is based
           on indices in local (not a common) currency.

       4. Money: This is the log of the end of the quarter money stock. Source:
           IFS, line 34 ("money") for Ml, lines 34 and 35 ("money" + "quasi—money")
            for M3.
       5.   Current Account: This is the dollar value of the flow during the quarter
            (not measured in logs). Source: IFS. Lines: 77aa (Merchandise: Exports,
            fob); 77ab (Merchandise:Imports, fob); 77ac (Other Goods, Services, and
            Income: Credits); 77ad (Other Goods, Services, and Income: Debits); 77ae
            (Private Unrequited Transfers); 77ag (Official Unrequited Transfers).
                                                                       37.




whereX is the log of the time series under consideratiofl,Xt_± is its value

lagged i quarters, D1 is a seasonal dummy, and t is time. Equation (10)

is a univariate autoregression of the variable X on its own past values,

and the estimated values of the a coefficients give the pattern of response

of the time series to a disturbance u. The two cases that will appear in

our data are first—order autoregression, where only       is significant, and

second—order autoregression, where a, and a2 are significant.    One purpose

of the analysis is simply to describe the data; the second is to see if

the time—series structure of the exchange—rate data is consistent with that

of the money, current account, and relative price data.

     For each variable we began with a regression on four lags, seasonal

dummies, and a time trend. We then shortened the lags by eliminating in-

significant variables at the far end of the lag.    The results are shown

                                               Each column in the tables
in Tables 3 through 6, one for each country.

shows the results of a regression of the indicated variable on lagged

values of itself. Coefficients of the time trend and seasonal dummies
                                               on quarterly data for the
are not shown. The regressions are performed

period 1974—I to 1980—IV. The beginning date was chosen because it was
                                                       in 1971—73, including
after the major period of disequilibrium adjustment
                                                                      the
a major real devaluation of the U.S. dollar [see Branson (1980fl, and
                                          data were available when we began
last date was the most recent for which

 the study in June 1981.


 IV.C. Country results.

 IV.C.l. United States

                                                   and serve as an illustra-
      The results for the U.S. are instructive,
                                           columns of Table 3, we show the
 tion of the technique. In the first two
                       TABLE       3:   UNITED STATES AUTOREGRESSIONS (STD. ERRORS IN
                                                                                      PARENTHESES)


                                                                            TIME SERIES
LAGS                                    e                       P/P                        Ml                             M3
                                                                                                            -                                         CAB
                               *                *           *               *
t—l                     0.86                 .78     1.71                                              *              *               *           *                *
                                                                      1.36        0.33          0.55        0.70               0.78        0.92             0.80
                        (.21)               (.10)    (.21)            (.17)        (.24)        (.18)       (.24)              (.14)       (.21)            (.14)

                                                            *               *
t—2                    —0.24                        -1.41        -0.60            0.31                      0.33                          -0.19
                        (.29)                        (.38)            (.16)       (.27)                     (.27)                          (.30)

t-3                     0.37                         0.74                        —0.16                     —0.22                           0.13
                        (.28)                        (.38)                        (.29                      (.30)                          (.30)

t—4                    —0.24                        —0.20                         0.22                     -0.08                          —0.20
                        (.19)                        (.21)                        (.24)                     (.24)                          (.22)



STATISTICS

R2                      0.86            0.85          .92             .90          .99           .99            .99             .99         .76              .74


D—W                     1.89            1.82         2.16         1.51            1.57          1.96       1.98                2.15       1.86              1.66

SE                     0.027                .026      .008            .009         .012          .012           .009            .008      1.96              1.91


Notes:   (1)   Sample period: 1973:IV to 1980:IV for dependent variable.

         (2)   All regressions include constant, seasonal dummies, and time trend.

         (3)   A   *   indicates        the coefficient is significant at the 5% level.

         (4)                                                                      ti/P
               Source for all data is IMF (but e is not merm,                            is WPI).
                                                                         39.




regressions for the log of the U.S. nominal effective exchange rate e,

weighted by the IMF, in foreign currency per dollar. The first column

shows the regression with four lags on the exchange rate; only the lag

at t—l is significant with a coefficient of 0.86. When the lags

at t—2 through t—4 are eliminated, the standard error of the estimated

equation falls a bit, and the coefficient of ei is 0.78. Thus the U.S.

effective rate, measured on a quarterly average, can be described as a
                                                 coefficient of 0.78 in e1
stable first—order autoregression (AR1). The

indicates that a given disturbance u will eventually disappear from the

time series as its effect is given by increasing powers of .78:

               Le+i =            etc. The "half—life" of the disturbance is
Le =   .78u;            .782u,
just over 3 quarters.—'

       The third and fourth columns of Table 3 show the results for the log
                                          This is an index of the U.S. WPI
of the U.S. relative price index P/P.

relative to a weighted average of the WPI's of thirteen other industrial

countries. The variable P/eP is the IMF's measure of relative cost, pub-
                                          Statistics. It is the inverse of the
lished in the International Financial

 "real exchange rate" of sections II and III.
          The first regression for P/P in Table 3 gives significant coefficients

 to the lags at t—l and t—2. Elimination of the longer lags results in the

 second equation, with a standard error only slightly larger than the first.




 _/The "half—life" is the time needed for the initial disturbance to be re-
 duced to half its initial size. It can be computed from
               in 0.5 —0.69 =
  where      in this case is .078 and t is the half—life.
                                                                             40.




The result for P/P is a second—order autoregression (AR2), with a stable

cyclical response to a disturbance.—'

         The next two pairs of columns in Table 3 show the univariate auto-

regression results for the two U.S. money stocks. In both cases only the

lag at t—l is significant. Both are stable first—order autocorrelations

with half—lives of 1.5 and 3 quarters, respectively.


         Finally, the last two columns in Table 3 show the autoregressions

for the current—account balance. These are run on the level of CAB,

rather than its log, since the time series passes through zero. The

result    is similar to that for the money stocks: a first—order autocor—

relation with a half—life of 3—1/2 quarters.


         In the case of the U.S., then, money stocks, the balance on current

account, and the nominal effective exchange rate all follow stable AR1

processes, while the relative price series is a cyclical AR2. This sug-

gests that the behavior of money stocks, the current—account balance, and

the exchange rate are consistent, at this level, with the theoretical

model of sections II and III. These variables all follow stable MU pro-

cesses. However, the relationship between relative price levels and the

exchange rate is more complicated. The relative price series exhibits

cyclical behavior while the exchange rate is monotonically damped.




_/The characteristic equation is given by
              — 1.36       + 0.60 '"—2 = 0.

  The roots of this equation are .68      .371, with a modulus of
  0.77   =   0.61/2
                                                                     41.



Thus there is not a one—to—one correspondence between price and exchange

rate fluctuations, even in the 1974—80 period.


IV.C.2. West Germany.

      Table 4 shows the univariate autoregression results for Germany. The

format is exactly the same as for the U.S., so the discussion can be brief.


      As in the U.S. case, the nominal effective rate, the money stocks,

and the balance on current account all follow ARI processes in Germany.

All but M3 are stable. German N3 has a lag coefficient of unity, indicat-

ing that it is a "random walk": the change in M3 is (roughly) white noise.

The German relative price series is AR2 with a stable cyclical response to

disturbances.—' Thus the German data are quite similar to the U.S.


IV.C.3. United Kingdom

      The U.K. results are summarized in Table 5. Again, the results are

broadly similar to those for the U.S. and Germany, with one major excep-

tion. In the first regression for the current—account balance, there are

no significant lag terms. Thus the U.K. CAB is best described as random

around the path described by the trend and seasonal dummy terms. This sug-

gests that innovations in the CAB in the U.K. should not be interpreted as

conveying information about future movements in the exchange rate.—' This

implication is reinforced by the vector autoregression results in section

VI below.


 /Note that the German price equation would not invert due to multico—
linearity with more than two lags.

 IA moving average specification of the equation for the U.K. CAB was also
experimented with, with no improvement in results. The U.K. CAB does
seem to be random about its trend.
                                                 TABLE   4:     GERNA1Y          UNIVARIATE AUTOREGRESSIONS




LAGS                              e                           P/P                            Ml                                                   CAB
                                                                                                                         M3
                              *              *                              *               *
t—1                    0.71           0.67           ————a
                                                                                                         *           *               *           *             *
                                                                     1.15            0.67         0.86        1.08            1.02        0.56          0.69
                       (.20)          (.18)                          (.19)           (.21)        (.15)       (.20)           (.11)       (.22)         (.15)

t—2                                                  ————                   *
                      —0.15                                         —0.58            0.23                    —0.10                        0.30
                       (.23)                                         (.19)           (.25)                    (.30)                       (.27)


t-3                    0.37                                                          0.24                     0.24                       -0.15
                       (.23)                                                         (.24)                    (.30)                       (.28)

                                                                                                                     *
t—4                  —0.29                                                          —0.32                    —0.50                        0.05
                       (.18)                                                         (.19)                    (.24)                       (.24)


STATISTICS

                        .96            .96                            .99             .99          .99         .99             .99         .82           .81


D—W                    1.11           1.43                          2.50             2.11         2.20        2.06            1.73        1.64          1.95


SE                      .024           .024                           .003            .020         .020        .009            .009       1.33          1.28



a
     With more than two lags, the autoregression for                  P/        would not invert due to collinearity.
                                                                                                                                                                   1:-
                            TABLE   5:     UNTTED KINGDOM UNIVARIATE AUTOREGRESSIONS




LAGS                                                —
                       e                                                    Ml                    M3                    CAB
                                                  P/P                                        *            *
                 *             *             *               *        *            *
             1.10          1.04           141            1.53    1.08        0.95       0.91        .85         0.12          0.12
t—i
                                          (.22)          (.17)   (.21)       (.12)       (.24)     (.16)        (.23)         (.21)
              (.22)        (.07)

                                                             *
                                                        —0.57    0.21                   —0.04                  —0.02
t—2          0.01                        —0.48
                                                         (.19)   (.25)                   (.29)                  (.26)
              (.31)                       (.36)

                                                                        *
                                          0.19                   —0.62                  —0.03                   0.02
t—3          —0.02
                                                                  (.22)                  (.29)                  (.27)
              (.30)                       (.35)


                                                                 0.08                   —0.14                   0.06
t—4          —0.10                       —0.20
                                                                  (.20)                  (.19)                  (.24)
              (.23)                       (.19)




STATISTICS

                                                          .99      .99           .99      .99           .99       .50          .50
               .94          .94            .99


                                                                  2.11       1.59        2.11          1.69      1.92         1.96
              1.7          1.64           1.96           2.09
D—W

                                                                   .019          .024     .01.6         .016   912.71     853.07
                .035        .033           .012           .012
 SE
                                                                         44.



        Both the nominal effective rate and the Ml money stock in the U.K.

have coefficients of unity on the t—l lag, indicating that they follow a

random walk. The relative price series is again AR2, but with a stable

monotonic adjustment response to disturbances.


IV.C.4. Japan

       The results for Japan are summarized in Table 6. There we see major

differences from the other three countries. The nominal effective exchange

rate, the relative price series, and the current—account balance are all

AR2 with stable cyclical response patterns. The two money stocks are AR1

with   unitary lag coefficients. Thus in the Japanese case the time—series

behavior of the exchange rate is consistent with that of relative prices

and the current account, but the exchange rate does not follow the random—

walk pattern of money.


IV.D. Summary on the Data

       The univariate autoregressions of Tables 3 through 6 provide a use-

ful and compact description of the "facts." Comparing the country results,

we see several common points.

       1. All weighted relative price series are second—order

           autoregressions with stable responses to shocks. All

           but the U.K. series are cyclical.

       2. All the money stocks are first—order autoregressions, many

           with unitary lag coefficients.

       3. All the exchange rate and current—account series except

           the Japanese are first—order autoregressions; the

           Japanese are second—order. Thus movements in the exchange
                                 TABLE    6:     JAPAN   UNIVARI/\.TE   AUTOREGRESSIONS



                                                                           Ml                      M3                    CAB
                      ________                   P/P
              1.18*      1.33*        1.24*            1.21*      0.79*         1.03*     1.03*         1.10*    1.25*          1.50*
  t—1
              (.22)      (.18)           (.20)         (.14)      (.22)         (.14)      (.22)        (.08)    (.22)          (.16)



 t-2         -0.37      _0.55*       _085*          _0.62*       -0.56                    0.26                  -0.32          _0.67*
              (.34)      (.18)           (.32)         (.12)      (.30)                    (.32)                 (.37)          (.16)



 t-3          0.12                    0.45                       -0.04                    -0.21                  0.10
              (.34)                      (.32)                    (.31)                    (.32)                 (.38)



 t-4         -0.26                   -0.27               ---     -0.24                    -0.01                 -0.34
              (.22)                      (.16)                    (.28)                    (.23)                 (.25)




STATISTICS

               .91        .90             .99            .99        .99          .99        .99          .99      .91            .90



  D-W         1.74       2.06            1.82          1.81        1.77         2.42       1.79         1.96     1.85           2.17



  SE           .044       .044            .014           .014       .023         .023       .008         .008     .97           1.00




                                                                                                                                        Li'
                                                                              46.




             rate are all consistent with movements in the current—

             account balance.


V. Purchasing Power Parity

        Before moving on to a vector autoregression analysis of the data for

the four countries, it is interesting to look directly at the relation—

ship between exchange rates and relative prices. The IMP data comparing

costs and prices provide us with effective exchange rates, e, and weighted

relative WPIs using the same weighting system. Thus we can report regres-

sions testing whether exchange rates followed relative price paths for

the four countries in the 1974—80 period. These are summarized in Table 7.

        In the table, we report regressions of the log of the effective rate

on a constant, a time trend, and the log of the effective relative WPI.

To allow for simultaneity between prices and exchange rates, the PIP

term was replaced by an instrumental variable estimate, and the equations

were adjusted for first—order serial correlation in the error terms.

       If PPP held at all times, the coefficient of   time   would be zero,

and   that of P/P would be (—1) in Table 7. In no case does this pair of
conditions   hold. The closest case is the U.S., where the coefficient of

P/P is — 1.09, but that of time is marginally significant.         Even

ignoring the difference between the AR1 in the exchange rate and AR2

in P/P, PPP is violated in the U.S. case during 1974—80 by a divergent

trend between e and P/P. This could be due to measurement biases. In

Branson (1980), it was shown that the major jump in the real exchange

rate for the U.S. came in 1970—73; after 1974 a steady trend seems to be

the dominant factor.
                                                                                    47.




                        TABLE 7 :        PPP REGRESSIONS, 1974—1980



                             COEFFICIENTS OF                         STATISTICS

                   Const.         Time          pip                      p        D—W


COUNTRY
                         *                                                   *
                                   —0.004       —1.09         .86       .65       1.83
U.S.                9.71
                   (2.49)           (.002)      (.55)                  (.15)


                        *                   *           *                    *    1.52
                                    0.035       —2.20         .91       .58
U.K.               14.06
                    (1.66)          (.007)       (.39)                 (.16)

                                                                             *
                                   —0.013       —1.88         .96       .83       1.64
Germany            13.57
                    (9.37)          (.023)      (1.95)                 (.11)


                         *                              *                    *
                                   —0.007       —2.06          .91      .71       1.43
Japan               14.22
                    (4.10)          (.009)       (.86)                 (.14)




Note:     A Cochrane—Orcutt iterative technique with a two—stage least—squares
          estimation method was used; the instruments are lagged exchange rates,
          and lag—one and lag—two PIP,aconstant, time, and seasonal dummies.
                                                                         48.



      In   the U.K. and Japan, the coefficients of P/P are well above unity,

and quite significantly so in the U.K. case. The U.K. also has a very

significant time trend. In Germany, neither the time trend nor P/P is

significant. This is consistent with Frenkel's (1981b) finding that the

real exchange rate is AR1.


      The regressions of Table 7 thus suggest that since 1974 a deviation—

from—trend version of PPP may have held in the U.S., but that the relation-

ship did not hold in the other three countries. This is consistent with

the theoretical view of section II that the relative price path is at most

a long—run average through the path of nominal exchange rates, even in

periods of largely monetary disturbances.
                                                                              49.


VI. Empirical Results Using Vector Autoregression

     A useful technique for studying the relationships between the inno-

 vations in money, the current account balance, relative price levels and

 the exchange rate is vector autoregression (VAR). Here each variable of

 a system is regressed against the lagged values of all variables (including

 itself) in the system, to extract any information existing in the move-

 ments of these variables. The residuals from these "vector autoregressions"

 are the innovations ——   the   unanticipated movements ——   in   the variables. We can

 study the correlations of the residuals to see if they are consistent with the

 hypotheses implied by the theory of section III. The vector autoregression

 technique is introduced and justified by Sims (1980). A clear exposition

 is presented in Sargent (1979). Interesting and instructive applications

 are discussed in Taylor (logo), Ashenfelter and Card (1981), and Fischer

 (1981).

     Here I estimate systems of VARs for each of the four countries, the

 U.S., the U.K., Germany, and Japan. Two systems are estimated for each country.

 Both include the effective exchange rate e, the current account balance CAB, and
                                                      between the two is that one
 the effective relative price P/F; the difference

 includes Ml and the other M3. An obvious extension of the research would be
                                                    of money stocks, but also the
  to include cross—country effects, particularly

  other variables. The difficulty in proceeding in this direction comes from
                                                   28 from 1974 I to 1980 IV.
  the limited number of quarterly observations:

  Each VAR includes lagged values of four variables, a time trend, and three

  seasonal dummies. In order to expand the analysis, I am presently moving to

  a monthly data base.

      Before estimating the VARs, one must consider the issue of the timing

  of the data. The effective exchange rate can be computed from public
                                                                          50.

 information on a daily basis. In fact, a UK effective rate is published

 daily in the Financial Times. Our data are averages during the quarter.

 Money stock data are available on a weekly basis, so they are roughly

 contemporaneous with the exchange rate data. Our money data are end—of—

 period. We would expect from section II that the weekly changes in M would

 generate nearly simultaneous movements in e.     Thus the innovation of the

 average e over a quarter would be most closely connected in our data with

 the innovation of the end—of—quarter money stock, which is the cumulation

 of the weekly innovations.


     The relative price data are quarterly averages of monthly data, which

become known soon after the month finishes. Thus in our data set, the inno-

vation in e would be most closely connected to the innovation in


    On the other hand, the data on the quarterly balance in current account

are not announced until well into the following quarter. Thus to the extent

that the innovation in CAB signals a change in the equilibrium real exchange

rate, it is the innovation in CABt       that moves e.
                                     1

    The VAR residuals to be correlated, then, are those of                     and
                                                             e, Mt,
CABt1. We will use a          to designate residuals from the VARs. The variables

in each VAR system are listed in Table 9. The number of lags included in

each variable was determined by the univariate autogression of Tables 3

through 6. This constraint provides a convenient way to limit the number of

regressors and conserve degrees of freedom. A next step in research would be

to re—estimate the VAR systems with additional lags to see how much infor—

mation is lost by application of this constraint.


   After the VAR systems are estimated, we correlate their residuals to

study the relationship among innovations. The correlations of the exchange—
                                                                       51.




                 TABLE 9: VARIABLES INCLUDED IN VECTOR
                          AUTOREGRESSION SYSTEMS




        US, UK, Germany                            Japan



            in e1                                  in ei

            in Mtl                                  in e2

            in                                      in Mt_i


            in 't-2                                 in PIP1
                                                    in
                 CABt2

                                                         CABt2

                                                         CAB
                                                               t— 3




NOTE:   Two VAR systems are estimated for each country, one with Mi, one
        with M3. The equations are estimated on data 19741    19801V, de-
        scribed in Table 2.
                                                                         52.


 rate residuals with those of the VARs for money, CAB, and relative prices

are shown in Tables 10 and 11 for the systems using Ml and M3 respectively.

Each rot..' in the tables gives the correlation coefficient r of the exchange—

rate VAR residual with the VAR residuals of the other three variables.

Given the definition of the effective exchange rate as foreign exchange per

unit of home currency, we expect the money correlations to be negative —— a

positive M innovation lends to a depreciation ——    the CAB correlations to be
positive,and the P/P correlations to be negative.


     In Table 10, which presents the correlations using Ml, the first col-

umn shows the correlations of exchange rate and money stock residuals for

each country. We see that only for the U.S. is the sign of the correlation

negative. The positive correlations for the U.K. and Germany, and the near—

zero are for Japan, are consistent with "leaning—against—the—wind" policy

behavior, in which money growth slows when the currency depreciates, and

vice versa. This type of policy reaction was discussed in Branson (1976),

and policy reaction functions of this form were estimated for Germany by

Artus (1976) and by Branson, Haittunen and Masson (1977). So the positive

correlation in the German case is easy to understand. Similar policy be-

havior in Japan has been reported in Amano (1979), which could account for

the low Japanese Ml correlation. A U.K. policy of mo;iig tI'e minimum lend-

ing rates to defend the currency would also be consistent with the positive

U.K. Ml correlation in Table 10. When sterling depreciates, interest rates

are raised and the rate of money growth is reduced.


     The pattern of money correlations in Tables 10 and 11 reflects an

asymmetry in policy behavior between the U.S. and the other three countries.

If U.S. monetary policy Is formulated with domestic targets in mind, then
                                                                      53.




           TABLE 10:    CORRELATION OF EXCEiANGE RATE RESIDUALS
                        AND OTHER RESIDUALS FROM VECTOR AUTO-
                        REGRESSiON SYSTEMS WITH Ml


orre1atiOfl of
e   of:          vith ovn:        J.                t—1

                                  —0.39             0.36          —0.37
U.S.

                                   0.13            —0.14          —0.29
U.K.
                                   fl.2              0.54         —0.32
Gerny
                                   0.03              0.24          0.11
Japar
                                                            -




          TABLE 11:    CORRELATION OF EXCHANGE RATE RESIDUALS
                       AND OTHER RESIDUALS FROM VECTOR AUTO-
                       REGRESSION SYSTEMS WITH M3
                                                                          54.


U.S. money will be exogenous with respect to the exchange rate. This is

the model of sections II and III, and gives the negative correlation. But

monetary policy in the U.K., Germany, and Japan may be reacting to movements

in the exchange rate, which would give a positive correlation. Thus the re—

suits are consistent with a view that U.S. monetary policy drives exchange

rates, and the others react.


    The CAB correlations should be positive, according to the theory of

section III. It should be noted that since we are correlating the VAR re-

siduals of e with CABt1, the positive correlation will not reflect "J—

curve" effects in which a current depreciation in e causes a reduction in

CAB due to low trade elasticities. The small negative correlation in the

case of the UK CAB is consistent with the univariate autoregression results

of Table 5. There we saw that the IlK CAB is approximately random about its

trend, so that innovations in CAB do not contain any information about future

movements in the real exchange rate. Thus the expected correlation for the

UK CAB should be zero, which it approximately is.


    The P/P correlations should be negative from the theory of section III

where causation runs from P/P to e. However, they would also be negative if

causation ran from e to P/P through the price of traded goods. Empirical evi-

dence on the importance of this link is presented in Bruno (1978). Thus the

negative correlations for P/P for the U.S., U.K., and Germany are consistent

with the theory of section III, but could also result from reverse causation.

Estimation of the relative strengths of the two effects will require more

sophisticated econometrics. The positive correlation in the Japanese case

is difficult to understand. The explanation may lie in the divergent be-

havior of export prices and the WPI in Japan, but analysis of that case will

also require further work.
                                                                          55.




    The correlation results of the systems using M3 are given in Table 11.

They are essentially the same as the Ml results of Table 10. The correla-

tion of the U.K. current—account balance is nearly zero, but the positive

correlation for Japanese relative prices is larger than in Table 10.


    In suumary, it appears that the VAR results are (perhaps surprisingly)

quite consistent with the theory of section III, which attempts to integrate

money, relative prices, and the current—account balance into one framework

explaining movements in exchange rates. The results are clearest for the

effects of CAB innovations on exchange rates, supporting Dornbusch (1980).

The money causation is less clear because of the plausibility of money

reacting continuously to movements in e as suggested in Branson (1976).

The relative price results are consistent with the theory but causation re-

mains ambiguous due to dependence of domestic prices of traded goods on the

exchange rate as shown by Bruno (1978). Thus the empirical results provide

support for the theory, but there is much more econometric research to be

done.
                               BIBLIOGRApHY


  1.   Amano, A., 1979, Flexible exchange rates and macroeconomic management:
       A study of the Japanese experience in 1973-1978. Kobe University,
       mimeographed.

  2.   Artus, J., 1976, Exchange rate stability and managed floating: the
       experience of the Federal Republic of Germany, International Monetary
       Fund Staff Papers 23, July, 312—333.

  3.   Ashenfelter, 0. and Card, D., 1981, Time—series representations of
       economic variables and alternative models of the labor market, University
       of Bristol, Working Paper.

 4. Branson, W.H., 1975, Comment on M.v.N. Whitman: Global inonetarism and
     the monetary approach to the balance of payments, Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity 6, Number 3, 537—542.

 5.    Branson, W.H., 1976, Leaning against the wind as exchange rate policy,
       paper presented at Graduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva,
       revised 1981 for book publication by the institute.

 6.                   1977, Asset markets and relative prices in exchange rate
       Branson, W.I-L,,
       determination, Sozialwissenschaftliche Annalen 1, 69—89.

 7.    Branson, W.H., 1979a, Exchange rate dynamics and monetary policy, in:
       A. Lindbeck, Inflation and employment in open economies (North—Holland,
       Amsterdam), 189—224.
 8.    Branson, W.H., l979b, Macroeconomic Theory and Policy, Second Edition,
       (Harper and Row, New York).

 9. Branson, W.Fl., 1980, Trends in United States International Trade and
     Investment since World War II, in : N. Feldstein, the American economy
     in transition (University of Chicago Press, Chicago); 183—257.

10. Branson, W.H., H. Halttunen and P. Masson, 1977, Exchange rates in the
     short run: the dollar—deutschemark rate, European Economic Review 10,
     December, 303—324.

11. Bruno, M., 1978, Exchange rates, import costs, and wage—price dynamics,
     Journal of Political Economy 86, June, 379—403.

12. Dornbusch, R., 1980, Exchange rate economics: where do we stand?
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity II, Number 1, 143—186.

13. Fischer, S., 1981, Relative shocks, relative price variability and
     inflation, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 12, Number 2,
     forthcoming.

14.    Frenkel, J., 198la, The collapse of purchasing power parities during
       the 1970's, European Economic Review 16, May, 145—165.
15. Frenkel, J., 1981b, Flexible exchange rates, prices and the role of
     ?newstT: Lessons from the 1970's, Journal of Political Economy 89,
     August, 665—705.

16. Katseli—Papaefstratiou, L., 1979, The reemergence of the purchasing
     power parity doctrine in the 1970's, Special Papers in International
     Economics, No. 13, (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).

17. Sargent, T., 1979, Estimating vector autoregressions using methods not
     based on explicit economic theories, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
     Quarterly Review, Summer, 8—15.

18.   Sims, C., 1980, Macroeconomics and reality, Econometrica 48, January, 1—48.

19. Taylor, J., 1980, Output and price stability: an international comparison,
     Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 2, February, 109—132.
