                    NBEE WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 PUBLIC GOODS IN OPEN ECONOMIES
                 WITH HETEROGENEOUS INDIVIDUALS



                       Joseph E. Stiglitz



                      Working Fper No. 802




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                         November 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in 'Ixation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper 11802
                                                    November 1981




          Public Goods in Open Economies with Heterogeneous Individuals



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper formulates a simple model of "perfect community competition."

It is shown that (1) the equilibrium is Pareto optimal; (2) communities

will, in general, be heterogeneous; not all individuals will have the

same tastes; but (3) all individuals of a given skill within the community

will have identical perferences; (4) in spite of the heterogeneity of

tastes, there is complete unanimity with respect to tax and expenditure

policy, and there is no scope for redistribution at the local level;

(5) under certain circumstances, everyone's expected utility can be

increased by introducing a particular kind of unequal treatment of

individuals who are otherwise identical with respect to tastes and

production characteristics; (6) when there is not "perfect community

competition," the equilibrium will, in general, not be Pareto optimal,

and benefit taxation may be desirable.



                                         Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                         Department of Economics
                                         Dickinson Hail
                                         Princeton University
                                         Princeton, New Jersey 08544

                                         (609) 452—4014
        PUBLIC GOODS IN OPEN ECONOMIES WITH HETEROGENEOUS INDIVIDUALS*


                                     by


                             Joseph E. Stiglitz
                            Princeton University


        In the theory of public expenditure there are two critical problems:

        (a) There is usually a large number of Pareto optimal allocations

(involving different levels and patterns of expenditure on public goods).

Each of these has different distributional implications. Economic theory,

as such, has little if anything to say about the choice among this set of

allocations. This we shall refer to as the indeterminacy problem.

(Several different solution concepts have been proposed, e.g., the Lindahi

solution, but these obviously are not meant to describe the actual method

by   which the equilibrium is determined. There are a number of political—
economic models providing particular   solutions, e.g., a majority voting;
                                                                 1
the equilibrium then depends on the political system employed.       Arrow (1951 )


*
    Researchsupport from the National Science Foundation is gratefully
    acknowledged. I am indebted to Peter Mieskowski and Ron Grieson for
    helpful discussions.

    There are two further problems with majority voting: in general it does
    not yield a determinate solution (see Kramer (1973)) and the majority
    voting solution depends critically on the tax system employed to raise
    the revenue for the public expenditure (see, e.g., Atkinson and Stiglitz
     (1980)).
                                        —2—



has   established   that there does not exist a social choice mechanism for

choosing among the Pareto optimal allocations which satisfies the conunonly

accepted desiderata of Ci) non—dictatorship, (ii) transitivity, and

(iii) independence of irrelevant alternatives.

       (b) It appears difficult to get individuals to reveal their

preferences towards public goods; systems which make what individuals have

to pay depend on what they say concerning how they value the public

good suffer from the free rider problem ——     individuals   will report an

undervaluation of their true benefits since what they enjoy will not

depend (significantly) on what they say. On the other hand, any system

of benefit taxation which charges individuals for use of the public good

is inefficient in the sense that it will restrict consumption even though

the marginal cost of using the public good is zero.1

      Tiebout suggested that, although there are no markets for public

goods, individuals could choose communities in which to live, and by their

choice of communities they revealed their preferences in exactly the same

way that   individuals   reveal their preferences in their choice of private

commodities. Tiehout did not, however, formally model the competition

among communities and attempts to do this (see, e.g., Stiglitz (1974))

have shown that the problem is far more complex than Tiebout's intuitive



  A number of recent studies, growing out of the work of Groves and
  Leyard (1977), has proposed solutions to this revelation problem. There
  are a number of difficulties with these solutions, which perhaps
  account for the fact that they have never been employed. For a more
  extensive discussion, see Mueller ( 1979) or Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980).
                                        —3—



    analogy    might suggest)
         In this paper I wish to prove three general propositions concerning

    equilibrium when there is competition among communities with heterogeneous

    individuals:

         (a) In a world in which there is competition among communities

    and conununities act competitively to attract inhabitants, in equilibrium the

    level of public goods and the structure of taxation in each community, given

    the actions of the other communities, is uniquely determined.2 The
                                                                             3
    equilibrium is Pareto optimal. We thus resolve the indeterminacy problem.

         In other words, the political mechanism has no scope for choice

    the exact nature of the political mechanism is irrelevant.

         In this equilibrium, communities are not homogeneous. There is no

reason that the doctors, lawyers, and blue collar workers within each

community should have the same tastes. The remarkable result of our

analysis is that, under our assumptions, even though individuals' tastes

differ, there is complete unanimity with respect to the allocation of resources



     The revelation and indeterminacy problems are not the only critical
     problems in the theor; of public expenditures. In Stiglitz (1981), a
     third problem is discussed, which I refer to as that of the "management
     of public good." While for private goods, there are strong incentives
     for firms to provide the goods which individuals wish to purchase, and
     to produce them efficiently, the incentives for citizens to obtain
     information to select good public managers, and the incentive for
     public managers to provide for the Public Good, are either absent or
     far from perfect. It is often suggested that competition among local
     connunities serves to improve the quality of the "management of the
     public good," We shall have little to say about this here.
2
     In our analysis, we assume individuals can belong to only one community,
     in which they work, and consume public and private goods. In practice,
     of course, individuals may work in one community, live in another, and
     join a club for the purpose of enjoying some kinds of public goods.
     Our analysis can be extended to this more complicated framework.
I
-
     Similar results are obtained in an extremely insightful paper by E.
     Berglas (1976).
                                      —4—



(both the level and form of taxation and the expenditures on public

goods) within each community. The assertion, commonly found in the

literature on local public goods, that in equilibrium, all communities

will be homogenous, is a consequence of the strong assumptions made

in these analysis, and not a general proposition. In our model, the

heterogeneity of the community follows from the assumption that individuals

of different productive characteristics interact in production, but we

could have formulated alternative models in which, for instance, individuals

differed with respect to their transportation costs as well as tastes.

Communities will then consist of individuals with low transport costs

living far from the city center, and indiviudals with high transport

costs living near the city center.    (.See Arnott and Stiglitz (1979, 1981).)

Again, individuals with different transportation costs may differ as well

in their attitudes towards public goods.1

       We establish that no community has individuals of the same productivity

with different tastes; thus the usual assertion concerning homogenous

communities follows as a corollary to our analysis: if there is a single

productivity group, communities will be homogeneous.

       One further property of the equilibrium is worth noting. All

public goods expenditures are paid for by pure rents. (This property of

communities which are of optimal size I referred to in my 1974 paper as

the Henry George Theorem. In Arnott and Stiglitz (1979) we show that,

although the theorem is considerably more general than had previously been

established, there were plausible conditions under which it would not obtain.)

1
    Indeed, even if they had. the same set of indifference curves, the fact that
    they live in different locations may well effect their attitudes towards
    different public goods.
                                         —5.-.




         The unanimity theorem we establish here has one further important

    implication: in a world with competition among communities, there is

    no scope for redistribution at the local level. If there is to be

    redistribution, it must be at the national level.

         Though our analysis is couched primarily in terms of the vocabulary

    of the theory of local public goods, it should be clear that our analysis

    may be viewed equally well as an analysis of equilibrium in an economy

    with inter%ational trade, with free migration of labor, with public goods

    within each country. Our analysis thus suggests that (in the absence of

    national loyalties, and restriction on emigration and immigration) in the

    traditional models involving a large number of small countries, within

 any country there is effectively no scope either for redistribution or

 for social choice among alternative public goods/taxation programs.

         (b) Under certain circumstances, everyone's expected utility can be

 increased by introducing a particular kind of unequal treatment of

individuals who are otherwise identical with respect to tastes and

production characteristics. We form two (or more) communities consisting

of individuals of type i and j. Individuals of type I living in Community

A are better off than those living in Community B, and conversely for

individuals of type j .       We then randomly assign individuals of type

i ,     the   possibility of the desirability of inequality whenever there

is a kind of convexity in the structure of the economy was noted earlier

in Stiglitz (l976).l Here, we note that the existence of local public

goods introduces the kind of convexity into the structure of the economy

which may well make randomization desirable.2



    Indeed, it can be viewed as the converse of the well—known arguments for
    equality in the presence of concavity of Edgeworrh, Lerner, and Samuelson.

2
    Even with communities in which all individuals are homogeneous but with
    transport costs, randomization may he desirable. See Stiglitz (1976).
                                     —6—



       (c) In a world in which there is competition among communities, but

communities ignore migration (so there is no active competition for

immigrants), and the level of public goods is determined by majority

voting, then the equilibrium will, in general, not be Pareto optimal.

When the valuation of public goods differs among individuals the limited

competition equilibrium may involve benefit taxation. Benefit taxation

may be Pareto optimal in a particular sense to be defined below.


2. The Basic Model
                                                                          1
       Assume we have an (infinitely) large number of identical islands.

We have a number of types of labor. Each type of labor is distinguished

by production characteristics and taste characteristics. We let

be the utility of an individual with taste characteristics j and

productive characteristics i who lives in community k. We assume,

again for simplicity, that we can write this simply as a function of the

wage he receives, w , the (after—tax) wage of an individual with

productivity characteristic i living in community k ,       prices   in
                                                        2
community k, k' and the supply of public goods, Gk.              and Gk
are vectors.)

1
    The assumption of a set of islands, each with a fixed supply of land, is
    a convenient way of thinking about community competition, but alternative
    formulations yield similar results. All that is required is that the
    output of a particular collection of individuals with, say, ni individuals
    with production characteristics 1, F(n1-), exhibits stronglydiminishing
    returns beyond some point.
2
    We thus assume we cannot differentiate the wages received or prices
    paid on the basis of taste characteristics. See Section 3.2 below.
                                              —7—




    I)                ,1J,
                   3 —U
                              k' k
          There is a certain technological feasibility locus for each island

    giving the set of wages, w, prices of private goods and production

of public goods which are feasible on an island given that it has

individuals of type ij:


    (2)
                 T(wk, k' Gk, 'k =

where       n,   represents the vector of labor types in the community. (For

the moment we assume that trade in commodities is not feasible. so that

each island is completely isolated.)

          A simple example may help explain what is contained in T. Assume

that we have only two groups, skilled and unskilled labor. Each island

has a production function of the form:

                            2
(3)              C+GF(n 1, n)

where C is aggregate consumption, i.e., there is a single public good

and a single private good and the relative production cost is exactly

unity. Then equation (2) becomes


(2')               n' +   n2 + G —   F(n1,   n2) =   0.


We assume that since all individual demand curves are homogeneous of

degree 0 in wages and prices, T is homogenous of degree 0 :in w and p .

1
    If the production possibiliites schedule of public and private goods is
    constant returns to scale, then doubling the vector n doubles output;
    if we keep w and p constant we double the dematid for private goods
    (per capita demand remains unchanged), and hence if we double C we
    just exhaust product. Thus, if the underlying production possibilities
    schedule of public and private goods is constant returns Lhen T is
    homogeneous of degree 1 in C and n. In that case, there would be only
    one island with a particular mixture of individuals. We thus postulate
    diminishing returns to labor.
                                      —8—




       We postulate that the supply of individuals of each type is fixed

at        .   Since in this paper we wish to avoid the difficulties raised

in our earlier paper (Stiglitz (1977)) concerning what happens when the

number of individuals available is not an exact multiple of the optimum

number in each community, it is best to think of         as the portion of

the population who are of type ij , when the number of individuals is infinite.'


1
    The assumptions concerning an infinite number of islands and an
    infinite number of individuals are made not just to simplify the analysis.
    They play two critical roles. First, the hypothesis concerning com-
    petition among communities is plausible only if there are a large number
    of competing communities. Secondly, as we have noted, there are a
    large number of problems in the analysis if the number of individuals
    of any type is not an exact multiple of the optimum number in each
    community.

       The existence of a finite optimumnumber of individuals (of any
    particular type) within a community was a question which we addressed
    In our earlier (1977) study. There we noted that even with diminishing
    returns to production, the optimal community size could be infinite.
    We required that there be sufficiently diminishing returns that it
    offset the natural increasing returns effect associated with the public
    good. In the absence of this condition, competition among communities
    is obviously not viable. Here, we simply postulate that on each
    island, there is sufficiently rapid diminishing returns that the
    optimum popu]ation (to be defined below) for each community is finite.

       Although the source of diminishing returns in our analysis arises
    from the limited supply of land on which individuals work in each island,
    it should be apparent that similar arguments would hold as a result of
    either congestion in the use of public goods (the source of diminishing
    returns in Tiebout's original study) or as.a result of increased transport
    costs in a residential location model with éonstant returns to scale
    in production.
                                         —9—




2.1 Competitive Equilibrium

        There are three basic equilibrium conditions:

        (a) Migration Equilibrium. Individuals move freely until they

find the community which maximizes their utility, i.e.,


                              =   max   {U}
(4)          if n> 0, u
                                  kK

where K is the set of islands.

        (b) Community Competition. Our second equilibrium condition is

dependent on the nature of competition among communities. In this

section we postulate the community competition equilibrium condition:

each community is small; each type of individual in each community

recognizes the dependence of in— and out—migration of all other

types of labor on the actions of the community. He would like the

community to maximize his utility, i.e., for the individual type


(5)         max

                  ,Ek,k,Gk}

(5a)        s.t.     T = 0


and to


(5b)
            nc? (wpk,Gk)
where         is the supply correspondence of laborers of type ij to

community k.

       Thus, we would normally expect that increasing the wage offered to

a particular group or increasing the supply of public goods which a particular

group finds attractive will induce migration. The exact nature of this
                                       —10—



supply correspondence under conditions of perfect community competition

will be discussed in Section 2.3 below.

     The solution to (5) which we shall denote by (3,f3,G3,fI3),

yields the optimal policy (including the optimal size community) from

the perspective of ij*. Arnott and Stiglitz (1980) have noted that,

in general, the optimal size n of the community will depend on whose
                              1
perspective is being taken.       Similarly, one would normally expect the

solution to involve different values of C (public expenditures), w (after—

tax wages) and p (consumer prices) depending on whose utility is being

maximized. The result we establish here is that, under conditions of

competitivity, all individuals will agree on the optimum value of

n, p, w, and C.
    The community competition equilibrium condition asserts that the

equilibrium action of the community is some feasible action lying within

the set of actions preferred by the different individuals. We assume

that the actual choices depend, in some way, upon the preferences of

the groups within the community. In particular, we postulate that the

action taken must lie within the Pareto optimum set for the community.

(It is important to emphasize that this assumption need not imply that the

economy as a whole is efficient because the population may not be efficiently

distributed among different islands, as in Stiglitz (1977).)



11t is important for our analysis that the optimal value of n be
 finite. To assure this requires certain restrictions be placed on the
 technology.   In the case of homogeneous communities, these are discussed
 in Stiglitz (1977).
                                                   —11-•




      Cc)    The Labor Equilibrium Cordition. The final condition is that

all laborers must live in some community, i.e.,


(6)         E n =
            kcK


2.2   A Dual Problem

      Bef ore considering the nature of the market equi.libriurn let us

consider the problem of characterizing the utility possibility frontier

of the economy, i.e.,


(7)          max U'3

             s.t. U1                 ij
and
                                          =   0.


      We can construct the utility possibilities schedule as follows.

First, we construct the utility possibiliites schedule for a fixed

population. This, in turn, is done by first constructing the utility

possibilities schedule for a fixed allocation of public goods. Thus,

if there is a single consumption good, and all individuals' utility

functions are linear in the private consumption good, the utility

possibilities schedule for a fixed population and fixed C is linear,

as in Figure la.        (In the diagrams, we assume there are only two types

of individuals.         The extension to the general case is straightforward.)

If, however, individuals have diminishing utility towards the consumption

of private consumption goods, the utility possibilities schedule has the

usual concave shape of Figure lb.
                               —ha—




    .2
U




                                               U

         Figure la. Utilities possibilities schedule with fixed
                     population and fixed supp'y of public goods:
                     constant marginal utility of the private
                     consumption good.1




                                           (footnote on page tic)
                       —lib—




                                        UI


Figure lb. Utilities possibilities schedule with fixed
            population and fixed supply of public goods:
            diminishing marginl utility to private
            consumption goods.




                               (footnote on page llc)
                                          —lic—




    We assume, for instance, a technology of the form represented by
    equation (3). With n- and n2 fixed,


            Ccn11+cn
                   22
    where c1 is per capita consumtpion of the private good of the individual
    of type i, and C is, as before, aggregate consumption. Thus, if
    the utility functions are of the form


(1')        U' = c1 + v'(G)


    the utility possibilities schedule will be of the form depicted.
2
    Under the same conditions noted in footnote 1 above, if the utility
    function is of the form


(1")        Ui =   u'(c')   + v1(G),   with   u1' >   0,   0


    the utility possibilities schedule will be of the form depicted.
                       —lid—




 G2




ire ic. Effect of an increase in the level of public goods
           expenditure on Utility Possibilities Schedule.1
           (G2 > C1)




                               (footnote on page lie)
                                           —lie—




1
    Assume, for instance, that


            U2c2+y2G

    while


            U1 =c1 +yG
                     1



    Then, if c1 =     0,

            u2 = F
                      —G +

    where F is aggregate output. Hence


                   >0           if   2>1
                          2   = 0
    Similarly, if     c


                = F
                      :iG + y'G

and


            dTJ1
                   <0         if
                              .
                                     y
                                      1
                            —hf—




U2




                                                     UI
     Figure ld. Effects of an increase in the level of public
                 goods axpenditure on Utility Possibilities
                Schedule.
                  —hg—




U2




                         UI
     Figure le.
                                —llh—




                                                                 UI
Figures le and If. Utility possibilities schedule with fixed n
                   but variable C may be convex.
                       —lii—




Figure 1g. Derivation of utility possihiliies
            schedule with two public goods.




                               (footnote on page llj)
                                     —llj—




1
    Consider, for example, a situation where there is a single lake,
    which can be used for boating and swimming. At any moment, however,
    it can be used only for one or the other (boating makes swimming
    too dangerous). Thereare twn types of individuals, those who like
    boating and those who like swimming. The utility of each is a function
    of the fraction of the time that they can use the lake for their own
    activity. Thus,


           U' = c1 + A

           U2c2+l—A
    where A is the fraction of the date that the lake is reserved for the
    use of swimmers.
                                          —12—



        Next, we construct the utility possibilities schedule for the

same n, but now, for a different allocation of public goods. Consider the case

where the public good is valued positively by only one of the two types of

individuals. Then, clearly, even when all the private consumption good

is allocated to the individuals of the other type, their utility is

lowered. On the other hand, if the level of public goods is sufficiently

small, it is clear that an increase in public expenditure will increase

the utility of the group which values the public good. Thus, in our

first example, with constant marginal utility of private consumption,

the new utility possibilities schedule crosses the old one. The utility

possibilities schedule for a fixed n is the outer envelope of these

utility possibility schedules (Figures le and if). Thus, it is clear that

the utility possibilities schedule, for a fixed population, with variable

public goods, may well be convex (rather than concave). This may be

the case even when the utility functions are strictly concave. The

argument holds equally well if there are two (or more) public goods,

one preferred relatively more by one group (Figure ig).

    We now need to consider how changing the population changes the

utility possibilities schedule. In Stiglitz (1977), we showed, with a

fixed amount of land, how, as we increased the population, the maximum

level   of utility attainable in a homogeneous population first increased,

and then decreased. Here, the argument is analogous. With a fixed number

of individuals of the other type(s), as we increase the number of individuals

of, say, type ij,     the   maximum level of utility attainable by group ij

may increase, and then decrease. In each of these cases there are two

effects.     If individuals valued only   public goods, so long as the marginal
product    of an individual is positive, an increase in population would
                                        —13—



Increase output, and hence the supply of public goods, and hence welfare.

If Individuals valued only private goods, if there is diminishing returns,

output per capita will decrease, and hence welfare will decrease. The

actual effect on welfare thus represents a mixture of these two effects.

     The utility possibilities schedule with variable n is the outer

envelope of the utility possibilities schedules with fixed n. Two

properties of this utility possibilities schedule should be noted. First,

even if the fixed n utilities possibilities schedule is concave, the

variable n will not, in general, be. (Clearly, if the fixed n utilities

possibilities schedule is convex, the outer envelope will be as well.)

This lack of convexity has an important implication which we shall discus

at greater length below.

     Secondly, as each point on the utility possibilities schedule

represents a solution to the problem (5), there is associated with each

point a value of a, C, w, and p. In the case of two groups, as we

increase the ratio of, say, U' to U2, normally we would expect the

associated ratio of n' to n2 to decrease: If individuals of type 1

have to pay individuals of type 2 a lower level of utility, they will

wish to have more of them in their community. This is illustrated

in Figure 2a.

     It is possible, however, that there is a range of values of

for which the same ratio of n11n2 is optimal, as illustrated in Figure 2b.

This can occur when the utility possibilities schedule, for fixed n,

is convex, as illustrated in Figure lh. The utility possibilities schedules
                   12
corresponding to (n In )   = (n12
                                In )*
                                               12
                                         and (n In )   = (n12
                                                            In )**   dominate

those corresponding to any intermediate value of n1/n2. This simply
                          —13a—




                            12
                          (n In )




                                                           2 **
                                                          In   )




Figure lb. Derivation of Utility-Possibilities Schedule
            (variable n and G)

           (n1/n2)** <   (fI1/n2)   <

           Some population Ratios Inefficient
                        —13b-




Figure l. Derivation of utility possibilities schedule
           (n and G variable).
                                        —14—



says that Pareto optimality entails that communities have either a lot

of individuals of type 1 or a lot of individuals of type 2. Tke      extreme
case of this is that where all individuals have identical production

characteristics and enjoy completely different public goods. We know

then that in equilibrium communities will always be homogeneous (under

our assumptions).

         In both cases, we have assumed that there exists points on the

utility possibilities schedule corresponding to arbitrarily large ratios

of n1/n2 and to arbitrarily small ratios of n1/n2. This will be the

case so long as the marginal product of any individual of any type is

strictly positive (regardless of their numbers).' Thus, if we set

     =   0, the wage received by an individual of type i (and hence the
consumption of private goods of type i) at zero, an increase in the

numbers of type i will unambiguously increase the welfare of individuals

of type j, since they allow an increase in either j's private consumption

or in the consumption of public goods of the kind that j enjoys.2


2.3 The Market Solution

         It is now easy to determine the nature of the market equilibrium:

we simply find that point on the utility possibilities schedule for which

the proportions of the laborers of the different types corresponds to

the relative supplies. Thus, in Figure 2a we can immediately see the

equilibrium level of (relative) utilities of the two groups; moreover, we

1
    And assuming, as we have throughout the analysis, that there is no
    congestion in the public good, or here, no "relative congestion."
2
    Alternative sufficient conditions, involving restrictions on the
    transformation function T, ray ecsily be derived.
                                        —15-



can also see that an increase in the relative supply of individuals

of    type   1 will lead to a decrease in their level   of utility and an
increase     in that of the other group.

       Our   analysis can thus be viewed as a straightforward generalization
of the traditional theory of demand and supply to incorporate public
goods. In the absence of public goods, the relative supply of individuals
of types 1 and 2 would determine their relative wages. An increase in
the relative supply of individuals of type iwould reduce their wages,
and increase those of type 2 laborers. Now, however, "compensation"

may   take   the form either of wages, with which individuals purchase private

goods, or of public goods. In the traditional theory without public

goods, if wages of type 1 individuals are too high, there will be an

excess supply of them; here, if the utility level of type 1 individuals

is too high, there will be an excess supply of them.         Each community
will wish     to have relatively few of the given type. Conversely, if the

utility level of type 2 individuals is too low, there will be an excess

demand for them. The communities will compete for the individuals of

type 2, either by lowering the taxes they have to pay, increasing their

wages, or by providing public goods that they particularly like. As a

result, the level of utility of type 2 individuals will increase (and,

of necessity, the level of utility that can be obtained by individuals

of    type 1 will decrease.)
       Indeed,   we can think of Figure 2 simply as a demand curve for laborers

of each type (or, more generally, we can think of the solutions to (7)

as generating demand correspondences of the form


                iJ =
                       n'(U11              ).
                    —15a—




n/n2




                            UI/u2
       Figure 2a.
                      —15b—




 fl/n2




ni/n2




                              2

         Figure 2b.
                                             —16—



Equilibrium is thus a (feasible) allocation for which the de.mand for

each type of laborer equals the supply.

          Our assumptions assure us that no matter how large, or how small,

the relative supplies of a particular type of individual, there will be

a solution, i.e. corresponding point on the utility possibilities schedule.

          Points of discontinuity along the demand curve for labor (as

illustrated in Figure 2b) raise some interesting questions, but pose no

serious problem for the analysis. We postpone these questions until

Section 3. More formally, we now establish

Proposition 1. Any set of values of {wk,pk,Gk,nk} such that


                     =



and which is the solution to (7) for some value of               is an equilibrium.

Proof. In the market equilibrium all communities are utility takers,

and in equilibrium there must be a single level of utility enjoyed by

all (other )        communities,   ____ .   Thus, the community in question must,

to attract anyone, guarantee at least a utility level of U             .   At
U         it can obtain an infinitely large supply of labor. Thus, each

group's optimal policy for the community is given by the solution to

(even assuming that the number of individuals of its own type is also a

control variable):


(8)           max


S   .t.
(8a)          U:i >U-i•*
                                       —17--




and


(8b)         T(wk,pk,Gk,nk) = 0.


But this is identical to problem (7). Hence the values of the variables

in the solution to this are precisely the same as the values of the

corresponding variables in that problem. In particular, in equilibrium,

the constraints (8a) will be binding: the level of utility for any

group is exactly what it obtains everywhere else; and the level of utility

generated for group i'j' is the same as that group could have attained

elsewhere.

Proposition 2. The equilibria characterized in proposition 1 are the

only possible equilibria.

       Assume that there is some set of {wk,pk,Gk,rlk} satisfying (6)

(demand for labor equals supply) and           =
                                                   U   ,   all   k ,   k'EK
(migration equilibrium)), but which is not the solution to (7). There

are two aiternative (equivalent) ways of seeing why this could not be

an equilibrium.

       (a) Land Developer. Since there is assumed to be an infinite

supply of islands the price of an island is zero. Thus, any land

developer could occupy an island, increase his own welfare and attract

(an infinite) supply of labor at the given utility levels. Thus the

original equilibrium could not have been an equilibrium.

       (b) For some group (on each island) there is some policy which

increases its welfare without reducing that of anyone else. The excess

or shortage of labor of each t.ype is sent to or taken from a large number

of other communities and hence has a negligible effect on each.
                                           —18—




Corollary   1. There is no disagreement among the members of the

community about the optimal policy of the community regardless of the

differences in tastes and productivities.

Corollary 2. Every competitive equilibrium is Pareto optimal.1


3. Characterizing Equilibrium

       In this section, we establish two results characterizing the

equilibrium (if it exists). We simplify the problem by assuming the

technology is of the form


            C + G =     F(n)

(For simplicity we assume a single public good.)


3.1 The Henry George Theorem

       If there is an equilibrium, it cannot pay any land developer to

organize a new island; hence if there is to be an equilibrium


            max F(n) —     Ew'3(G;U')n13   —   G   = 0
(9)

            {n,G}
where w'(G;U13) is the after—tax wage required to induce an individual

of type ij     to   come to the community when the equilibrium level of

utility   yielded in the equilibrium for him is U13. Thus the equilibrium
is characterized by

(10)        F. =   mm          w
                    3

All laborers of a given productivity hired within a community receive the

same after—tax wage; there_is no benefit taxation. Each factor gets paid

its marginaprodnct.


  This result depends critically on our assumption of identical islands.
  See Stiglitz (1977)
                                           —19-



        If profits are to be zero, using (9) and (10),


            G = F —
(11)
                            11
where


(12)        n. = E
                   3

Expenditure on public goods is equal to rents.

3.2 Taste Variahiliy

       We show that, within any community, all individuals of a given

productivity must be identical (in the sense that their marginal rate of

substitution between the public and private good must be the same).

       Assume the vector           has been chosen optimally for the community.

Then the land developer's profits are maximized at the point where


(13)        — 13
                       13
                                 =1.

This is just the familiar condition that the sum of the marginal rates
of substitution equal the marginal rate of transformation. But note

that as the developer increases G it would pay him to "switch" to having

only the individuals of productivity              who value the public good a great

deal; and as it reduces G it would pay him to switch to having only

the individuals of productivity i who do not value the public good

(at the margin). In Figure 3, there is, in effect, a kink in the supply

function of laborers of productivity i. But this implies that profits

could be increased by either increasing or decreasing G; and hence
                  —19a—




wij




                          G


      Figure 3.
                                                    —20—




 the      original allocation could not have been an equilibrium.' For

 instance, if there are two productivity groups in the population and

each productivity group has two taste sub—groups, and if the relative

proportions of productivity groups differ in the different taste sub-

groups, then equilibrium will, in general, consist of there being three

kinds of islands: those in which all workers (of both productivities)

are low demanders; those in which there is a low demander of type 1

and a high demander of type 2; and those in which there are high demanders

of both types. In Figure 4 we illustrate an equilibrium with three

communities in which relative wages are not equalized in the different

communities.


3.3 Variability Across Communities

             In our earlier discussion, we noted that it was possible that             the
"demand" functions for labor might not be continuous: there might be

no Pareto optimal allocation entailing a ratio of n' to n2 between

(n1/n2)* and (fl1/fl2)** , as illustrated in Figure 2b. The nature of

the equilibrium in this case is straightforward: there will be some

communities with (n/n2) =
                                        (n1/n2)* and some with (n1/n2)             (n1/n2)**.
The relative proportions of the two types of communities will depend on

the relative supply of laborers of each type.

          These       equilibria have several interesting properties:
1
        That is, if at G*, —       ___   > —       d1   , then   — n           > 1 while
                                   dG
    •
        —n
             iw 3.3

                       < 1. Hence, by setting n13
                                               .
                                                                       -
                                                                           .
                                                           = 0 (and increasing
                                                                           .

                                                                               ni_J        a
        correspondingaiiount) and increasing G, or by setting n13 = 0 (and
-       increasing n13 by a corresponding amount) and decreasing G, profits
        can he increased.
                —20a--




w

                              w2
                              w
                 I


                         .1




           G1



    Figure 4.
                                       —21—



        First, note that changes in the relative supplies of laborers of

 different types may have no effect on the level of utilities attained;

 changes in the relative supply only change the relative proportions of

 communities of each type.

       Secondly, because the relative proportions of individuals within

 the different communities differ, the equilibrium will not be characterized

by production efficiency; a rearrangement of the population among the

 islands would increase group output, but it would not result in a Pareto

opt imal improvement.

       Indeed, the economy may not be productively efficient even when the

"demand" functions for laborers are continuous.


3.4 Randomization and Convex Utility Possibilities Schedules

       We noted in our analysis that the utility possibilities schedule

may well be convex, even though all individuals have concave utility

functions (so individuals are risk averse) and all production functions

are strictly concave. Assume that the labor supply is such that the market

equilibrium occurs at a point E on the utility possibilities schedule

where the schedule is convex. Assume, for simplicity, that the "demand"

curve for    laborers of each type is continuous near the equilibrium. We
can then find points on the utility possibilities   schedules, A, and B, with

corresponding levels of relative demand for the two types of labor, as

illustrated in Figure 5, such that we can form communities of type A and

type B (Pareto efficient communities) with relative supplies of the two

types of labor corresponding to the points A and B on the utility possibilities

schedule), in such proportions as to fully absorb the available labor, and

such   that the expected utility of both type 1 and type 2 individuals is
higher than in the original equilibrium, E. In community A, individuals
                               —21a—




    U2


                      'I

                      1                A
                                'I


                           I




                                           U'


  ni/n2


nrn2f'


                                           UI
          Figure 5.
                                    —22—



of type 1 are better off than at E, but in community B they are worse

off, and conversely for indiviudals of type 2.   It is clear that Pareto

efficiency (in terms of maximizing ex ante expected utility) requires

randomization.


4. Limited Competition

     Critical in the above analysis was the assumption that each community real-

ized that its policies affected the migration of individuals into and out of it;

that is, perceptions about the "supply functions" were correct and that there

were so many islands and individuals that each community effectively faced a

horizontal supply schedule of laborers of each type (at a particular utility level).

     Assume, at the other extreme, that each community simply acts

myopically, ignoring the consequences (in its decision about public goods

allocation) for migration. We replace the Condition 2 with the following

condition:

     The set of feasible allocations are viewed by each individual to be

those satisfying


             T(wk,pk,Gk,nk) = 0


for fixed

     Each individual ranks the feasible allocations simply by the effect

on his own utility. There is some social decision rule which aggregates

the different preferences. It satisfies the minimal condition of being

Pareto optimal within the set of policies which are viewed to be feasible.

We call any such allocation a "limited competition" equilibrium, in contrast

to the "full competitive equilibrium" analyzed in Section 2.
                                     —23—



     We can now prove:

Proposition 3. Every full competitive equilibrium is a limited competitive

equilibrium, but there are limited competition equilibria which are not

full competitive equilibria and which are not Pareto optimal.

     The first part of the proposition is obvious.

     There are two kinds of situations giving rise to non—optimality.

First, the size of communities may not be optimal. Assume all individuals

are identical. Then, under certain conditions, it can be shown that the

level of utility attainable on an island is a function of the number of

individuals on the island, as depicted in Figure 6. There exists an

"optimal" number of individuals. Any   distribution   of the population among

a set of islands in which all islands have the same population, in which

for the given population the supply of public goods is optimal, is a

limited competition equilibrium; but clearly it is not Pareto optimal

unless the number is precisely equal to the optimal number. If the number

exceeds the optimum, the equilibrium is stable in the sense that any

individual who migrates to another island lowers the utility on that

island and raises the utility in his original island, and thus has an

incentive to return to his original island.

     The second kind of inefficiency arises from the heterogeneity of

individuals. With majority voting there will be a tendency of islands

to concentrate in one type of individual. This is limited by the fact that

if different types of individuals are complementary in production, as the

relative proportion of one group increases, its productivity declines.

But the resulting equilibria are likely to he inefficient. Consider the

following example. Assume there are two groups which enter symmetrically

in production (but are complementary) and have different tastes; there are

two public goods, C1 and C2 ,   preferred   relatively strongly by groups 1 and 2.
                —23a—




U




                        n
    Figure 6.
                                                —24—



Assume    the     relative cost of production for the two goods is unity and for

both groups the sub—utility function of public goods can be written
 i            i         .       1 =                          1
                                    1    for group 1 and    02 < 1   for group 1, and
      G1 + 2 G2 with
symmetrically for group 2. Finally, assume that we use as our social decision

rule majority voting. Because we have only two groups and two alternatives

we do not get into any of the usual problems with majority voting; if we

assume that there are slightly more individuals of type 1 than type 2,

then the majority voting equilibrium for a closed economy would be

straightforward: it is only the preferences of type i that count, and

provided that lump          sum taxes   can be imposed the equilibrium is Pareto optimal.

Now, however, the equilibrium will in general not be Pareto optimal.

        Let


              C + G1 + G2 =
                                  F(n1,n2)

as before. Then, equilibrium consists of two types of communities, those

in which n1 are in the majority, and those in which n2 are in the

majority; the differences in wages just compensate for the differences

in public goods supply: if we assume precisely the same number of

individuals in the two groups the (asymmetric) equilibrium is described

by the equations below.
  -
        (1)   Within each community the supply is determined by majority vote:

                    1
(14a).        u (c1) =                    for community 1
                            n1 + n2

(l4b)         u'(c)                       for community 2
                            n1 + n2


(15a)         C1 = 0                      for community 1


(15b)         G2 = 0                      for community 2
                                                                —25—



(16a)        c =    F — t,                 c = F2      —    t       for conununity 1



(16b)
              2
             c2 = F2 —           t,         2 =
                                           c1   F1
                                                   —        t       for community 2


Where    we have assumed that the government can only impose uniform lump
sum taxes.

        (ii) Individuals are indifferent about migrating (letting                                                i j)
(ha)         u(c) + G1 =                 u(c21)
                                                  ÷    G2


                                     =
(17b)        u(c) +                        u(c) +
or, in the symmetric equilibrium

(18)        u(F2 —      t)       —
                                     u(F1
                                              —
                                                  t)   = (1 —     6)(F   —
                                                                             F1n1
                                                                                    —
                                                                                        F2n2
                                                                                               +
                                                                                                   t(n1 + n2))

Hence, we obtain the result that any set of (n1,n2,t) satisfying (18) and

(19)        u'(F1 —         t)    =
                                         n1
                                              +


is a limited competitive equilibrium. We solve (19) for t as a function

of fl]    and     n2:

                                  —l
            F1—t=u                       (n1+n2)
or
            t=     F1
                        —
                             u'(n1 + n2)
            dt —F                    1

            dn1
                 11                  ii"

            cit    —F
            dn2
                     12              u"

1
    Unless some such restriction is imposed on the let of admissible taxes,'
    the majority will attempt to confiscate the woalth of the minority; the
    only equilibria then entail separate cotmunities.
                                                                —26—



 There is a whole range of values of (n1,n2) yielding an equilibrium.

 But all entail production inefficiency (i.e., gross output is less than

 it would be if all individuals lived in communities with n                                         n
                                                           1                                         2

 Mixing the communities more would, on the other hand, entail a "loss"

 from having imperfectly matched public goods. To see that for some

 values of 6 all limited competition equilibria are inefficient, consider

 the effect of combining two communities, redistributing the labor force

 equally among them, and mixing the two public goods equally. The increment

 in gross output can be approximated by

                  n +n2               n1 +n                                           n_n2
             F(                                 2) -                     (F11 —                2)
                          2                2                 F(n1,n2)             F12)(   2


But we know

            (1 —6)C =
                                    u(F2
                                           —   t)    —
                                                         u(F1
                                                                —   t)

                                    u'(F21 — F11 — F22 + F12)                 = u'(F21    —
                                                                                              F11)An
                                    2n(F2 — F11)An


(when j=fllfl2)

Substituting, we obtain the gain in output per worker as



            —    (1
   -                                                (F11 - F12)
                               )2GV)2
A lower bound on the gain in utility is thus given by


            u'F- GGj (l—6)c51 >0
                                       r                      21
                                                         —
                   L'l2 F11) J
provided   6 ,    n   ,       and    IF12 - F11J              are small enough.

       That the majority voting equilibrium, even when "internally" Pareto

optimal, is not "internationally" Pareto optimal, has some other important

implications. Note that in the previous section there was no scope for
                                     —27—



benefit taxation: within any community the after—tax wage was a function

only of the individual's productivity ——    not   of his tastes (and indeed

there was no mixing of tastes for a given productivity). Now, however,

there may be some scope for benefit taxation; first, there may exist

within any community individuals of different tastes and the same pro-

ductivity; secondly, there may he no way of identifying who is a "low"

demander from who is a high demander without resorting to benefit taxation.

Thirdly, observe that although there is a consumption inefficiency thereby

induced, there may be no other way of identifying a particular group

(low denianders), and hence there may be no non—discriminatory equilibrium

in which a particular group is as well off as in the one involving benefit

taxation—— it is in this sense that benefit taxation may be Pareto

optimal. Finally, note that the total social loss from benefit taxation

may be less than the induced reduction in consumption of the ubiic good,

the usual focus of the discussion of inefficiency; for benefit taxation

may entail greater production efficiency ——   in   the absence of benefit

taxation migration equilibrium may entail wide discrepancies in wage

ratios   in different communities)


5. concluding Comments

     In this paper we have formulated a model of "perfect community competition"

analogous to the "perfect competitive model" for conventional communities.

To attain Pareto optimality communities must be aware of the competitive

environment in which they operate. The model has one particularly interesting


 In Stiglitz (1981), I provide a simple example in which without benefit
 taxation, the "high denianders" and "low demanders" have separate
 communities; with benefit taxation they live together. Th2 latter is
 Par6to superior to the former.
                                    —28—



feature: there is unanimity within each community about the level and

pattern of allocation of public expenditure, even though individual

tastes differ. There is no "social choice" problem nor is there any

scope for redistribution.

     The model has other implications which are undoubtedly unrealistic;

within each community all individuals of a given productivity are identical.

     Clearly there is an important grain of truth in the Tiebout hypothesis.

Whether, however, the "perfect community competitive" model is a good

model for the determination of the supply the public goods and the

allocation of individuals among communities —— as good, say, as the corresponding

competitive model for private goods —— remains a moot question.
                                        —29—



                                    REFERENCES



Arnott, R. J. and J. E. Stiglitz (1979), "Aggregate Land Rents, Expenditure

      on Public Goods and Optimal City Size,'t Quarterly Journal of Economics,

     Vol. 63, (November), 471—500.

 Arnott, R. J. and J. E. Stiglitz (1981), "Aggregate Land Rents and

      Aggregate Transport Costs," Economic Journal, Vol. 91, (June), 331—347.

Arrow, K. (1951), Social Choice and Individual Values, (New York: Wiley,

      2nd edition, 1963).

Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Stiglitz (1980), Lectures in Public Economics,

      (New York and London: McGraw—Hill Publishing Company).

Bergias, E. (1976), "Distribution of Tastes and Skills and
     the Provision of Local Public Goods," Journal of Public
     Economics, Vol. 6, No. 4, Pp. 409-423.

Groves, T. and J. Ledyard (1977), "Optimal Ailoation of Public Goods:

     A Solution to the 'Free—Rider' Problem," Econoinetrica, Vol. 45, 783—809.

Kramer, G. H. (1973), "On a Class of Equilibrium Conditions for Majority

     Rule," Econometrica, Vol. 41, (March) 285—297.

Mueller, D. C. (1979 ),   Public   Choice, (Cambridge, England: Cambridge

     University Press).

Stiglitz, J. E. (1977), "The Theory of Local Public Goods," in The

     Economics of Public Services, N. Feldstein and R. Inman, (eds.),

     (London: MacMillan Press).

Stiglitz, J. E. (1976), "Utilitarianism and Horizontal Equity: The Case

     for Random Taxation," fl4SSS Technical Report No. 214 (forthcoming in

     the Journal of Public Economics).

Stiglitz, J. E. (1981), "The Theory of Local. Public Goods Twenty—Five

    Years after Tiebout: A Perspective," paper presented to a conference

    at Rice University, April 16—17, 1981.
                                   —30--




Tiebout, C. M. (1956), "A Pure Theory   of   Local Expenditures,"

    Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 64       ,   pp. 416—424.
