                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE ECONOMICS OF WAGE FLOORS




                          Jacob Mincer



                      Working Paper No. 8O1




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                         November 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #804
                                                      November 1981



                           The Economics of Wage Floors



                                      ABSTRACT



     This paper contains a theoretical analysis of and summaries of empirical
information on consequences of wage floors in the labor market imposed by
minimum wages and by labor unions.
     Excess supplies are rationed in part probabilistically C'first come,
first served"), and in part systematically——by raising hiring standards,
or by discrimination and nepotism. Effects on employment, unemployment,
and labor force participation, and on wage differentials between the
"covered" and the free sector follow. Empirical information on these ef-
fects is cited in the minimum wage case, but only wage differentials are
analyzed in the union context.
     Other consequences outlined here are: lengthening of school attendance,
reduction of hours of work, substitution of paid out wages for fringes in
the minimum wage case. However, union pressure on fringes is greater than
on wages. This strategy produces larger income and greater job security
for union members.

     The minimum wage reduces opportunities for job training and consequent
wage growth. Quits initially decline as wages are pushed up, but turnover
is likely to increase as the training content of jobs is reduced. Union
wage and fringe advantages reduce quits significantly. However, training
as well as wage growth are reduced.



                                         Jacob Mincer
                                         Economics Department
                                         Columbia University
                                         International Affairs Bldg—Rm. 809
                                         New York, NY 10027

                                         (212) 280—3676
                                                                   AEA Meetings
                                                                   Denver, September 1980
                                                                   Revised 1981


                        The Economics of Wage Floors

                               Jacob Mincer
                           Columbia University

                                    and
                    National Bureau of Economic Research


      It is often claimed that in a world of "administered" prices and

 wages, laws of supply and demand are largely abolished. This paper

 illustrates the contrary proposition that the usefulness and richness

 of supply-demand analysis is never as apparent as when attempts are

 made to overrule market forces by decree. The proposition is not novel,

 but a comprehensive analysis of theoretical and empirical consequences of

 imposed wages or prices is lacking. An attempt is made here to outline

such consequences in the labor market when above-equilibrium wages are

 imposed by (1) minimum wage legislation, and (2) by labor unions. The

analysis represents both a guide and an agenda for empirical work

currently under way.

I. Double-crossing the Marshallian Cross

     At the basic level of price theory the question is: What

are the demand and supply responses to a double—crossing (above the inter-

section)   of the Marhshall.jan cross7Ihe resulting leftward movement on the
demand curve   is    understood by most freshmen, yet its verification and
estimation   has kept researchers busy for over three decades.2 I shall leave

the explanation of this perhaps embarassing illustration of our industry

to historians of thought or of politics. Be it as it may, it took a long

time for the analysis to move from effects on the left side to effects on

the right, or supply side of the Marshallian cross.


     11n the labor market.

    2I investigating effects of       minimum wages.
 In the following outline I briefly review the supply effects as well

 as demand effects which go beyond the usual focus on disemployment.




(1) Supply Effects

     The standard 'double—cross" analysis as described in elementary textbooks

is portrayed in Fig. 1. It shows a decrease of employment from E0 to Em in

response to an increase in wages from W0 to Wm. It also shows that the induced

excess supply (unemployment) EL is larger than the reduction in employment EoEm.

Note that the alleged expansion of supply from E0 (=L0) to L, also implies a

tendency for wages to rise in the "free" or non-covered sector.

     These conclusions on the supply side are theoretically unwarranted and
                  4

empirically false. The basic reason is that supply responds not only to the wage,

but also to the probability of employment. Abstracting from frictional unemploy-

ment, the probability of employment is unity in equilibrium, and S is a locus

of equilibrium points traced out by shifting D's. Since a reduction of vacancies

lowers the probability of employment, the quantity of labor supplied will be

less than L at

     The more interesting question, however, is not whether the supply of labor

will be less than L, but whether it will be increased (to L1) or decreased (to L)

from the previous level L0(=E0).

     Wage increases make covered jobs more attractive, but demand for workers

in such jobs is reduced, so the probability of finding a job in them is reduced.

Thus it is not clear a priori whether labor moves, on balance, toward or away

from the covered sector. It can be expected to move out of the covered sector



1The 'standard" analysis is correct in the case of farm price supports. But
this is only because the government stands ready to L&y up the surpluses,
effectively keeping the probability of sales equal to unity at the higher price.
    0
        -a




P1
I
N

             'I
                                        3




if the orobability of employment in it falls by a larger percentage than the
increase in the wage (abstracting from risk preferences). Labor moves into
the sector in the opposite case.1
     Outward mobility widens the wage differential between the covered and
not—covered labor groups, while mobility toward the covered sector reduces
it, but can never eliminate it.     Unemployment   arises in both cases. tt   is

larger than the reduction in employment when labor is attracted to      the   covered
sector, it is wailer when labor moves out of it.
     When   the excess supply, resulting from above—equilibrium wages is rationed
probabilistically, it can be shown (Mincer, 1976) that outward movement (and
reduction in the not—covered wages) occurs when the vacancy rate in the covered
sector is wailer than the demand elasticity in it. pirica]. work (ibid) indicates
that increasein the minimi wage and in its coverage result in outflows from
the covered into the not—covered sector and out of the labor force. Increases
in unemployment, attributable to the wage hikes or to increases in coverage are
therefore smaller (about 1/31 than the decrease in employment.
     An interesting implication of the observed supply responses is an increase
in the rate of return to further schooling for youngsters at the relevant wage
levels   (starting wages of high school or less than high school graduates). The

observed labor force outflows      from the covered sector indicate a deterioration

of labor    market   prospects for job searchers in both sectors. Consequently, the

opportunity costs of further schooling declines. That the observed lengthening

of school enrollments at the high-school and junior college levels is associated

with hikes in minimum wages was shown by Matilla in two recent papers (1978, 1979)


l. Effects of increased costs on relative product prices may mitigate the          flows
on the labor market, but are not likely to cancel or reverse them.
                                          4




       It is worth noting   that   the question of effects of minimum wages on welfare
 enrollments   is1 in principle, analogous to the question about effects on school
 enrol3..ment. A priori, one could argue either way.. Indeed, one of the arguments
 in favor of minimum wages is that they create an inducement to leave welfare
 for more attractive paid work. 3ut the evidence on labor force participation
and on enrollment effects. suggestathe opposite, namely that minimum wages induce
welfare, not work,1

 (2) Demand effects
      (a) Job Rationing

                            In   the presence of excess supply, jobs are rationed,
at   least in part, probabilist±cal2.y; the reduction in vacancies deters some
of the excess supply and creates a queue of job searchers. 8eyond that the
increase in wages creates incentives for employers to ration jobs by screening
out less productive workers so as to reduce the increase in labor costs per
efficiency units This can be viewed as part of the process of substitution
of capital (human or nonhuman) for labor, in response to changes in relative
factor prices. Alternatively, or additionally, excess supply also creates
opportunities for discrimination and nepotism. Rationing by such changes in
hiring standards reduces the unemployment queue arid increases the likelihood
of ouigration from the covered sector. If rationing involves upgrading of


Wachter  and Kim (1979) claim that increases in both welfare generosity and
 minimum wage and coverage levels occurred at about the same time in recent
 years. The effects appear to reinforce one another, rather than cancel,
 which, prima facie supports our inference.
                                     5




hiring standards, the wage gap between the covered and uncovered sector is
overstated by quality components which may be difficult to measure.
     The empirical evidence on the nature of job rationing is not clear. The
apparent substitution of white students for less educated black youngsters in
jobs at the minimum wage level may reflect job rationing by quality or by dis-
crimination. But it may also be due to the fact that a higher wage level or new
coverage represents a larger wage increase for blacks than for whitesr which re-
suits in greater disemployment of blacks.
     () Disemplôyment: NumberE or aours?
     Does the reduction in the demand for labor induce primarily a reduction
of nbers employed or            in hours per worker, This choice
is not a matter of indifference to the employer. To the extent that employment
costs are unrelated to hours of work and are sizable, exogenous increase in
wage rates shift the margin toward reduction of hours per worker rather than
                            1
disemployment of workers.
     At the level of minimum wages, hiring costs are likely to be small. Training
costs may be of some consequence, but as I argue below these are reduced or
eliminated as a result of minimum wages. sours may be reduced in the short
rim if this process of changing the job content takes a long time (Wessels, 1980).
pirical findings on hours of work are both skimpy and mixed. Zucker (1973),
Mixcn E1978) and Wesseis (1980) find small effects, negative and positive, in
low wage industries. Gramlich 1976 finds a rise in part-time work of teen-
agers, but Matilla (1978) suggests that this finding pertains largely to students.

     1See equation (1) in Part II, section (3) ,   below.
                                         6




 It may therefore simply reflect the previously reported supply shift from market
to school, rather than a response in the relative demand for hours- vs•    numbers.

         C.c) Adjusthents in the Wage Package: Fringes, Training am Turnover

        If some of the components of the wage package are not subject to wage
floors, the? will tend to be reduced to offset some of the increase in labor
costs-. Sere the major items- are so called fringe benefits, largely in the
form of pens-ions and insurance contributions, and training expenses of the
firm.
        The minimum wage applies- only to the paid out money wage. Since wages of
the very young and inexperienced workers are close to the minimum wage, the
effect on training is. potant.tail.y the most important consideration under this
rubric.
        Tr-inirig cpenses- of the firm are largely financed by initially lower
wages of trainees. Firms beet' -some of the costs if training prsduce
worker skiLl.s specific to ti'e firm. The minimum wage reduces the scope for
worker training in both cases: Even if current productivity of some of the
employed young workers warrants paying the minimum wage, job training is
precluded or reduced, since its provision would require paying a sub?ninimum
wage.
        Thus the labor market difficulties which the minimum wage generates for
low wage young workers are twofold: loss of jobs for some where wages are
initially below the minimum and loss of opportunities for training and careers
even for those whose initial productivity is worth as much or somewhat more than
the minimum wage.
                                         7




       As already noted, minimum wages tend to discourage. the formation of
general", that is transferable      skills, as   well as firm—specific capital,
although the effects on the latter may be weaker to the extent that the firm
is willing to bear costs of training.
       Several t'pes of feedback on the supply side may be expected to result
from the barriers• to job training created    by minimum wages: Those who are

intellectually and financiaLly able to prolong schooling will do so, even if
their   interests-j axe prarily' vocational and they would have preferred job
training to staying in school. Thus the prolongation of schooling is due to
deterioration of both current job opportunities and of prospects for
advancement.
       One   may speculate that the growth of junior colleges1 as well as the growing
demand for     vocationalism in college curricula    is partly a reflection of this
response. And so is also the growing tendency of students to combine school
with   market work) Student work is also partly encouraged by provision of the Fair

Lor Standards Act which creates subminimum differentials and exceptions for them.

The    transition to full-time work at wages above the minimum wage    hurdle   is   made

easier   by part-period and part-time work while at school. Although jobs of
students are usually low—skilled and casual, they provide some experience and
some measure of financial independence. The "dead—end" nature of many of these
casual jobs creates no particular anxiety, since they will be left behind as
soon as the student has graduated and acguired more rewarding capacities.


  This is shown to be      the case in Mattila's work. There are, of course,
additional reasons for     this trend which need not concern us here.
                                       8




     The early labor market difficulties produced by the minimum wage are not
easily surmounted by youth., who are either unwilling or unable to prolong their
schooling. Since opportunities for job training leading to advancement on the
job are blocked by the minimum wage for some of them, the young school dropouts
must choose jobs with little promise for advancement or become a labor market
dropout as well. Non.participation in the labor market, which is induced by
the minimum wage, may be financed by the family, by unreported market or illegal
activities, or y the welfare system.
     The non—students. who do not drop out of the labor market despite their low
productivity must contend with several obstacles: greater difficulties (longer
unemploymentJ in finding jobs. in the covered sector, and lesser growth on the
job because of the reduced availability of training on the job. Although it
may seem strange to assert that higher wages- increase turnover, this can happen
in the longer run when minimum wages- are raised, if firm—specific training is
important in these low!-wage jobs; :ts elimination reduces the cost of turnover
for the worker and for the employer. In the short-run, prior to full adjus1ent,
the effects- on turnover are ambiguous,, since quits are likely to be reduced and
layoffs increased in the covered sector.                -


     We   may s11nr±ze these implications, of minimum wages as follows: Reduced
training on the job leads to reduced pace of job and wage advancement, and to
eventually increased turnover in jobs. which previously contained specific train-
ing opportunities.,
                                        9




     The hypothesis that minimum wages tend to discourage on the, job training
is largely supported   in   the empirical analysis of Mincer and Leighton CNBER
Wbrk±ng Paper 44]j. Direct effects on reported job training and coroLlary
effects on wage growth were estmated in longitudinal microdata of the NLS and
RSID covering the period 1967—1971, in the NLS and 1973—1975 in the PSI. The
effects were consistantly negative and stronger at lower education levels.
No effects were observed in groups- when education exceeds high school. The
effects on turnover, were mixed. it decreased among young NLS whites,          and

increased among NLS- blacks and PSID   whites. W!iether   these   apparently   conflicting
findings on turnover reflect a distinction between short and long-run adjusents
remains unclear.1
     Our procedure relied on differences in wage levels across states for the
"same worker" Cas estimated by. wage functions I and on differences in coverage
among whites to construct the minimum wage variables. Alternative methodologies
used by' M. Hashi.moto (J.980r produced qualitatively similar results on the wage
growth question.



 Mixon (1978) found that minimum wages reduce quits in manufacturing industries
 in the short run.
                                            10




II. The Minimum Wage Model as a Guide to Union Wage Effects


(1) Supply Responses

        In contrast to the minimum wage literature the union effects literature tends

to    focus on union—nonunion (n-u)   wage differentials rather t1 n on employment

effects,    and even less on unemployment and labor mobility consequences. Does labor
move out of the unionized sector thereby reducing nonunion wages or the opposite?
If mobility is out of the sector the measure of union wage gain is biased upward,
                                                 1
if into the sector it is biased downward.            The hypothesis one encounters more

frequently in the union literature is that the wage gap is an underestimate of

union wage gains because of the so—called threat effect. The notion is that in

response to increases in union wage rates nonunion firms raise their wages in

order to reduce the probability that a union will organize their employees. This

kind of behavior, if true——and the evidence is not clear, needs to be distinguished

from supply effects.

        However, if, as both theory and empirical analyses suggest (Mincer, 1981),

the union wage push leads to selective rather than probabilistic rationing of

jobs, by upgrading of hiring standards or by nepotism and discrimination, labor

moves to the non—union sector in all cases, Consequently, unless offset by

threat effects, wages are reduced the non-union sector, but with the elimina-

tion of queues little unemployment would be observed in the covered sector.

        Empirical studies of the effects of unions on non—union wages 2 show mixed or

    negligible results.   This suggests that either supply effects are largely offset

by threat effects, or that the non—union sector is too large relative to the

union sector (80% of labor is not unionized in the U.S.) to show any discernible

    supply effects.

1
    For a thorough discussion of the difference between wage gain and wage gap,
    see Lewis (1963)
2
    Freeman and Medoff (1978) , Donsimoni and Shakotko (1979) , Kahn (1980).
                                          II




         The traditional use   of   the coverage variable (% unionized) alone can be mis-

 leading. Its interpretation as a measure of union power to raise wages need not

 be correct, if supply effects matter. For example, assume that union wage gains

 are uncorrelated with coverage, but increased coverage results in outward mobility.

 Then larger coverage would be associated with larger u—n wage gaps, but the

 interpretation that coverage measures union power to raise wages would be

 incorrect.




(2)    The Wage Push and Mir±ng Standards

        In contrast to legislatively imposed minimum wages, union wage gains are
endogenous to union power, objectives, and conditions-. Their size is not easy
to determine. This has been a subject of extensive research in the past two
decades. Much of it relies on estimating wage differences between union and
nonunion labor of          similar quality. Since full standardization is never
                    otherwise

possible, the estimates. are subject to debate. Available longitudinal data
permit a "before and after" analysis carried out on the same individuals.
The same analysis permits estimates of selectivity into union job hiring, since
information on prior wages and training is available.
         Current    work with longitudinal micro-data2 indicate that

the    one or two—year wage gain of men who move from    non—union   to union membership
 2
     Mellow (1981), Mincer l98l)
                                             12



significantly exceeds the wage change of others whose tenure or mobility status

 (inter-firm or inter-industry) is the same. This gain estimated

between a third to two-thirds of the (standardized) wage differential in the

cross—section.1 The latter averages about 20%. The remainder can be viewed

as an indirect estimate of the quality adjustment in hiring. More
                                                                          directly,
the fact of selectivity in hiring is seen in the higher non-union wage (On

the previous job) of new union hires compared to non-union hires (Mincer, 1981).

The differential between these prior wages is an estimate of the selectivity

component in the cross-sectional Uflion—flOflufliOfl wage differential.



(3) Effects on Hours of Work

          If numbers employed (N) and hours per worker (H) are viewed as separate

factors of production, cost minimizing employers will determine their demand for

N and H at the point where the ratio of marginal factor costs is equal to the

ratio of marginal productivities, i.e., the slope of the optimal production

isoquant.

          Following Rosen (l9?), the equilibrium marginal factor cost ratio is2

    (1)       jHF(r+q)
              MCH N
where F is the fixed cost of employment per worker, amortized per period by r,

the interest costof capital and by q, the worker quit probability which depreciates

the capital sum creating a capital loss Fq per period.

          To the extent that F is sizable, an increase in the wage rate W reduces the

factor cost ratio shifting the relative demand away from hours toward numbers.

In the minimum wage case we argued that F is significant at most in terms of

training expenses, but that minimum wages tend to reduce or eliminate such

1
 A similar approach by Mellow (1981) applied to a large CPS two-year panel showed
 somewhat smaller union gains. Mellow's data, however, did not permit analyses by
 mobility status.
2Let total labor costs be C = NHW + NF (r-+-q), Then MC = dc = HW + F (r+q)

 and MCH=dc
               dh
                                          13




expenses,   so that the predicted effects on hours may be observed only in the
short run before the adjusent is comp1eted or it may be indeterminate.
     In the union case, union presaure on wages' extends to most components of
the wage packa9e. Indeed, union push on components other than directly paid
out wages appear to be even stronger. thii'on fringe benefits exceed non!-union
benefits not only in doLlar value but also as a proportion of the wage
package (about 30%). A number of possible explanations have been conjectured,
running from union democracy which favors the older worker to union management
of pension funds as an instrument of power. One economic argument relies on
reduced turnover, which is a result of union wage push and of other gains. In
the presence of incomplete vesting of pensions in the worker, longer tenure
of union members means that the probability of ultimately receiving the. pension
is higher in union than in non—union jobs. ence the incentive to push for larger
pensions    (Freeman, 1978). But why increase fringe benefits by a larger percentage than

the increase in the paid out wage? One           reason   is the higher marginal income

tax rate, if the income        elasticity of   worker demand for fringes is otherwise

unitary    (Rice   (1966 ) •                   But this explains only a small part      of
the proportional increase (onsimoni and Shakotko, 1979).

     The analysis      of effects   of wage push   on   hours may   provide   a sufficient

rationale: An increase in union wages W, with F unchanged, would lower the
ratio of marginal factor costs both by raising the denominator in the second
right hand component of equation (1) and by reducing q in its numerator. If
hours are reduced, weekly earnings may not increase much even if wage rates
                                            14




 rise significantly. To blunt the adverse effect on hours, more specifically,

 to prevent their reduction which would limit union gains in earnings, costs (F)

 such as fringes which are partly unrelated to hours, must be increased by a

 larger      percentage than the paid out wage, (w) since quit rates (q) decline. Our
 evidence that union hours of work are not        significantly shorter than hours

 of (comparable) nonunion workers at least does not contradict this analysis.

        In contrast to hypotheses which rely on non—wage aspects of unionism to

exslain      the larger ratio of fringe benefits to paid out wages in union employ-
ment, this analysis predicts a positive link between the percent union Wage
premium      and the relative increase in fringe benefits (F) .      Moreover, the per-
cent    increase in     F is expected to exceed the   percent   increase
in   the wage, since the larger the latter, the bigger is the decrease in the

quit    rate. Thus unions which achieve the biggest gain in paid out wages would
also want the largest proportion of       their total compensation in fringe benefits.


        An   important consequence of higher fixed costs (in hiring and in fringes)
imposed on        union employers is greater stability   of employment -— reduced
fluctuations        in N, when labor demand fluctuates (see Rosen, 1968). As a result,

the major means of adjustment to fluctuating demand in union employment are the

use of overtime when labor is short and the use of temporary layoffs (recall

unemployment) in slack times. Temporary layoff is favored by union workers,

as it implies lesser income loss than corresponding reductions in weekly hours,

because      ef   unemloyment compensation and ether unemployment benefits

For their part, employers can expect less attrition, since temporaily laid off

union   workers are less likely to look for other jobs than comparable        non-union
workers.
                                             15


        The evidence that average weekly hours are not less in the union than

non—union sector, that overtime is more prominent and that temporary layoffs

are more frequent and a larger proportion of total layoffs in the union sector
                1
is available ,      but   needs to be investigated more rigorously.



(4) Wage Profiles, Turnover, and Training

         Wage profiles of union members are higher and quit rates lower than

in non-union jobs. These facts are neither unrelated nor surprising. Since

the wage received in union employment exceeds the worker's opportunity wage

in non-union employment, and fringes even more so, he is less likely to quit

a union job then a non-union job. Quit rates in the union sector are about

half as large as in the non-union sector. The differences are smaller for

separations, since layoffs (much of which are recall) are larger in the

union sector-—also an implication of larger fixed labor costs, as already

observed.

        Lower quit rates of union workers have been ascribed to the existence

of grievance procedures ("voice" instead of "exit")             Although union wage

premia are assumed to play a part in the reduction of mobility, no direct

empirical tests have been offered. Longitudinal micro-data permit direct

tests: If unionization reduces job mobility, this reduction should be

observed on the same individual by comparing his mobility before and after

joining a union firm. And if the wage premium gained by moving to a union

firm matters, the reduction in mobility should be greater the greater the

wage gain. Tests carried out on NLS        and    PSID panels (Mincer, 1981) confirm

these predictions, but they leave out advantages in fringes which are not

available in the data.


'In MID, straight-time in weekly hours are about 4% shorter in union jobs,
 but total hours are no less in union than in nonunion jobs. See also
 B1a and Kahn (1981) , and Raisian (1981)
2
    See Freeman (1980) .But there is little reason to believe that similarly
    effective procedures cannot be adopted in non—union firms, given the in-
    centives to reduce turnover costs.
                                        16


     Analyses of minimum wages (Mincer and Leighton, 1980) showed mixed effects

on turnover. Since minimum wages apply only to the paid out money component,

other components of labor costs are likely to be reduced, and this is apparently

true of training costs whether they are borne by employers or employees.

Although the initial increase in wages is likely to reduce quits, later

dilution of job training content may well increase turnover.

     Although the typical union wage profile is higher in level, it is flatter

than the typical non—union profile. This difference has been found in many

studies and has been ascribed to union policy of compressing wage differentials

across firms and workers. The policy of wage compression has been attributed

to union pursuit of equity, to administrative convenience in collective bar-

gaining, and to union efforts to reduce competition from lower wage firms.

     In studies of minimum wages flatter wage growth has been conjectured

and observed, and inferred to be a consequence of increased wage costs re-

placing job training expenditures. Union effects on job training are more

complex: They may be derived from union wage pressures on the entire tenure

profile of wages: Explicit and rigid rules make seniority a necessary condi-

tion for promotion in most union firms, and wage progressions are adhered to,

though they may be slowed or accelerated, along seniority lines. Such provisions

limit the supply of trained workers from other firms, and reduce incentives

for general (transferable) training.

    Although specific training need not be affected, since employers can

rely on lesser quit and employees on job security afforded by seniority,

general (transferable) training is likely to be reduced. Empirical wage

functions which distinguishes between effects of work experience at fixed

levels of tenure, and of length of tenure at given levels of experience ,show

little difference in the slopes of tenure profiles of wages between union and
                                     17


and non—union workers, but a much flatter union experience profile.

Although volumes of specific training need not be affected, direct

responses in the micro—data confirm that total training is less frequent

in union firms.
                                     18

                                References

  0. Ashenfelter and G. Johnson, "Unionism, Relative Wages, and Labor Quality,"
       American Economic Review, October, 1972.

  FD. Blau and L.M. Kahn,"The Exit-Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market:
       Soire Additional Evidence." (Mimeograph, 1981).

  M.P. Donsimoni and R. Shakotko, "Unionism and the Structure of Total Compen-
       sation," Djscussjon Paper 21, Columbia University, August, 1979.

  G.J. Duncan and F.P. Stafford, "Do Union Members Receive Compensating Wage
       Differentials," American Economic Review, June 1980.

  R. Freeman, "The Effects of Trade Unionism on Fringe Benefits,'1 NEER
       Working Paper No. 292, October 1978.

  ________ and J. Medoff, "The Percent Organized Wage Relationship," NBER
      Working Paper No. 305, December 1978.

  E. Gramlich, "Impact of Minimum Wages on Other Wages, Employment, and Family
       Incomes," Brookings Paper 1, 1976.

 M.Hashimoto, "Minimum Wages and Earnings Growth of Young Men," Econometric
      Society Meetings, December 1979.

 L.M.Kahn,"Union Spi].lover Effecrs on Unorganized Labor Markets," Journal of
      Human Resources, Winter 1980.
 H.G. Lewis,Unionjsm and Relative Wages in the U.S., Chicago University Press,
      1963.
 J.P Mattila, "Youth Labor Markets, Enrollments and Minimum Wages," Industrial
      Relations Research Association Proceedings, 1978.

 ___________ "The Impact of Minimum Wages on Teenage Schooling," AEI
      Conference, 1979.

 W. Mellow, "Unioni and Wages: A Ingitudina1 Analysis," The Review of
      Economics and Statistics, February 1981.

 J. Mincer, "Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages," Journal of Political
      Economy, Part 2, August 1976.

 _________ and L. Leighton, "Effects of Minimum Wages on Human
      NBER Working Paper No. 441, February 1980.               Capital Formation,"

J. W. Mixon, Jr., "The Minimum Wage and Voluntary Labor Mobility," Industrial
     and Labor Relations Review, October 1978.

C.J. Parsley, "Labor Unions and Wages: A Survey," Journal of Economic Literature,
     March 1980.

J. Raisian, "Contracts, Tenure, and Cyclical Variability in Wages and Hours,"
     (ELS Mimeograph, April, 1981).

A. Rees, The Economics of Trade Unions, 2nd. ed., Chicago University Press, 1977.

A. Rice, "Skill, Earnings, and the Growth of Wage Supplements," American Economic
     Review, May 1966.
                                       19




S. Rosen, "Trade Union Power, Thrust Effects, an the Extent of Organization,"
     Review of Economic Studies, April 1969.

_______   "Short—run Employment Variation on U.S. Railroads," Econometrica,
     July 1968.

G.J. Stigler, "The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation," American Economic
     Review, June 1946.

M.Wachter and S. Kim, "Time Series Changes in Youth Hoblessness," NBER Working
     Paper No. 384, August 1979.

F. Welsh, "Minimum Wage Legislation in the U.S.," Economic Inquiry, Spetineber 1974.

W. Wessels, "The Effects of Minimum Wages in the Presence of Fringe Benefits,"
     Economic Inquiry, May 1980.

A. Zurker, "Minimum Wages and the Demand for Low Wage Labor," Quaterly Journal
     of Economics, May 1973.
