                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 COMPENSATING WAGE DIFFERENTIALS
                     FOR MANDATORY OVERTIME


                       Ronald G. Ehrenberg

                        Paul L. Schumann


                      Working Paper No. 805


               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          November 1981




Professor of Economics and Labor Economics, Cornell University, and
Assistant Professor of Industrial Relations, University of
Minnesota. Our research was conducted under a contract with the
Minimum Wage Study Commission, however the views expressed here are
solely our own. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at
the Winter 1980 Econometric Society Meetings and at seminars at the
National Bureau of Economic Research (Palo Alto), Michigan State
University, the University of Arizona, and Tel—Aviv University.
Without implicating them for what remains, we wish to thank the
participants of these sessions, as well as numerous colleagues at
Cornell and elsewhere for their comments. We also wish to express
our gratitude to Eileen Driscoll for her assistance with some of
the computations and to our colleague, William Greene, for pro-
viding us with a copy of his econometric program that estimates
equations, controlling for selectivity bias. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper II 805
                                              November 1981



                    COMPENSATING WAGE DIFFERENTIALS

                        FOR MANDATORY OVERTIME



                               Abstract

      Our paper estimates the extent to which employees are compensated

for an unfavorable job characteristic, being required to accept mandatory

assignment of overtime, by receiving higher straight—time wages. Our

estimating equations are derived from a model in which wage rates and the

existence of mandatory assignment of overtime are jointly determined in the

market by the interaction of employee and employer preferences. While on

average, we do not observe the existence of a compensating wage differential

for mandatory overtime, we do observe the existence of such differentials

for unionized workers and workers with only a few years experience at a firm.

      Given any estimated compensating wage differential for an unfavorable

working condition, one must decide whether its magnitude is sufficiently

large to allow one to conclude that the differential fully compensates

workers for the disutility of being subject to the unfavorable working condi-

tion. We develop and illustrate a methodology that can be used to answer

this question, at least for the case of mandatory overtime provisions and

other rules that restrict employees' choice of hours.



                                             Ronald C. Ehrenberg
                                             Paul L. Schumann

                                             New York State School of
                                             Industrial and Labor Relations
                                             Cornell University
                                             P.O. Box 1000
                                             Ithaca, NY 14853
                                             (607) 256—3026
I.   Introduction

     The overtime pay premium provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act

(FLSA) currently regulate only two dimensions of the hours of work rela—

tionship; the number of hours after which the overtime premium goes into

effect (40) and the premium's level (time and a half). In their legislation

several European countries regulate other dimensions; for example they

require either prior governmental approval for overtime and/or for employees

to give their consent to working overtime.1 A bill to amend the FLSA intro—

duced recently into Congress, would have similarly prohibited mandatory

assignment of overtime in the United States.2

     A rationale for many forms of protective labor legislation is that they

are attempts to correct for failures of private markets and overtime hours

legislation can be analyzed with this in mind.3 For even if both employers

and their employees were satisfied with long workweeks and no premium pay

for overtime, their private calculations ignore the social costs of unemploy-

ment. An overtime premium can be thought of as a tax to make employers bear

the full marginal social cost of their hours decisions; its intent is to

reduce the use of overtime hours and stimulate employment growth. The pay-

ment of the premium directly to employed workers may be justified if market

imperfections prevent workers from freely choosing their desired workweeks

and force them to work "excessively" long hours. The payment can then be

seen as an attempt to reduce their disutility from long workweeks.

     Proposals to legislate prohibitions against mandatory overtime can be

viewed as being based upon the belief that market Imperfections persist In

the labor market and that the overtime premium does not fully compensate

employees for the disutility associated with mandatory overtime. However,

one may question if markets have failed here; there appear to be a variety



                                  1
                                                                           2




of overtime hours provisions offered in the labor market. For example,

only 16 percent of the individuals in the 1977 Michigan Quality of Employment

Survey, who reported working overtime, also reported that the overtime hours

decision was made unilaterally by their employer and that overtime was

mandatory, in the sense that employees who refused it suffered a penalty.4

In addition, roughly 20 percent of employees covered by major collective

bargaining agreements in 1976 had explicit provisions in their contracts

that gave them the right to refuse overtime.5

       To the extent that labor markets are competitive and establishments do

offer a variety of overtime hours provisions (i.e., employer determines,

employee determines, penalty for refusal, etc.), compensating wage differen-

tials should arise. That is, establishments which offered "distasteful"

mandatory overtime provisions would have to pay either higher straight—time

wages, higher overtime premiums, or higher fringe benefits to attract labor

than would establishments in which such provisions did not occur. If

straight—time wage, overtime premium, or fringe benefit differentials exist

that fully compensate employees for the disutility of mandatory overtime

provisions, no case for legislated prohibitions against mandatory overtime

is present.6 As such, evidence on the extent to which such compensating

differentials currently do exist is of importance to policymakers.7

      Our paper first attempts in the next section to estimate tb extent

to which employees currently are compensated, in the form of higher straight—

time wages, for being required to work mandatory overtime. Our focus is on

compensating straighttime wage differentials because the data base we use,

the 1977 Michigan Quality of Employment Survey (QES), contains no information

on   the   value of fringes and because preliminary analyses suggested that the
                                                                           3



magnitude of the overtime premium was not correlated with the presence of

mandatory overtime rules, other variables held constant. Our estimating

equations are derived from a model in which wage rates and the existence of

mandatory assignment of overtime are jointly determined in the market; an

employee's willingness to work mandatory overtime is positively related to

the premium he would receive for working mandatory overtime, while an

employer's demand for mandatory overtime provisions is negatively related

to the premium he would have to pay to institute this work rule.     Such a

model leads naturally to the estimation of wage equations, using econo-

metric techniques that correct for the sample selectivity problem.

     Our empirical analyses do not provide strong support for the proposi-

tion that on average employees who work for establishments with mandatory

overtime provisions tend to receive higher straight—time wages, ceteris

paribus. On the other hand, they do suggest that there is a straight—time

wage premium associated with mandatory overtime provisions for union

workers and for workers with only a few years experience with a firm. We

provide explanations for why these results might occur.

     Given any estimated compensating wage differential for an unfavorable

working condition, one must decide whether its magnitude is sufficiently

large to allow one to conclude that the differential fully compensates

workers for the disutility of being subject to the unfavorable working

condition. In Section III we develop a methodology that can be used to

answer this question, at least for the case of mandatory overtime provisions

and other rules that restrict employees' choice of hours. The methodology

requires one to estimate the parameters of an explicit utility function and

then to use these estimates to compare the utility that a representative
                                                                          4




worker would achieve when employed in situations in which mandatory overtime

provisions are, and are not present. For expository convenience we use the

simple Cobb—Douglas function to illustrate the methodology. The final

section, then provides some brief concluding remarks.



II. Are There Compensating Wage Differentials Associated With Bei
     Required to Work Mandatory Overtime

     Our goal is to estimate the extent to which individuals who are employed

by firms that require mandatory overtime receive higher straight—time wages

than otherwise identical individuals who are employed in firms in which

overtime is voluntary. If the wage of the th individual is W.      if he

works in a firm in which overtime is mandatory and W.lv   if he works in a

firm in which overtime is voluntary, then we can define the relative wage

differential received for mandatory overtime, d., as


             d. = (W      — W. )/W.   log(W. 1W. )
     (1)      1      liii    iv iv         im iv

     In general it is not possible to observe both W.im   and W.  with
                                                               iv
cross—section data, as at a point in time an individual is typically

observed employed either by a firm that requires mandatory overtime or by

a firm that does not, but not by both.8 A naive approach that circumvents

this problem is to estimate wage equations separately for individuals in the

mandatory and nonmandatory sectors, use the estimated coefficients from

these regressions and the characteristics of a representative individual to

compute predicted values of the wage rate that the individual would receive

in both sectors, and then estimate the differential by calculating the

percentage difference in these predicted values.
                                                                                   5




     More formally, suppose that we postulate that the wage rate an indi-

vidual would receive in a job requiring mandatory overtime is a log linear

function of a vector of variables, X, which represent his personal

characteristics (e.g., education, experience) and the characteristics of

his employer (e.g., union status, establishment size, industry) plus a

random error term (c. )
                         im
                              K
               logW. =            a. X.. + .im
     (2)
                         3=1
                                   jmji
and that a similar functional relationship exists that describes the wage

that an individual would receive in a job in which overtime was voluntary

                              K
     (3)       logW. =
                  iv      .
                         3=1      jvji
                                  a. X.. + Eiv


The naive approach would involve estimating the paraneters of (2) by

ordinary least squares from observations on individuals who are required to

work mandatory overtime and the parameters of (3) by ordinary least squares

from observations on individuals who are not required to work mandatory

overtime. Given estimates of these parameters (a.               &. ) and
                                                            jm, JV
                                                                           the charac—

teristics   of a representative individual and his employer (X.1), one can

then obtain an estimate of the relative straight—time wage premium paid

for mandatory overtime by

                                             K
              d. = logW. — logW. =                 (&. —&. )x
     (4)
               1       im      iv                    jm JV J1
                                            ;j=1

    As is now well—known, however, estimates of wage equations from trun-

cated samples will not necessarily yield unbiased estimates of the under-

lying structural wage equations, since the assumption that the error term
                                                                          6




in each equation is random and uncorrelated with the other explanatory

variables is typically violated.9 This occurs because employees and

employers are not randomly assigned to the mandatory overtime sector, but

rather make explicit choices. Estimates of the wage equation that ignore

the underlying choice model will be biased because they will confound the

effect of an explanatory variable on wages with its effect on the probability

that an individual is, or is not, employed by a firm that requires mandatory

overtime. To correct for this sample selectivit_y problem requires us to

model the underlying economic choice process that determines whether an

individual is observed working mandatory overtime.

     This problem is complicated by the fact that such an event is a product

of both employee arid employer decisions. The straight—time wage premium

paid for mandatory overtime will influence both employees' willingness to be

employed in establishments that require mandatory overtime and employers'

demands that their employees work mandatory overtime. Other things equal,

the larger the premium the greater employees' willingness to accept this

working condition and the smaller employers' demands to have their employees

accept it.

     An employee's willingness to be required to work mandatory overtime

is also undoubtedly related to a vector of personal characteristics and

characteristics of his employer that influence his desire to regularly

work long workweeks. For example, older employees, employees with "home

responsibilities", and employees working in firms with unpleasant working

conditions might, ceteris paribus, prefer not to be required to work inanda—

tory overtime. Similarly, an employer's demand for the provision is also

related to a vector of employee and firm characteristics that Influence
                                                                           7




the net benefits of having mandatory overtime provisions. For example,

an employer operating a firm in a continuous process industry, or in other

situations in which the firm's technology depends upon the simultaneous

presence of labor and capital or different categories of labor, might per—

ceive it to be important to have mandatory overtime provisions)°

Similarly, he might believe it more important to have such provisions for

skilled production workers, where an absence might otherwise create a

"bottleneck", than for unskilled clerical workers.

     One can formally model the assignment of workers to the mandatory

overtime or voluntary overtime sector in the context of a model in which

employers have demand functions for mandatory overtime provisions, employees

have supply functions that indicate their willingness to work for employers

that offer such provisions, and the assumption is made that an employee

will be found in a job requiring mandatory overtime if, and only if, both he

and the employer believe that it is in their best interests to have such a

provision.11 Under the appropriate assumptions about the error terms in

the demand and supply equations (joint normally distributed) the equilibrium

assignment rule is seen to be generated by a truncated bivariate probit
         12
model.

     Unfortunately softward limitations and our inability to make a suf-

ficient number of a priori restrictions to identify all of the parameters

of this model have prevented us from estimating the complete model ((l)—(3)

plus the assignment rule) either by maximum likelihood methods or by an

iterative approach that leads to consistent estimates. Rather, we have

assumed that the assignment rule can be approximated by the univarlate

probit model
                                                                                        8


                                      R
       (5)       S*d.+
                 i  01 r6Y  •+ui
                           rn
                         1



                 S1
                      = 1       if S >      0


                      = 0       otherwise

Here S        is an unobservable continuous variable that indicates the

"strength" of employer and employee preferences for mandatory overtime

provisions. This variable can be arbitrarily scaled so that when it exceeds

zero mandatory overtime is observed (S,1), otherwise mandatory overtime

is not observed (S.=0). The Yr                     are a set of variables (in addition to
                            1
the wage differential, d.) that influence either employees' willingness

to work mandatory overtime or employers' desire to have such a working

condition. Finally, u.                is a normally distributed random error term and

the          are parameters to be estimated.

      Consistent estimates of the model specified in (l)—(5) can be obtained

using an iterative procedure originally suggested by Lung—fei Lee (1978)

and James Heckman (l979)) One can substitute the wage equations (2) and

(3)   into   (1) and then (5)        to   obtain a reduced form probit selection model in

which the probability of observing an individual working mandatory overtime

i8 specified to be a function of all of the predetermined variables in the

ode1 (the X. and 'r From                        estimates of this probit equation, one can

compute estimates of variables (the inverse of the Mills ratio —— see

Heckman (1979))       which      are then added to the wage equations ((2) and (3)) to

control for the probability that an individual is observed working mandatory

overtime. These "augmented" wage equations can then be estimated by ordinary

lea9t squares and consistent parameter estimates of equations (2) and (3)
                                                                          9



obtained.14 Finally, these estimated parameters and the mean values of the

explanatory variables can be substituted back into (4) to compute consistent

estimates of the straight—time wage differential associated with the presence

of mandatory overtime provisions.

     The data we use to implement the above framework come from the 1977

Michigan Quality of Employment Survey.15 We eliminated from the original

1515 individuals in the survey who were employed full—time those individuals

who failed to report their straight—time hourly wage rate and/or whether

they were required to work mandatory overtime. An individual was said to

be required to work mandatory overtime if he or she reported that he or she

could not refuse to work overtime without a penalty. This left us with a

usable sample of 1108 observations,of which 165, or 14.89 percent, were

categorized as being employed in a job that required mandatory overtime.

     Columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 present OLS estimates of wage equations

(equations (2) and (3)), estimated separately for individuals in the manda-

tory overtime and nonmandatory overtime, or voluntary overtime, sectors.

We estimated three equations for each sector to permit us to test later for

the sensitivity of our estimated differential to the specification of the

wage equation used. The first is a standard human capital model, augmented

by a variable indicating whether the individual is a union member or covered

by a union contract (X8) and includes measures of the individual's total

labor market experience (X1, X2), of his or her experience with the

current employer (X3, X4), of his or 'her years of formal schooling and

trade school (X5, X6),    of his or her health status (X7), and measures

of the respondent's sex           race (X10), and marital status (X11).
                          (X9),
The second specification adds a vector of one—digit major occupation
                                                                          10




dichotomous variables. Finally, the third specification adds a vector of

one—digit major industry dichotomous variables. For brevity, only the first

specification is reported in the table.'6 The pattern of coefficients in

each equation is similar to the pattern found in previous studies that

ignored the mandatory overtime question.

    We also estimated several reduced form probit equations (equation (5)),

one corresponding to each specification of the wage equations, that explain

whether an individual is employed by a firm requiring mandatory overtime.

The explanatory variables included in these equations are those that

influence either employers' demands for an employee to work mandatory over-

time or an employee's willingness to supply mandatory overtime, or that

influence the wage paid in each sector, and hence the straight—time wage

premium ((4))paid for mandatory overtime.17 The pattern of coefficients

did not vary across specifications and again for brevity we report only the

simplest specification, which excluded the occupation and industry variables,

in column (3) of Table 1. Many of the variables in these equations enter
                                                                               18
from both the employer and employee sides, and also from the wage equations.

Hence, it is difficult to predict what the expected signs of their coefficients

should be in the reduced form probit model.

     Column (3) indicates that while many of these variables' coefficients

prove to be statistically insignificant, the chi—square statistic suggests

that one can reject the hypothesis that the entire vector of coefficients is

statistically insignificantly different from zero. Moreover, when we use

these probit equations to compute predicted values of the inverse Mills

ratios (A1, A1), enter these variables in equations (2) and (3)

respectively, and then reestimate these augmented wage equations using OLS,

the selectivity variables prove to be statistically significant, at least
                                                                           11.




at the .90 level of significance (Columns (4) and (5)),19 This provides

some evidence that the estimated OLS wage coefficients may be inconsistent

estimates of the true coefficients of the wage determination models,

although as noted in footnote 13, the consistency of the estimates when we

control for selectivity bias is condition upon (5) being the correct under—

lying selection rule.

     The coefficient estimates contained in Table 1 can be used along with

equation (4) to compute estimates of the straight—time wage premium paid

to workers who are required to work mandatory overtime. We do this initially

for a representative worker who has the mean value of each of the charac-

teristics (X) in the sample. The estimated premium is tabulated in the

top row of Table 2 for each of the three specificatations of the wage equa-

tions, for both the OhS and the selectivity corrected estimates. Quite

strikingly, in only one of the six cases is the estimated premium positive.

Onaveg, market forces do not seem to be producing a compensating wage

differential for mandatory overtime.

     Of course the fact that on average such a differential does not exist,

does not imply that no workers in the economy are compensated for being

required to work mandatory overtime. Two groups of workers that one might

want to focus on, in particular, are those covered by collective bargaining

agreements and those newly hired by firms.

    Turning first to the role of collective bargaining, recently attention

has been redirected to the many roles unions play in addition to seeking

to increase their members' wages.2° Empirical studies have indicated that

unions may affect productivity and labor turnover.2' In addition, it has

been argued that unions may help to compensate for market failures by
                                                                            12




providing information on unfavorable working conditions and/or by obtaining

compensating wage differentials for employees who are employed under such

conditions. Indeed, a recent study suggests that up to two—fifths of the

estimated union/nonunion wage differential is simply a compensating dif—

ferential because unionized employees tend to be employed in more structured

and hence less desirable (from the perspective of the employees) work
             22
settings.         Following this line of reasoning, one might hypothesize that

unions will also achieve larger compensating wage differentials for manda—

tory overtime provisions for their members than those received by otherwise

comparable nonunion employees. That is, markets may be sufficiently imper—

fect that compensating differentials might not arise in the absence of union

pressure; unions may serve to help restore the differentials that would

exist   in   the absence of these imperfections.

     To test for this possibility, rows B and C of Table 2 present

estimates of the percentage straight—time wage premium paid to workers
required to work mandatory overtime in the union and nonunion sectors,

respectively. These estimates again make use of the estimated wage equations;

the differentials paid to union members are evaluated using the mean values

of union members' characteristics, while those for nonunion members are

evaluated at the mean values of nonunion employees' characteristics.23

The estimated differentials are positive in the union sector but are nega-

tive in the nonunion sector. The OLS estimates suggest that the straight—

time wage premium paid to induce workers to accept jobs which require

mandatory overtime is roughly 4.0 to 5.3 percent in unionized establishments,

while those that control for selectivity bias place the differential in the

range   of   2.6 to 4.3 percent.
                                                                           13



     Turning next to the role of job tenure, it is also plausible that

whether a premium is paid for mandatory overtime depends upon an employee's

job tenure. If an employer seeks to attract a new employee to a firm that

requires mandatory overtime and job applicants know of this unfavorable

working condition, a compensating wage differential will be required. In

contrast, employees who have been with a firm for a number of years and

have accumulated "firm—specific" human capital, may find that there is a

wedge between the wage they are receiving and the wage they can command

from other employers.24 As such, ex post, the employer may not have to

pay them a compensating wage differential for newly instituted unfavorable

working conditions.25 These employees' investments in firm—specific human

capital limit the need for such differentials to arise.

     This line of reasoning suggests that compensating wage differentials

for mandatory overtime will be larger for employees with only a few years

experience with a firm than they will be for long—term employees. To test

this hypothesis, we divided our sample into employees with less than three

years experience, and those with three or more years, with their current

employer. OLS wage equations and the selectivity corrected wage equations

were reestimated separately for each group and then the estimated straight—

time wage premium paid to employers required to work mandatory overtime

computed as before.

     These estimated differentials are evaluated at the mean values of the

characteristics for the individuals in each group and are reported in the

last two lines of Table 2. The hypothesis appears to be borne out, at

least for the OLS estimates. The OLS estimates suggest that positive

compensating differentials for mandatory overtime are paid to inexperienced
                                                                          14




workers with less than three years of job tenure, however no such diffetential

is paid to workers with more than three years job tenures In contrast, the

"selectivity corrected" estimates suggest that neither group receives a

positive compensating differential for mandatory overtime Since we have

only approximated the true sample selection rule (see footnote 13 and above),

the statistical properties of the "selectivity corrected" estimates are not

certain and it is not obvious which set of estimates should be considered

preferred.

     In sum, our results indicate that on average employees who work ot

establishments with mandatory overtime provisions do not receive compensat—

ingly higher straight—time wages. Focusing on what happens "on average",

however, masks important differences between groupsb The data suggest that

unionized employees do receive a straight—time wage premium for mandatory

overtime; this provides support for the view (Duncan and Stafford (1980))

that one role unions play is to establish compensating wage differentials

for unfavorable working conditions. The data also provide some weaker

support for the view that experienced workers, who are "tied" to firms,

fail to receive compensating wage differentials for mandatory overtime, but

that workers with less than three years experience with a firm do receive

such dIfferentials. How one might attempt to judge whether the magnitude

of any estimated differential is sufficient to fuUy compensate employees

for being subject to mandatory overtime provisions is an issue to which we

now turn.
                                                                           15




III. Are Compensatingage Differentials for Mandatory Overtime
     Provisions "Fully" Compensating?

      A long and growing literature in labor economics provides evidence on
the   existence of "compensating" wage differentials for various job charac-

teristics. Among the characteristics examined have been risk of injury,

nonwage forms of compensation (such as retirement system characteristics),

working conditions, and risk of unemployment.26 A key question that

policymakers must address is whether an estimated differential is suf-

ficiently large to allow them to conclude that a worker is equally well—

off with the job characteristic and the wage differential as he would be

in the absence of the characteristic and the differential? If the answer

is yes, if the differential is indeed "fully compensating", then the case

for government intervention is substantially weakened.

      If one truly believes that all labor markets are competitive, then it

is almost a tautology that whatever wage differentials are generated by

markets will be "fully compensating" ones. However, once one allows for

market imperfections, the question becomes an empirical one. In some cases,

it Is possible to test whether the "compensating" differential is indeed

"fully compensating". For example, Ehrenberg (1980) found    that holding the
factors   that influence wages, promised retirement benefits, and the deterini—

nants of total compensation constant, that for every dollar that public

employees were required to contribute to their pension fund, their annual

earnings increased by a dollar. It is straightforward to conclude here

that the wage differential associated with employee retirement system

contributions are fully compensating.

      In contrast, in other situations it is not easy to establish whether

compensating differentials are fully compensating. Estimates of the
                                                                          16



compensating differential associated with the risk of fatal injury at the

workplace suggest that individuals are paid a premium of 1 to 4 percent of

their wages to compensate them for existing risks of fatal injuries.27

However, researchers have not evaluated whether such differentials truly

fully compensate workers for the risks of fatal injury; all we know is

that they are the differentials observed in the market. If labor markets

are not perfectly competitive, there is no reason to assume that the dif-

ferentials are in fact fully compensating. Hence, the potential usefulness

of these estimates for public policy in the occupational safety area is

unclear.

     In the case of mandatory overtime, or any other employment package that

specifies a tied wage rate—hours of work bundle, it is possible to evaluate

whether the compensating wage differentials that are observed are fully

compensating. To understand the logic of our approach, refer to Figure 1

where a familiar indifference curve model is plotted. The individual is

assumed to derive utility from leisure time and income; the latter is a proxy

for some Hicksian composite commodity whose price is taken as fixed. Suppose

an individual has nonlabor income of OT, a wage rate of W0 for the first

H hours per week that he works, and he receives an overtime premium of

time and a half for all overtime hours. The individual then faces the

budget constraint BAOT and, given his indifference map, will locate at

point a working H0 hours and having a total income of Y0.28 Thus, his

utility would be given by


     (6)     U(Y0, L0)
                                                                          17



     Now suppose the individual was employed by a firm In which mandatory

overtime was required and was forced to work         more hours of overtime

than he otherwise would choose. [n this case he would wind up at point b

with a total income of       Although YM exceeds Y0, he obviously now

would be at a lower level of utility. In fact, to leave him equally well

off as he was at point a, if he is forced to work ill hours he would

require a total income of Y1. Y1—Y1 is the lump sum income transfer, or

the compensating variation in income, that would be required to fully com-

pensate him for the disutility associated with mandatory overtime.

     Suppose, however, that instead of a lump sum payment, to get the

employee to Y1    the employer offers him a straight—time wage W1 which is

d percent higher than before (W1=(1+d)W0).     It is easy to see that each

value of the straight—time wage premium for mandatory overtime, d, will

lead to a new budget line and that there is only one value of d which will

permit him to locate at point e where his income will be Y1, his leisure

hours L1 (=T—H1) and where


     (7)
             U(Y1, L1) = U(Y0, L0)

     This value of d, which leads to the budget line DCOT, is the fully

compensating wage differential; the differential which fully compensates the

individual for mandatory overtime. Provided that the individual's marginal

utilities from income and leisure are both positive, and his indifference

curves are convex, it is straightforward to show that higher values of d

will more than fully compensate him, while lesser values will less than

fully compensate him. Furthermore, how onerous mandatory overtime is depends

upon the difference between H1 and H; the larger this gap, the larger
                                                                            18




will be the straight—time wage premium necessary to fully compensate him

for mandatory overtime.29 The analysis would of course be similar for any

other tied wage—hours employment offer; for example, one could similarly

analyze the compensating wage differential required to induce workers to

accept jobs with shorter workweeks than they desire.

       To operationalize this approach, and estimate what the fully compensat-

ing straight—time wage differential is, is no trivial task. In the present

example, each individual either works for a firm requiring mandatory overtime

or does not. Hence, we can directly observe either            and H0, or W1
(=W0(l+d)) and H1, but not both. Furthermore, it is necessary for us to

know the shape of the individual's indifference curve, something which is

typically not directly observed.

       Fortunately, there is a way in which one can deduce all of the neces-

sary information. To do so requires one to assume a specific functional

form for the utility function. To illustrate the methodology, we assume

for expositional convenience that the individual's utility function is any

monotonic transformation of the Cobb—Douglas utility function.


        (8)        U =


       If         were known, one could compute the level of utility achieved by

a representative individual who was required to work mandatory overtime

from


        (9)        U1 =


where         =        ÷                   + M
                  WH       W1(l.5)(H1—H)


          L1T-H1
                                                                                 19




Here          is the individual's observed wage, H1 his observed weekly hours

of work, M his weekly nonlabor income, H the number of hours after

which the overtime premium goes into effect (typically 40) and T the

total number of hours in a week (168).

       Now given the utility function specified in (8), if this individual was

employed by a firm which did not require mandatory overtime he would work

H0 hours, where H0 is given by


       (10)      H0 = aT + (a—1)(M—.5W0H)/W0(l.5)                if H >   H


                      = aT + (a—i) (M/W0)                        if H0 < H


That is (10) represents the labor supply curve for individuals employed in

the nonmandatory overtime sector. Now we do not observe W0 for the

individual employed in the mandatory overtime sector, rather we observe

W1, which equals W0(l+d). Hence, (10) can be written


       (11)           = aT   + (ci—1)(M—.5(W1/(l+d))H)/(W1/(l+d))(1.5)    if   H0 >   H
                 H0

                      = aT + (a—i)(M(l+d)/W1)                             if H0 <     H


       Observe   that    given a, everything on the right—hand side of (11) is

known save for d. Moreover,           for each value of d, there will exist a

corresponding     value of      H0 and hence of Y0 and L0. Thus, we can specify

the individual's utility from being employed by a firm in which mandatory

overtime Is not required as a function of the size of the differential


       (12)              =
                 U0(d)
                                                                        20



     One can then set (12) equal to (9) and solve for d*. The solution

will be the fully compensating straight—time wage differential for mandatory

overtime; it can be contrasted to the actual differentials that we have

estimated.

     Of course, to proceed along this line first requires an estimate of a

and it is natural to obtain such an estimate from the sample of people who

are employed by firms that do not require mandatory overtime.30 That is,

for this sample of 943 individuals we estimate a labor supply function of

the form (from (10))



     (13)          = aT + (a—1)Q. + c.



where Q = (M—.5WH)/l.5W                               if H >

            —N/W                                      if H<H

Estimation of (13) yields an estimate of a of .224, with an estimated
                           31
standard error of .001.

     With this estimate in hand, we can compute U1, using (9) and the

mean values of the variables for individuals employed by firms requiring

mandatory overtime. Similarly, we can compute H0 and U0, conditional

upon d, from (11) and (12).32 Finally, equating     U0 to U1 and solving

the resulting nonlinear equation for d, yields our estimate of the fully

compensating straight—time wage differential for mandatory overtime. Our

data suggests that this would be approximately 1.1 percent.

     This estimate, however, is conditional upon the Cobb—Douglas function

being the correct functional form for the utility function. We have used

it for illustrative purposes here because It requires us to obtain an

estimate of only one parameter (ct), and this estimate could be obtained
                                                                           21



 directly from estimates of the simple labor supply equation (13). However,

 because the Cobb—Douglas form Is very simple and restrictive, results based

 on It should be considered only illustrative. While we choose not to pro-

 ceed any further here because our analyses in the previous section suggested

 that on average compensating wage differentials for mandatory overtime do

 not exist, researchers working on similar problems should test the sensi-

 tivity of their estimates of the fully compensating differential to alternative

 assumptions about the functional form of the utility function and/or its

 parameter values.




 IV. Concluding Remarks

     Do employees who are employed by firms in which mandatory assignment

of overtime is required receive compensating straight—time wage differen-

tials? The evidence presented in this paper suggests that on average they

do not; this presents some support for the case in favor of legislative

prohibition of mandatory overtime. This conclusion should be qualified,

however, because in some circumstances, namely for unionized employees and

employees with short job tenure with their current employers, compensating

wage differentials do exist. Furthermore, the benefits from the legislation

must be weighted against the potential costs; these include reduced

employer flexibility in scheduling production and consequently increased

production costs.

    We believe that variants of the methodological framework presented in

this paper should prove useful in a number of other contexts for at least

two reasons. On the one hand, we have suggested the Importance of modeling
                                                                          22




the selection process and controlling for selectivity bias in the estimation

of compensating wage differentials for undesirable job characteristics.

On the other hand, we have developed a framework that permits one to

estimate if compensating differentials are in fact fully compensating. The

latter is an important step in the analysis which previous investigators,

who focused on related topics, often ignored or forgot to undertake,

     We would be less than honest if we did not acknowledge three major

qualifications of the findings we have reported in this paper. First, it

is conceivable that the model we used in Section III understates the true

magnitudes of the fully compensating wage differential. As noted earlier,

it assumes that individuals value only income and leisure time; the

disutility from mandatory overtime provisions arises because employees are

forced to work more hours than they otherwise would prefer. Suppose,

however, that employees also value the way in which overtime hours are

distributed across a week and mandatory overtime provisions cause them to

lose control over this decision (e.g., "you can't work 1 hour overtime per

day like you want but you have to work 5 hours Monday night"). In this

case, even if total hours of work were unchanged, employees would still

demand a premium for accepting mandatory overtime provisions. The model

in Section III does not capture the need for such a premium.

     Second, software limitations have prevented us from estimating the

complete statistical model that is required to control for the joint

employee/employer selection problem; the consistency properties of the

selectivity adjusted wage equations and the associated wage differentials

reported in Tables 1 and 2 are conditional upon the approximation (equation

(5)) being a correct one. In addition, our simulations of the fully
                                                                          23



compensating wage differentials assume a very simple, and restrictive

functional form for the utility function; future researchers working on

similar problems must examine the sensitivity of their results to alternative

assumptions about the form of the utility function.

     Finally, we should stress that we have focused on the trade—off

between wages and mandatory overtime provisions, and ignored all other

pecuniary and nonpecuniary job characteristics. Our approach is in the

tradition of most of the compensating wage differential literature which

focuses on the trade—offs between wages and one nonwage characteristic

(e.g., risk of injury or pension coverage) at a time. Implicitly,

researchers in this tradition have assumed that the partial correlations

between the omitted job characteristics and the included one (holding all

other included right—hand side variables constant) are close to zero and

thus that the omission causes no omitted variable bias.

     It is not obvious that this is always a good assumption to make; a

preferred approach would be to analyze the trade-offs between all charac-

teristics simultaneously. However, to appropriately model the more general

problem would require selection models for every job attribute and that,

coupled with greatly reduced degrees of freedom and possible collinearity

problems, may well lead to insignificant results. We suspect that this is

why such an assumption is typically made.
                                                                                           24
                                          Table 1

               Ordinary Least Squares and Selectivity Bias Corrected
                 Least Squares Log Wage Equations and Reduced Form
                    Probit Model for Mandatory Overtime: 1977
                        Quality of Employment Survey Dataa

                                                Reduced Form            Selectivity Bias Corrected
              OLS Log Wag Equations             Probit Model            Log Wage Equations
              Mandatory     Voluntary                                   Mandatory      Voluntary
              Sector        Sector                                      Sector         Sector
Variable        (1)            (2)                         (3)            (4)             (5)

  C            .265 (2.1)     .654 (9.6         —.279 (1.0)              .453 (2.4)      .420 (3.4)
               .040 (4.4)     .028 (6.7)        —.018 (1.0)              .039 (3.4)      .030 (5.0)
  x1
  x2
              —.682 (3.6)   —.519 (5.8)             .383 (1.1)          —.651 (2.7)     —.562   (4.3)
              —.007 (0.6)     .040 (6.2)            .027 (1.1)          —.008 (0.5)      .035   (38)
  x3
               .363 (0.7)   —1.192 (4.6)      —1.300 (1.4)               .414 (0.7)     —.958 (2.6)
  X4
               .078 (9.6)     .053(13.3)        —.052 (3.3)              .084 (7.8)      .060 (9.9)
  X5
               .007 (0.2)     .016 (1.0)       —.061 (1.0)               .019 (0.4)      .023 (1.1)
 x6       •

               .016 (0.2)   —.136 (3.2)        —.109 (0.6)               .037 (0.3)     —.121 (2.0)
  x7
               .327 (6.2)     .202 (6.9)            .214 (2.0)           .305 (4.5)      .159 (3.6)
  x8
              —.282 (4.5)   —.364(12.6)        —.313 (2.6)              —.198 (2.2)     —.299 (6.5)
  x9
              —.096 (1.4)   —.109 (2.6)             .187 (1.3)          —.143 (1.6)     —.130 (2.1)
  x10
  x11
               .068 (1.1)     .015 (0.5)       —.244        (2.0)        .093   (1.2)    .040 (0.9)

 x12
                                               —.311        (1.5)   •


                                                    .013    (1.3)
  X13
                                                    .242    (0.6)
 x14
                                                    .033    (1.0)
 X15
 x16
                                              —4.494        (0.0)
                                                    .048    (6.2)
 X17
                                                    .058    (0.5)
 X18
                                              —4.736        (0.0)
 X19
 x20
                                               —.163        (1.4)
                                                    .046    (1.2)
 X21
 X22
                                               —.004        (0.6)
 X23
                                               —.177        (0.9)
      A                                                                 —.204   (1.8)   —.454   (2.9)

  K2           .633           .474                                       .668            .486

               165            943               1108                     165             943
log—
likelihood                                     —411.4

Chi—squared                                     109.8
                                   Table 1 (continued)                      25

where

  C     intercept term
  X1
        total years of labor market experience
  X2    X1 squared/l000
        total years of experience with current employer
  X3
  X4    X3 squared /1000
        years of formal school
  X5
  X6    years    of trade school

  X7
        lhealth    limits work; 0=otherwise
        lunion member or covered by union contract; 0=otheriise
  X8
        lfemale; 0=male
  X9
        l=nonwhite; 0=white
 X10
 X11    1=married,    spouse present; 0=otherwise
        1=employee has a second job; 0=otherwise
 X12
        hours of work on second job if reported; 0=otberwise
 X13
        lhours on second job not reported; Ootherwise
        size of establishment (number of ernployees/l000) if reported; Ootherwise
 X15
 X16 lsize of establishment not reported; 0=otherwise

 X17    weekly   overtime hours

 X18
        travel   time to work if reported; 0=otherwise

 X19
        ltravel    time to work not reported; 0=otherwise
        1=respondent feels comfort on the job is "okay"; 0=otherwise
 X20
        number of dependents (excluding spouse)
 X2]
 X22
        other   family members' earnings if reported; 0=otherwise
        lother family members' earnings not reported; 0=otherwise
 A      estimated value of the inverse of the 1i1ls ratio




 aThe numbers in parentheses are the absolute value of the t ratios for the OLS
  model, the absolute value of the corrected t ratios for the selectivity bias
  corrected model, and the absolute value of the asymptotic t ratios for the
  probit model.
                                                                                      26
                                     Table 2

               Summary of Estimated Percentage Straight—Time
                 Wage Premium Paid to Workers Required to
                  Work Mandatory Overtime: 1977 Quality
                       of Employment Survey Dataa

                                     OLS_________            Selectivity Corrected
                          (1)         (2)        (3)         (1)   —    (2)     (3)

(A) All Workers          —0.6        1.1        —1.0        —3.5       —1.8    —3.6

(B) Union Workers        4.0         5.3         4.2        2.6         43      3.4

(C) Nonunion
    Workers             —3.0        —1.0        —3.6        —7.0       —5.3    —7.6

(D) Less Than 3 Yrs.
    With Current
     Employer            3.1         2.8         5.0        —2.3       —5.9    —3.3

(E) 3 or More Yrs.
     With Current
     Employer           —7.3        —5.7        —5.8    —11.5          —9.6   —11.2



aFor (A), (B) and (C) separate wage equations were estimated for those
 'people who worked mandatory overtime and those who did not. The dif-
  ferentials are evaluated in (A) using the mean values of the explanatory
 variables for all workers, in (3) using the mean values of union workers'
  characteristics, and in (C) the mean values of nonunion workers' charac-
  teristics. For (D) and (E) the two wage equations (mandatory, nonrnandatory)
  are estimated separately for "new" and "experienced" workers and the dif-
  ferentials computed in an analogous manner. The sample sizes are:

                                            (A, B, and C)

         mandatory sector                        165                    68            97

 -       nonxnandatory sector                    943                   434        509

 (1) Basic human capital rode1 (including uni,.n status).

 (2) Basic human capital model plus occupation binary variables.

 (3)   Basic human   capital    model pli.s occupation and industry binary
       variables.
                                                                     27




Income
 Y
 D



Yl        e
 B
                      —W0(i+d)(1.5) = _W1(l.5)
                                  .5)


Yo



                                  U0



                                            —WO
                                                Slope —W0(l+d) =




                            T-H                          L Leisure
                                                     T




                      Figure 1

         Fully—Compensating Wage Differential
                for Mandatory Overtime
                                                                           28



                                References


John Abowd and Orley Ashenfelter. "Unemployment and Compensating Wage

     Differentials," Princeton University Industrial Relations Section

     Working Paper No. 120, March 1979.

Gary Becker. Human Capital. Columbia University Press, New York, NY.       1964.

Charles Brown and James Medoff. "Trade Unions in the Production Process,"

     Journal of Political Economy. June 1978.

Kim Clark. "The Impact of Unionization on Productivity: A Case Study,"

     Industrial and Labor Relations Review. July 1980.

Alan Deardorff and Frank Stafford. "Compensation of Cooperating Factors,"

     Econometrica. July 1976.

Greg Duncan. "Earnings Functions and Nonpecuniary Benefits," Journal of Human

     Resources. Fall 1976.

Greg Duncan and Frank Stafford. "Do Union Members Receive Compensating Wage

     Differentials?," American Economic Review. June 1980.

Ronald Ehrenberg. "Retirement System Characteristics and Compensating Wage

     Differentials in the Public Sector," Industrial and Labor Relations

     Review. July 1980.

Ronald Ehrenberg and Paul Schumann. "The Overtime Pay Provisions of the Fair

     Labor Standards Act." In Simon Rottenberg, ed. , The Economics of Legal

    MlnimumWages (American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C., 1981).

Ronald Ehrenberg and Paul Schumann. Longer Hours or More Jobs (New York

    State School of Industrial and Labor Relations Publications Division,

     Ithaca, NY, 1982).
                                                                         29


 Richard Freeman and James Medoff. "The    Two   Faces of Unionism," Public
     Interest, Fall   1979.

 James   Ileckman. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,"
     Econometrica.    January 1979.

_________     "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error: With An Appli-

     cation to the Estimation of Labor Supply Functions," in James P. Smith,

    ed., Female Labor Supply: Theory and Estimation. Princeton University

    Press, Princeton, NJ. 1980.

Lung—Fei Lee. "Unionism and Wage Rates: A Simultaneous Equations Model

     With Qualitative and Limited Dependent Variables," International

     Economic Review. June 1978.

James Medoff. "Layoffs and Alternatives Under Trade Unions in U.S. Manu-

     facturing," American Economic Review. June 1979.

National Board for Prices and Income. Hours of Work, Overtime, and Shiftwork.

     Report No. 61. London, England. 1970.

Dale Poirer. "Partial Observability in Bivariate Probit Models," Journal of

     Econometrics. February 1980.

Robert Quinn and Graham Staines. The 1977 Quality of Employment Survey:

     Descriptive Statistics. Ann Arbor, Michigan. 1979.

Robert S. Smith. The Occupational Safety and Health Act: Its Coals and

     Achievements. American Enterprise Institute,     Washington, D.C. 1976.
________     "Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy: A Review,"
     Industrial   and Labor Relations Review. April 1979.
                                                                  30




Richard Thaler and Sherwin Rosen. "The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence

   From the Labor Market," in Nester Terleckyj, ed., Household Production

   and Consumption. National Bureau of Economic Research, New York. 1975.

US. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Characteristics of Major Collective

   Bargaining Agreements, July 1, 1976. Bulletin 201. Washington, D.C.

   February 1979.
                                                                          31



                                 Footnotes


     1. See National Board for Prices and Income (1970).

     2. HR 1784 introduced into Congress on February 1, 1979.

     3. A more extensive discussion of this conceptual framework, and of

how the history of hours of work legislation in the United States relates

to it, is presented in Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Paul L. Schumann (1981).

     4. Robert Quinn and Graham Staines (1979), pp. 90—91.

     5. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1979).

     6.   Such compensating differentials can also be viewed as an insurance

payment made by employers, who are faced with the need for regularly

scheduled overtime or with random fluctuations in their demands for overtime,

to guarantee them the availability of the appropriate number and skill mix

of employees to work overtime.    Viewed in this way, prohibitions against

mandatory overtime would limit the freedom of the parties to agree to the

issuance of such "insurance policies".

     7. A separate policy issue is whether the overtime pay premium required

under the FLSA should be raised from time—and--a—half to double—time in the

hopes that this would reduce employers' usage of overtime hours and stimulate

employment growth. We discuss this issue in detail inEhrenberg and Schumann,

(1982).

     8. If one had longitudinal data one could estimate the extent to which

changes in overtime hours provisions were correlated with changes in straight—

time wages over time, other things equal. An example of the use of longi—

tudinal data in a similar context is Greg Duncan and Frank Stafford (1980)

who use the Michigan Income Dynamics Panel data to analyze the interrelation-

ship between changes in unionization, wages, and two other working conditions.
                                                                           32




      9. See James Heckman (1979) and Lung—fet Lee (1978).

      10. See Alan Deardorff and Frank Stafford (1976) who point out that

in situations in which such complementaritieS exist, that straight—time

wage differentials might arise to compensate workers for workday lengths

that depart from those that they would freely choose, given their alterna-

tive wage rates.

      11. See Ehrenberg and Schumann (1982) for a more complete description

of the model.

      12. Dale Poirer (1980).

      13.   One must caution, however, that because we have only approximated

the true sample selection rule with a univariate probit model, the statistical

properties of our estimates of (2) and (3) when we control for selectivity

bias are not obvious. That is, their consistency is conditional upon (5)

being the correct underlying selection rule (see Foirer (1980)).

      14. The conventionally reported OLS standard errors are inappropriate,

however, since the estimated values of the inverse of the Mills ratio (the

A in Table 1) are estimated from data in a previous stage. Heckman (1979)

derives a method to consistently estimate the correct standard errors, and

the results reported in Table 1 in the next section present these estimates.

Unfortunately, as I-ieckman (1980) notes, this procedure may lead to negative

estimated standard errors in finite samples and whenever this occurred the

conventional OLS estimates were reported in the table instead.

      15. For a complete description of these data, see Quinn and Staines

(1979).

      16. The complete   results, both here and below, are reported in Ehrenberg

and   Schumann (1982).
                                                                           33



     17. We must caution that some   of   these variables (e.g., overtime hours,

hours on second job or extent of unionization (see Duncan and Stafford

(1980)) are undoubtedly simultaneously determined with the presence of

mandatory overtime provisions. To keep our problem manageable, we treat

all of the variables in column 3 of Table 1 as being predetermined. We did

experiment with omitting overtime hours from the reduced form probit equation;

such an omission actually increased the magnitude of the compensating wage

differential for mandatory overtime above the level that we report below.

     18. See Ehrenberg and Schumann (1982) for a discussion of why each of

the explanatory variables enters the probit equation and its expected sign.

     19. Our estimation of the "selectivity corrected" wage equations were

facilitated by our colleague William Greene, who provided us with a computer

program he has written to estimate such models.

     20. For an excellent expository survey of this literature, see Richard

Freeman and James Medoff (1979).

     21. See, for example, Charles Brown and James Medoff (1978), Kim Clark

(1980), and James Medoff (1979).

     22. Duncan and Stafford (1980).

     23. The sample sizes available were unfortunately too small to permit

us to reestimate the model separately for union and nonunion employees and

then to base estimated differentials on such equations.

     24. See Gary Becker (1964).

     25. This statement should be qualified by noting that if, ex ante,

job applicants expect to have long tenures with a firm and they are aware

that an unfavorable working condition exists or may be instituted at the

firm in the future, then they would accept employment only if they expected

to receive compensating differentials throughout their tenure with the firm.
                                                                           34




Footnote 25 continued:

Our argument in the text essentially assumes that the unfavorable working

condition was imposed unexpectedly (to them) sometime after the initial

hire date.

       26. For risk of injury, see Robert S. Smith (1976) and Richard Thaler

and Sherwin Rosen (1975). For nonwage forms of compensation, see Ronald

Ehrenberg (1980). For working conditions, see Greg Duncan (1976) and Duncan

and Stafford (1980). Finally, for risk of unemployment, see John Abowd and

Orley Ashenfelter (1979).

       27. Robert Smith (1979).

       28.   The assumption that the individual would voluntarily choose to work
overtime is not essential to what follows.

       29. Our analysis assumes that the individual is concerned about total

hours of leisure in a week not how it is allocated across days. If he was

concerned about the latter, he might require a premium to be employed by a

firm requiring mandatory overtime even if H0 was equal to H1. This is a

complication which we do not deal with here. We should also emphasize that

the fully—compensating premium is a function of the gap between H1 and H0,

not of the level of overtime that the individual actually works.

       30. This procedure assumes that e is the same for individuals in

both sectors —— an assumption that is somewhat inconsistent with the model

discussed previously in which Individuals are "sorted" into the mandatory

sector at least partially on the basis of their willingness to work overtime.

Other things equal, we should expect to observe individuals with lower

marginal utilities of leisure (higher cx's)   to   be In the mandatory sector.

As   a result,   the estimates of a which we obtain below from data on
                                                                               35



Footnotes 30 continued:

individuals in the voluntary overtime sector will likely understate the

true values of a for individuals in the mandatory sector. Since one can

show that an increase in a will lead to a decrease in the magnitude of

the fully—compensating wage differential, the value of d* which we report

below may well overstate the true fully—compensating differential.

       31. Variants of (13) were also estimated in which a was specified

to be a function of an individual's sex, race, marital status, health

status, and number of dependents. When evaluated at themean values of

these variables for individuals employed by firms that required mandatory

overtime, the resulting estimate of a was almost identical (.223) to the

value reported in the text.

       This estimate and the one in the text imply that the marginal propensity

to consume out of unearned income is less than one—quarter, a result that is

much smaller than other investigators have found. As noted in footnote 30,

however, larger values of a would lead to even smaller values of the fully—

compensating differential.

       32. The parameters used in this simulation are T = 168, Wi = $6.026,

Hi =   45.139,   H =   40,   and M = $80.615;   the latter represents all family

income except for the respondent's labor earnings including the labor

earnings of other family members. The f data unfortunately did not permit

us to compute family nonlabor income which theoretically is the more appro-

priate variable to use, unless the respondent's labor supply is conditional

on other family members' labor supply decisions.
