                   N .13 E R \'VJ:sT   L!I3RARY

                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             EVALUATING THE TAXATION OF RISKY ASSETS



                        Alan   J. Auerbach



                      Working Paper No. 806




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                          November 1981




I am indebted to Angus Deaton, Roger Gordon, Jerry Green, Jack
Mintz, Shiomo Yitzhaki and participants in the NEER Program in
Taxation and the Harvard Public Finance seminar for comments on an
earlier draft. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #806
                                                     November 1981




                     Evaluating the Taxation of Risky Assets



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper explores the taxation of risky assets, both from the

theoretical perspective of optimal taxation and from the practical one

of measuring "the" tax rate on an asset when, as under existing practice,

its stochastic returns are subject to differential tax treatment across

states of nature. The results suggest that it may be ttappropriateP? for

tax rates to vary systematically with the riskiness of an asset, but

that use of the expected tax rate to evaluate the characteristics of any

particular tax system may be very misleading.




                                        Alan J. Auerbach
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Harvard University
                                        Cambridge, NA 02138

                                        (617) 495—3934
 I. Introduction

      Suppose that two investment projects have the same expected rate of return

after tax but different expected rates before tax. Which project is taxed more

heavily? Is it inefficient for tax burdens to differ, if indeed they do?

      While we are accustomed to answering these questions for the certainty case,

the task of doing so becomes more complicated when there is uncertainty and

investors are risk averse. For a number of reasons, there need be no well—

defined measure of "thea tax rate on an asset, at least not in          any   sense familar

from the certainty context. First of all, if there does not exist an efficient

pooling of private risks in society, then competitive equilibrium is not F.reto

efficient. In such an environment, taxation can act to mitigate this

externality. As a result, the excess burden of imposing a tax on asset returns

may very well be negative, it may be possible for government to raise a substan-

tial amount of revenue and yet make no asset holder worse off. Thus, in the

sense of resource cost imposed, a tax may      not   really be a tax.

      Even if efficient markets for risk exist, each asset is actually a bundle of

state—contingent commodity claims. Unless returns in different states are taxed

uniformly, the tax rate on the entire bundle imist       be calculated using some
weighting    scheme for combining these state—contingent tax rates. One          obvious
candidate,    corresponding to that   used implicitly in   some empirical     studies, is

the   expected tx rate, based on probability weights for the different states of
nature.     However, this particular measure will be seen to be of      limited value
unless    the risk characteristics of the   taxes   collected and the net return that

remains are also known. This aggregation problems is not merely of theoretical
                                           —2—



interest. Current methods of capital income taxation impose markedly different

relative tax burdens on any given asset in different states of nature, because

of such characteristics as imperfect loss offsets and ndsmeasurement (often

intentional)   of economic depreciation.
      Finally, the question of whether asset returns are taxed efficiently reduces
to   one concerning the optimal taxation of the underlying state—contingent

returns themselves. Just as in the certainty case, Ramsey rules may be derived

for the taxation of different commodities under uncertainty. While these tax

rates should be different across the states, in general, the conditions required

for the optimality of uniform taxation and the direction of divergence when such

conditions are not met have a special interpretation when applied to the taxa—

tion of risky claims. Not surprisingly, these results are closely related to

those of the earlier literature on taxation and risk—taking. However, the pre-

sent analysis explores not how taxes affect risk—taking, but how they should

affect risk—taking, from an efficiency perspective.

     In the next section of the paper, we discuss the optimal taxation of risky

assets and the state—contingent claims of which they are composed. Section III

explores the problem of calculating a meaningful tlveffectiveu tax rate for a

risky asset when its underlying returns are taxed at rates differing across

states, and points out the difficulties involved in using expected or "average"

tax rates. In Section IV, we apply this analysis to a tax system resembling

that of the U.S. to determine the biases involved in the use of expected tax

rates.
                                         —3—




II.   Optimal Taxation of Risky Assets

      1any contributions to the literature on taxation and risk—taking have uti

lized the fact that risky assets are, themselves, bundles of contingent

commodities, in applying standard results from the theory of demand (see, for

example, Fischer 1912, Diamond and Yaari 1972, and Sandmo 1917). From         this
perspective, the portfolio choice problem may   be   seen simply   as   a choice among

the   underlying contingent claims subject to a budget constraint. When the

number of   assets is not sufficient to allow purchase of all state—contingent
claims independently,   the consumer faces the additional constraint of having to

choose among bundles in the commodity subspace spanned by existing assets. Such

analysis assumes, either explicitly or implicitly, that competitive trading

exists for all risky assets. In such a case, the resulting allocation of

societal risk, subject to the constraints imposed by the incomplete spanning of

the entire comodity space, is Pareto optimal (Diamond 1961).

      We may approach the optimal tax problem for risky assets from this same

perspective. For simplicity, we assume that the entire space of contingent

claims is spanned by existing assets. A more general treatment would relax this

restriction, but would lead to a difficulty with the usual fixed revenue

constraint assumption. For example, if there were three uncertain states and

two assets offering combinations of returns in these states, arbitrary corn—

binations of receipts in the different states could not normally be achieved

without raising an excess amount of revenue in at least one state; this addi-

tional welfare cost should be accounted for.    It then would be preferable to

allow explicitly for the societal preferences for public expenditures (as in
                                           ——




 Atkinson    and Stern 197k) and choose the level of public output in the different

 states along with the optimal taxes, subject to the spanning constraints.

       Consider a simple two—period two—state model in which the representative

 individual is endowed with I units of labor in period 1, out of which he can

consume leisure, or work and purchase assets that provide different combinations

of returns, which are consumed in the two states in period 2. The individual's

optimization problem is


 (1)        maximize w(C0, C1, C2) such that p1C1 p2C2 =   (I-C0)

where C0, C1 and C2 are first period leisure and consumption in each of the

second period states, and P1 and P2 are the implicit prices, in terms of labor,

faced by the consumer for the state—contingent claims C1 and C2, derived from

the prices of assets used in combination to obtain returns in the two states.

It is possible to restrict the form of the general utility function w() by

adopting the Van Nèuznann—Morgenstern axioms that iniply   expected   utility

maximization. We return to this point below.

       Let the indirect utility function that results from (1) be v(p1, P2' I) , and

suppose that the government wishs to raise revenue sufficient to acquire the

vector S =    (s0,   S1, s) of the three commodities using taxes      on C1 and   on

           If we let q1 and q2 b the producer prices for C1 and C, and R =

S0+q1S1+q232 be the revenue required to purchase the bundle 5, then the

government's optimal tax problem may be written:
                                                —5—




 (2)        maximize v(p1, p2, I) such that                + O2p2C2 = R


 Since the same optimal tax formula results whether we assume a constant returns

to scale production function (as in Diamond and Mirrlees 1971) or simply that

producer prices are fixed, we make the latter assumption for the sake of

simplicity.

       The first order conditions with respect to t1 and t2 may be combined to

yield the familar ratio:


()                 = l22l_+
                       £12 + £21 + £10


where        is the compensated elasticity of demand for good i with respect to

price j.

       The formula in (3) is no different from that for any three—good optimal tax

problem in the absence of uncertainty. However, more may be learned if we

accept the hypothesis of expected utility maximization; then, the objective func-

tion w() may be written


()                         =
           w(c0,C1,C2)         1u(c0,c1)   + 2u(c0,c2)


where      and 2 are the subjective probabilities the consumer assigns to states

1 and 2.

       So1vin for         and €() , we obtain:
                           1     2         j                      ji
                       (1u2) (   2IJ2)
(Ii)
               =   —
                                 ______[—(_
                                         yJ
                                                 )+   pC
                                                            dlog(U2/U2)
                                                                          ]   (i,j)   =   (1,2)
                                                               dC0
                                            2


where A is the determinant of the bordered Hessian, which must be negative, U' =

u(c0, ci), U is the partial derivative of Ui with respect to its jth argument,
                                               —6—




and Ujk is the second partial derivative of U1 with respect to its th and

kth arguments. From a comparison of (3) and (5),                it   is apparent that there are

two factors that might lead to differential taxes on C1 and C2, corresponding to

the two terms in brackets in (5). The tax on C1, &-,                 will    be greater than that

o C2, 02, to the extent that
               1                2
                               U- C
(6.a)
              U) C1
            _(_±E_±) >   —(J
                   U

            diog (u/U)
(6.b)
               dC0

       Each of these effects has an intuitive interpretation. The second is the

derivative of the logarithm of the marginal rate of substitution between C1 and

C2 with respect to C0.-'1 If it exceeds zero, then an increase in the consump-

tion of C0 increases the marginal valuation of C1 relative to C2.

       If the marginal rate of substitution between C1 and C2 is unaffected by the

level of C0, then the function w() is, by definition, weakly separable into

goods and leisure; that is,


('r)       W(CQ,C1,C2)          F(C0,(C1,C2))


for some welt—behaved functions F and .              However,   by ()4)    , this   weak separabi—

lity implles strong separability, so that expected utility takes the form:


                         =
()         w(c0,C1,C2)       1111U1(C0) +   u11(c1)1 + 2Iu1(c0)        +


                         = u1(c0)   +
                                        ir1U11(c1) + ir2U11(02)

where u1() and u11() are the utility subfunctions that apply to consumption in
                                            —7—



periods 1 and 2, respectively. This intertemporal separability is a common

assumption in the literature.

       In this case, equation (6.a) can be rewritten




(8)         — (                   >   (UII(02)02 )

which says that the tax on returns in state 1 should be higher than those in

state 2 if and only if the degree of relative risk aversion (Arrow 1965) is

higher in state 1 than in state 2, given the commodity bundle (C1, 02) that is

being purchased. The intuitive explanation for this result is that as indivi-

duals become more risk averse, their behavior becomes more inelastic; hence, a

tax is less distortionary.

       The implications of this result for the taxation of risky assets depends on

how such assets difer in their combination of returns in the two states as they

get "riskier", and whether individuals display constant, decreasing or

increasing relative risk aversion. Arrow          has   argued that relative risk aversion

ought to be constant or increasing with respect to wealth. If relative risk

aversion is constant, then from (8) it follows that uniform taxation is optimal.

This is unsurprising for two reasons, Most directly, since u11(c) must take the

form


                   a + B   (L_)


where y is the degree of relative risk aversion, the function i1U11(C1) +

            is    homogenous in C and 2• Thus, the function w() satisfies the
                                                           —8—




condition of weak, hornothetic separability that is sufficient for the optimality

of uniform taxation (Sandmo 19T4, Auerbach 1919). In addition, because of the

separation of portfolio and savings decisions present under constant relative

risk aversion (Merton 1969, Samuelson 1969), it makes sense that a "second—best"

distortion of portfolio choice would not help offset the overall disincentive to

save introduced by the uniform taxation of savings.

      If individuals display increasing relative risk aversion, then the degree of'

relative risk aversion, and hence the optimal tax rate, will be higher in the

state with a higher level of consumption. In a two—state model, this corresponds

to the "good" state when returns are high in the aggregate. However, taxes

typically would be applied to asset returns rather than state—contingent

commodities, so it          is      important to know what this result implies for the taxa-

tion of the risky assets themselves.

      Suppose there are two assets, A and B, that span the two states of the
                i           i
world.    If rA arid rB are the returns per dollar of investment in state i, then

by solving the system of                 equations

            1       1           i
           rA   r13         XA             6.1
(9)        2        2           i =                         (1=1,2)
           rA rB            XB             612



where      = 0      for I           j   and 1    for i =   3, we   obtain the amount of each asset,
XA and XB, that must be purchased to get a unit return in state i, as well as
the implicit prices of such returns,
                                                     —9—




(10)                  =
                          x    +
                                    xB                (i=l,2)

       It   is then easy to solve for the tax on returns to asset A and that on

returns to asset B that together yield the desired taxes on the state—contingent

returns.            (In fact, there are an infinite number of other solutions to this

transformation problem if we allow tax rates to differ not only across assets

but also across states for a given asset, for then there are four, rather than

two instruments available.) If we let the state—contingent taxes be 1 and 02,

as above, and the taxes on asset returns be tA and tB, then the asset com-

bination needed to achieve a unit return in state i in the presence of taxes,

(y, y), nst satisfy:



            r(l_tA)r                             y         il
(ii)        I
                                                                 (i=l,2)
                                   (1—tB)                  6i2




and


(12)            (y +      y)   (l_01) =     x+                   (i=l,2)
                                                                           I   i   I
Together, (11) and (12) represent six equations in the unknowns tA tB, '                B'
 I              i                                                 1   1
    and y, given the posited values of arid 02 and the values of XA, XB,
 2      2
   and X13 obtained from (9). Solving for tA and tB yields:
                                                          —10—




 (13a)                 1        =       1
                                                121 211
                                                4BA rA(rB_rA)
                                                      -—
                     ltA                r       fto')            (Q)

                                                   2 1 rkr—r
                                                r r—rj  2, 1 1
                                =
                     ltB                        (1—0')


                12         21
where r = rArB — rArB               .       Combination of (13a) and (13b) yields:


(in)
                tAtB                    =   1       01_02            1 1 2 2
                                                10')(1            [(rA-rB)(rB-rA)J
            (1-tA)(1-tB)

Since    in equilibrium there can be no stochastic dominance of one asset over
another, the last term on the right—hand side of (114) is positive. Thus,

(15)        sgn (tA—tB) = sgn( 1') x sgn( Oj 02)

       The sign of the determinant r                   depends   on which asset is relatively intensive
in   state 1.    If it is asset A, then r > ü and sign (tA—tB) = sgn (01—02).

Similarly, if B is relatively intensive in state 1, I'<O and sgn (tB—tA) = sgn

 Q1_02). In both cases, the tax should he highest on that asset relatively

intensive in the state we wish to tax more heavily. Under intertemporal separa-

bility of    utility and increasing relative risk aversion, this is the state                    in

which consumption is greater,                    the   "good" state. Therefore, the asset to be

taxed more heavily is the one yielding a greater fraction of its return in the

good state; by any common definition, this is the riskier of the two assets.

     This   solution is depicted in Figure 1. For simplicity, we assume asset A is
                                                             —11—




                                                      Figure 1

                                      Optimal   Taxation of Risky Assets


State 2




                                      P1
1                           s1oper_        (Pre—tax)
        (Pre—tax)
    2



                                                                        / /
 2
         (Post—tax)                                                 /
                tA




                    2
                rB




                        U
                                                   /rA                        1
                                                                                       State 1
                                                                              - (Pre—tax)
                                                  1
                                                          (Post—tax)              1
                                                      1
                                        -12-




riskiess and that asset B yields a higher return in state 1. Thus, if there are

positive quantities of both assets, the market return is higher in state 1 than

in state 2. The two budget lines depict the returns possible per dollar of' mi—

tial investment, before and after tax. A higher tax rate on purchases of'       state
1 claims is accomplished by placing a higher tax on returns to asset B,

(1—OB'/OB), than on the the riskiess return, (l—OA'/OA). As stated above, the

same   outcome would he achieved in a number of ways   through the use of state—

dependent tax rates on the two assets.      For example, a shift in the return per

dollar invested in asset B from point B to B", rather than to B', would yield

the same   post—tax budget line. As   depicted, this would involve taxing the

return to asset B more heavily in state 1 than in state 2.

    Thus, under familar restrictions on the nature of individual preferences, it

appears that heavier taxation of the return to risky assets may be appropriate.

However, though it would be straightforward to extend the analysis to consider

several states of nature, the model is still a very simple one; it would be

unwise to draw general conclusions about the optimal tax treament of risk. In

particular, the assumption of complete markets is rather extreme, in light of

the existence of such important nontraded risks as those associated with human

capital. Nevertheless, the   analysis   does suggest that differential taxation of

assets   may be optirnil.
                                       —13—



III. Calculating the Tax Rate on Risky Assets

    The previous section was devoted to the derivation of the optimal propor-

tional tax rates on risky assets. However, it was pointed out, in passing, that

an infinite number of combinations of state—dependent tax rates on each asset

also yield the results desired. For example, a proportional tax that brought

the after—tax return on asset B to point B' in Figure 1 would have the same

effect on consumer choice as a nonproportional tax, heavier in state 1, that

brought the after—tax return to B". As pointed out in the introduction, "real

world" tax systems typically do not impose on a given asset the same fractional

tax burden in each state of nature, due to mismeasurement of income. Thus, in

the derivttion of a single "the" tax rate on an asset, the choice of' weights

used in aggregating tax rates across states is important; there are certain cri-

teria such a choice of weights would satisfy. For example, the tax rate on

asset B in Figure 1 should be the same whether the post—tax bundle is B' or B".

    One measure that might be suggested is the expected tax rate, defined as the

fraction of an asset's gross return the government expects to collect. Aside

from having a straightforward interpretation, this measure also lends itself to

empirical use. By examining the returns over time of a risky asset, and

assuming that they are drawn from the same distribution, one can take average

gross   and net returns and calculate the sample mean of the annual tax rates to
obtain an estimate of the expected tax rate.
    However, the expected tax rate can be a seriously misleading estimate of the
                                          -l4 -




real   tax burden imposed on an asset. This point is perhaps most easily

recognized if one considers a tax that has no real effects at all. As recently

pointed out by Gordon (1981) ,F a tax on risky assets of that portion of the

return that exceeds the risk—free rate is completely non—distortionary, and has

no effect on the investor's consumption possibilities. This may be seen as an

extension of Tobin's (1958) result, which was based on the assumption of a zero

safe return. Such a tax is depicted in Figure 2, where the return to asset A is

unaffected and that to asset B is moved toward A along the original budget line,

to B*, by the fraction of tax on B's excess return.' Such a result would occur

if there were no personal taxes and a corporation facing an income tax financed

all its investment by the issuance of interest—free debt, with interest payments

tax deductible.

    To calculate the expected tax rate on asset B, we calculate the change in

its expected return resulting from taxation. If i and 2 are the probabilities

attached to states 1 and 2,-" then the expected return on asset B before tax

equals r5, as depicted in Figure 2. The bundle B =   (rB,   rB) lies along the

same expected return line as the original bundle. That such a line has a

steeper slope than the budget line itself is a condition necessary for

equilibrium.-"    Another way of stating this condition is that the risky asset

must carry a   positive   risk premium.

   The post—tax expected yield on asset B is r* and the expected tax rate is

therefore Ll_(B*)/(FB)]. Clearly, this is a misleading measure. The error

arises because the weights used in calculating the tax rates are probabilities,
                                   —15--




                              Figure 2

         A Proportional Tax with Interest Deductibility



State




                                                       /
                                               /
                              P
             '—   slope   —



   rB

   r
                                           \                       =
                                                                           Tr
   rA                                                      slope       —




                          /   /A
                                      B*
                                               \
                                                   \


           / /                                     B




         /45
    1)
                                                                                State 1
                                              —i6--




 rather than the actual implicit prices for goods in the two states. It would be

 as if the governement "taxed" a bundle of apples and oranges by purchasing

 cheaper apples with costlier oranges, at market prices. The value of the bundle

would be unaffected, but the number of pieces of fruit would decline. In a

similar way, the government exchanges state 1 returns for the scarcer, more

expensive (relative to expectations) state 2 returns. This difficulty does not

arise when the tax rate on an asset is constant across the states, for then any

weighting scheme wilt do.

     This result suggests that a more logical way of calculating effective tax

rates is to measure the value of resources extracted by comparing the lines with

the slopes of the new budget line running through the before and after tax

return bundle for each particular asset.1I' An example is shown in Figure 3,

where it is assumed that A is not taxed and B is taxed only in state 1, the good

state. We measure the effective tax rate on asset B by comparing the distance

from the origin of the new budget line and that line parallel to it passing

through the original bundle B. This measure will be the same along any ray

from the origin, but is perhaps clearest intuitively if we use the 45° line and

project onto either axis. The effective tax rate would then be (rB—rA)/rB0,

which compares the risk—free components of the before-tax and after-tax bundles.

By insisting that the bundles compared lie along the same ray, we avoid con—

fusing changes in risk characteristics with changes in tax burden. Putting

every LI! ing   in risk—:idj usted   terms seems the most naturat method of doing this.

     This   "risk—adjusted    effective tax rate" (henceforth referred to as RET) has
                                   —17—




                               Figure 3

           Calculation of Risk—Adjusted Effective Tax Rates


State 2




                              p1
                     slope = — — (Pre—tax)
                                    P
                                      1
                                  — -;;-- (Post—tax)
                                    r2


                                               / /
                                           /
      rA




                                                       B




            /\\\45
                                                              State 1
                                             —18—



certain desirable properties. First of all, any time the tax burden is uniform

across states of nature, the pre—tax and post—tax budget lines are parallel.

Thus, the BETs on assets A and B will be equal. In particular, for the special

case depicted in Figure 2, the RET on both assets is appropriately measured as

zero. A second characteristic of the RET is that any shift in post—tax returns

that leaves the post—tax budget line unaffected, such as a movement of the post—

tax return on asset B from 13' to B" in Figure 1,        also   leaves unaffected the RET

on each asset. Finally, when taxation of state—contingent commodities is not

uniform, the RET    must be higher on that asset which is relatively intensive in
the more highly taxed state.

       However, knowledge of the RETs on different assets is not sufficient for

determination of the overall tax burden faced by the investor, as measured by

the exact tax burden in each state. This is because the post—tax and pre—tax

budget lines may be the same in two cases, yet the RETs may differ if the ini-

tial bundles differ, as seen in Figure 3 by comparing the RET starting from

point B rather than B.

       Thus, in using the RET, we can say which assets are taxed more heavily, but

have no unambiguous measure of the differential tax between assets.

Nevertheless, it    remains                       telling us how the tax system is
                               a useful statistic in

biased    with respect to different assets. It can be useful, therefore, in com-
paring an   existing   tax   system   with one dictated by   optimal   tax considerations
like   those discussed above, where a heavier tax burden on riskier assets may be

appropriate.
                                                 —19—


 IV. An Application

       flather than fully describing an asset in terms of its returns across states

of nature, we may also characterize it in terms of how much its expected return

exceeds its risk—adjusted return. This may be done for the return on an asset

as a whole or for various components separately. For example, suppose an asset

receives a post—tax cash flow, x, plus some certain depreciation allowance, y,

as depicted in Figure 4.          No adjustment need be made      to   the latter's expected

value. However, the          expected   cash flow, x, exceeds its value at post—tax

prices, x°. We may summarize this by defining a discount rate P such that


(15)               =
            l+p l+i
where i is the post—tax risk—free return.               p is the discount rate that, when

applied to the expected return x, gives the correct value of the uncertain

return x. The total value of'           the   asset's return x+y would be



            l+p        l+i

       To use this approach in a nultiperiod setting is complicated unless we have

some form of stationarity which allows us to examine each period independently.

Therefore,    let us consider     a model     where such stationarity obtains. We assume
assets depreciate exponentially. In each period, the gross return to dollar of
capital of type j is r and the rate of physical decay is d. Both r and
dj are independent and identically distributed over time. Thus, for a dollar
invested,    the   gross   return at the end of     the period is r —         plus a certain
                                   -20-



                               Figure 4


                     Calculation of Discount Rates


State 2




                                          / /     /

                                    /
        X   ———————                       slope    —




            -———-
   yo
                                      slope   =   —    (Post—tax)



            /   /\   450


                                                                    State 1
                                           —21—




 return of the original dollar. Once depreciated capital has been replaced,-1

the asset is identical in all respects one period hence and nist have tL

value.

      To maintain this stationarity in the presence of taxes, we must assume

unrealistically that all assets of a particular type j, whatever their age, are

allowed the same (possibly stochastic) depreciation per dollar of capital,
                                                                                    ,
for   tax purposes, as well as the same physical depreciation, d. We assume new

assets receive an investment tax credit equal to TAJ,' and that taxable profits

face a proportional tax at rate T.

      Thus, an investment of one dollar yields an immediate credit of value TX

and, one period hence, a gross return r(l—T) in after tax flows, less depre-

ciation      plus depreciation deductions TcL plus an investment tax credit on

replacement investment, TAd. At the end of the period the asset itself,

including replacement, is still worth l—rX, the value of the initial net

investment. If we let p,        and        be the discount rates appropriate for the

expected values of           and a. then it follows, by construction, that the

adjusted return to the one dollar of capital (which costs (l—TA)) is



(16) .(1-T)
      (L - i.(i-TX.. +
                                    f&.
                                             J   (l+i)
            l+pj       l+ó

Since in equilibrium   all assets   must   yield the same   adjusted return after tax,

this must, in turn, equal (l—TX)i. That is, the risk—adjusted return after tax

to this investment of (i—tA) is i, the post—tax risk—free return. Rewriting
                                                            -22--



(16),    we have     the    post—tax, risk—adjusted return on asset j:


(17)
             .   (i—r) (l+i)
                 _____               -
                                         . (i+i)
                                           ____- +
                                                            ii, (i+i)
                                                                              =
             (1—TA)(1+P)                      l+          (i—tA)(i+i)

To obtain the RET           on asset j, we simply construct the risk—adjusted gross of tax

return and compare it to (ii). The gross adjusted return on asset J is:

                     :,   (i+i)       .(1+i)
                                         _____
(i8)         z=
                                          (l-e-)

Thus,    the RET on asset j              is   (Zj —   i)/z,      or




                                                      —
                                         (i÷T              (1+1.)
                                                               3
(19)             =                 ) _____-_3
                                              r
                                              —

                                                      —
                                                            —
                                                            d
                                         (i÷)              7i--o)




             ng:
For a number of special cases, expression (19) becomes quite simple:

       Ci)                     Here, A and                   0, so           0.

                                                                                                      =
       (2) Economic Depreciation: Here, X = 0,                               cz =   d   and hence

             Thus,    cYj =   T.

       (3) First—Year ystern: As                   in Auerbach and Jorgenson (1980) ,               the   idea is to

                      = 0     and choose              to   set        = T.    This      is accomplished for
                                          —23—




             J
                       —_____
                               1+6.
                           d+i(_L)
                                1+i

            which equals the present value of flows of future economic

            depreciation)"


       Typically, the tax system satisfies none of these simple cases. Except for

inflation risk, depreciation allowances are certain. With econoniic depreciation

and no investment tax credit, this would yield:




                                      -
                               (i+)       (i+i)
(21)                   T     ___________________


                               (l+)       (i+6)




The effective tax rate will be higher or lower than T depending on whether

depreciation carries a discount rate less than or greater than i.

       In comparison to the risk—adjusted effective tax rate, the simple expected

tax rate on asset j is:




(22)             =
             J
                     1—tx.            —

                                  r—d
which will be the same in general if and only if the tax is proportional

(expensing or economic depreciation) or all components of the net return possess

the same characteristics. Even in so simple a case as the first year system,

the result is different. Whereas the RET               =   T,   the   expected tax rate is



                   l+i p.—6. d.(l—T)
(23)        =t[i÷( )(L1)
             J                                     i
                                l+pj l+cS


For the simple case where physical depreciation itself is certain (i) (23)

reduces to



(24)             =   i   [
                                p.—i
                             1+ (—-—-)
                                          ..
                                           (l—r)
                                           1
                                l+P


Thus, riskier assets             large)   or rapidly depreciating assets (         large)   would

appear to be taxed at lower rates, even though o =               r    for all assets and the

underlying state—contingent commodities are taxed equally.

       Thus, if one knows the values of the discount rates p, 6, and                   for each

asset, as well as the expected values of               d and           calculation of a useful

effective tax rate is possible (leaving aside how the above analysis can be

extended to a more complicated tax system). Without such information, one might

still avoid use of the expected tax rate by calculating the effective tax rate

for hypothetical riskiess assets with the same values of                    d, and          But
                                     —25-



these will generally differ from those of the actual assets, which are risky.

Without a proportional tax system, it will not generally be possible to infer

anything about the tax rates on risky assets without actually making assumptions

about the risk characteristics of such assets.
                                      -26—


V. Conclusion

    The foregoing analysis has shown that it needn't be optimal to tax the

returns to different assets at the same rat.e.   Indeed, it may be optimal to tax

risky assets more heavily than safe assets, if individuals possess increasing

relative risk aversion. However, a comparison of any particular tax system,

current or proposed, is difficult when the taxation of individual assets varies

across states. The use of expected tax rates in such cases can be seriously

misleading, not only in theory, but in practice as well, as the   example in sec-
tion IV demonstrates. A proposed alternative measure, the "risk—adjusted effec-

tive tax rate," performs better, but cannot be computed without more extensive

knowledge of an asset's risk characteristics.
                                                —27—


                                              Footnotes


 1   The tax on first period labor supply, (1—co), may be set equal to zero with
     no loss of generality since equiproportional taxes on C1, C2, and (I—c0)
     have no real effects.

2    This term appears in the analysis by Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) of the
     optimal non—linear tax on labor income with a heterogenous population. In
     that context, only this term enters into the determination of whether com-
     modity taxes should be different.

3    See also the   discussion      in Mintz (1981)

     This involves a subsidy in state 2.

5    We ignore issues arising if individuals have different or incorrect subjec-
     tive evaluations of    and

6    With expected utility maximization, (1u11t(c1)/2u11'(c2)) = (p1/p2).
     Since C1 > C2,        >
                             (p1/p2).
7'   A similar measure could be constructed using the before—tax budget line and
     a line of equal slope running through the post—tax bundle.

8    It   is merely a convenience to assume that such replacement actually occurs.

9    This   may also be thought of as an initial deduction equal to a fraction
          of the asset's purchase price.

10 •This can be seen as the summation of the infinite series:

            d.
                  +(   1       d.        d.
                                               +...+(      1            d.J       d.J +...
             J
                     jiI   —    J

                               i+6
                                     )    J
                                                          1-77:
                                                                  —


                                                                      i+S,,
                                                                              )
                                        —28—


                                    References


Arrow, K.J.., 1965, Essays in the Theory of Risk—Bearing.

Atkinson, A.B., and N.H. Stern, 1974, "Pigou, Taxation and Riblic Goods,t' Review
    of Economic Studies, January, pp. 119—128.

Auerbach, A.]., 1919, "A Brief Note on a Non—Existent Theorem About the Opti—
    mality of Uniform Taxation," Economics Letters 3, pp. 49—52.
_____ and D.W. Jorgenson, 1980, "Inflation—Proof Depreciation    of Assets, Harvard
    Business Review, September/October, pp. 113—118.

Diamond, P.A., 1967, "The Role of the Stock Market in a General Equilibrium
   Model with Technological Uncertainty," American Economic Review, September,
    pp. 759—716.

_____ and J.A. T1irrlees, 1971, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production: I,"
    American Economic Review, March, pp. 8—27.
_____ and M. Yaari, 1972, "Implications of the Theory of Rationing for Consumer
    Choice Under Uncertainty," American Economic Review, June, pp. 3333143.

Fischer, S.,   1972, "Assets, Contingent Commodities and the Slutsky Equations,"
    Econometrica, March, pp. 371—385.
Gordon, R.H., 1981, "Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax Revenues versus
   Tax Distortions," Bell Labs mimeo.
Merton, H., 1969, "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The Contin—
   uous—tirne Case," Review of Economics and Statistics, August, pp.247—257.

Mintz, J.M., 1981, "Some Additional Results on Investment, Risk Taking and   Full
    Loss Offset Corporate Taxation with Interest Deductibility," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, November, pp. 631—642.

Samuelson, P.A., 1969, "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by rnamic Stochastic    Pro-
    gramming," Review of Economics and Statistics, August, pp. 239—246.
Sandmo,A., l974, "A Note on the Structure of Optimal Taxation," American Economic
   Review, September, pp. 701—706.
_____ 1977, "Portfolio Theory, Asset Demand arid Taxation: Comparative
    Statics   with Many Assets," Review of Economic Studies, June, pp. 369—319.

Tobin, J. , 1958, "Liquidity Preference as Behavior   Towards Risk," Review of
    Econoraic Studies, February, pp. 65—86.
