                   NBER WOCING PAPER SERIES




             A POSITIVE THEORY OF MONETARY POLICY
                    IN A NATURAL-RATE MODEL


                        Robert J.   Barro
                        David B. Gordon


                     Working Paper No. 807




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                         November 1981




Neither author is related to Robert J. Gordon. Some useful
suggestions were provided on earlier drafts by Ken Arrow, Gary
Becker, Bob Brito, Ben Eden, Bob Hall, Bob Lucas, Bill Oakland,
Alan Stocknian, and Larry Weiss. This research is supported in part
by the National Science Foundation. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in EcOnomic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #807
                                                       November 1981



            A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural—Rate Model



                                        ABSTRACT



                  models suggest that the systematic parts of monetary
        Natural—rate
policy will not have important consequences for the business cycle.
Nevertheless, we often observe high and variable rates of monetary growth,
and a tendency for monetary authorities to pursue countercyclical policies.
This behavior is shown to be consistent with a rational expectations
equilibrium in a discretionary environment where the policymaker pursues
a ttreasonable objective, but where precommitments on monetary growth
are precluded. At each point in time, the policymaker optimizes subject
to given inflationary expectations, which determine a Phillips Curve—type
tradeoff between monetary growth/inflation and unemployment. Inflationary
expectations    are formed with the knowledge that policynakers will be in
this    situation. Accordingly, equilibrium excludes systematic deviations
between actual and expected inflation, which means that       the   equilibrium
unemployment rate ends up independent of "policy" in our model. However,
the equilibrium rates of monetary growth/inflation depend on various
parameters, including the slope of the Phillips Curve, the costs attached
to unemployment    versus   inflation, and the level of the natural unemployment
rate.  The monetary authority determines an average inflation rate that
is "excessive," and also tends to behave countercyclically. Outcomes are
shown to improve if a costlessly operating rule is implemented in order
to precommit future policy choices in the appropriate manner. The value of
these precommitments——that is, of long—ten agreements between the government
and the private sector——underlies the argument for rules over discretion.
Discretion is the sub—set of rules that provides no guarantees about the
government's future behavior.


                                             Robert J. Barro
                                             David B. Gordon
                                             Department of Economics
                                             University of Rochester
                                             chester,    New York 14627

                                             (716) 275—2669
       The primary   puppose of this paper is to develop a positive theory of
monetary/inflation policy. The conclusions accord with two perceptions
about    the world for recent years:

        1) average rates of inflation and monetary growth are excessive

             relative to an efficiency criterion, and

        2) there is a tendency to pursue activist, countercyclical inonetary/

             inflation   policies.
Yet,    the udel exhibits three other properties:

        3)   the unemployment rate (real economic activity) is invariant with
             monetary/inflation      policy (neglecting the familiar deadweight—loss

             aspect of inflation),

        4) the policymaicer and the public all act rationally, subject to their

             environments, and

        5) the policymaker's objectives reflect the "public's" preferences.

        Natural-rate models with rational expectations--such as Sargent and

Wallace (1975) --suggest that the systematic parts of monetary policy are

irrelevant for real economic activity. Some empirical evidence on the

real effects of monetary disturbances in the post-World War II U.S. (e.g.,

Barro, 1977, 1981) is consistent with this result--in particular, there

is some support for the proposition that anticipated monetary changes are

neutral with respect to output, unemployment, etc. On the other hand,

these empirical studies and others indicate the presence of countercyclical

monetary policy at least for the post-World War II U.S.--rises in the unem-

ployment rate appear to generate subsequent expansions in monetary growth.

Within the natural-rate framework, it is difficult to reconcile this observed
                                  —2—




countercyclical monetary behavior with rationality of the policymaker.2

A prinôipal objective of this analysis is to achieve this reconciliation.

      The natural-rate models that have appeared in the macroeconomics

literature of the last decade share the characteristic that policy

choice is over a class of prespecified monetary rules. With the policy

rule predetermined, there is no scope for ongoing policymaking; 4iscretionary

policy choice is excluded a priori. If private agents can deduce.the character-

istics of the monetary process once it is implemented, it defines their

expectations. Thus, the policy decision is made subject to the constraint

that agents' expectations of future   monetary   policy will equal the realiza-

tion. This framework has the advantage of allowing the analysis to be

reduced to a pair of single-agent decision problems, which can    be   considered

independently, but excludes consideration of the essentially game-theoretic

situation that arises when policy decisions are made on an ongoing basis.

      In our framework an equilibrium will include the following features:

      (a) a decision rule for private agents, which determines their

          actions as a function of their current information,

      b) an expectations function, which determines the expectations

          of private agents as a function of their current information,

and   -




      c) a policy rule, which specifies the behavior of policy instruments
          as a function of the policymaker's current information set.

The outcome is said to be a rational expectations equilibrtum if first,.

the decision rule specified in (a) is optimal for agents given their

expectations as calculated under (b), and second, it is optimal for the
                                    -3-




policymaker, whose actions are described by (c), to perform in accordance

with agent's expectations (b), given that the policymaker recognizes the form

of the private, decision rules under (a). Faced by a maximizing policymaker,

it would be unreasonable for agents to maintain expectations from which they

know it will be in the policymaker's interest to deviate.

       If policy is precommited, the only reasonable expectations that agents

can   hold   are those defined by the rule. But, if policy is sequentially

chosen, the equality of policy expectations and realizations is a character-

istic of equilibrium-—not a prior constraint. The question to be addressed

is then what expectations can    agents   hold that they can reasonably expect

to be realized.

       The policymaker is viewed as attempting to maximize an objective that

reflects "society's" preferences on inflation and unemployment (or output).

(Additional arguments for the preference function are introduced later.)

Although the equilibrium involves a path of unemployment that is invariant

with policy, the rational. policymaker adopts an activist rule. The extent

of countercyclical response is dictated, among other things, by society's

relative dislikes for inflation and unemployment. There is an apparent

contradiction because an activist policy is pursued that ends up having

no desirable effects--in fact, unemployment is unaltered but inflation

ends. up being excessive. This outcome reflects the' assumed inability of

the policymaker--that is, of the institutional apparatus that is set up

to manage monetary affairs--to precommit its course of future actions.

This feature has been stressed in an important paper by Kydland and Prescott

(1977). If precommitment were feasible through legal arrangements or other
                                    —4—




procedures, the countercyclical aspect of monetary/inflation policy would

disappear (and, abstracting from costs of erecting and maintaining institu-

tions, everyone would be better off). When this type of advance restriction

is precluded, so that the policymaker sets instruments at each date subject

only to the initial conditions prevailing for that date (which do not

include restraints on policy choices), the equilibrium may involve an

activist form of policy. This solution conforms to optimal behavior of

private agents subject to a rationally anticipated policy rule. It cor-

responds also to optimality for the policymaker each period, subject to

agents' decision rules. Although an equilibrium obtains, the results are

sub-optimal, relative to outcomes where precommitment is permitted. Given

an environment where this type of policy precommitment is absent--as appears

to characterize the U.S. and other countries in recent years--the results

constitute a positive theory of monetary growth and inflation.




 1. The Model of Unemployment and Inflation

      The general results are illustrated by a simple economic model, which

 is based on an example that was set out by Kydland and Prescott (1977,

 pp. 477-80) and extended in Gordon (1980). The unemployment rate U, which

 is a convenient proxy for the overall state of real activity, equals a

 "natural rate," U, plus a term that depends negatively on contemporaneously
                              -
 unexpected inflation,


      (1)    Ut =   U   -
                            a(IT— ), a >0
                                       —5—




For convenience, the "Phillips-Curve slope" parameter, a, is treated as a

constant.3 Given the relevant inflationary expectations, ir,                 equation    (1)


is assumed to reflect the maximizing behavior of private a.gents on decentralized

markets. The formulation of           is detailed below. Equation (1) could be re-

formulated without changing the main conclusions by expressing Ut as a reduced-

form function of monetary shocks.

     The natural unemployment rate can shift over time due to autonomous

real shocks, c. A single real disturbance is allowed to have a persisting

influence on unemployment, output, etc. This behavior is modeled as


        (2)      U = AU1     +   (l-A)I.f   +           o      A   1,



              is independently, identically distributed with zero mean.             If
where

 0 < A c 1 applies, then the realization for c affects future natural

 unemployment rates in the same direction.                  For example, for the one_periodT

                                                +   (l-A)U',   where     denotes date t-l
 ahead forecast, E(UtIIt1) =        AIJ1
 information, which includes the observation of U1. The effect of c on

 • future natural unemployment rates dissipates gradually over time--equation

 (2) implies that the long-run mean of the natural unemployment rate is
  lim    E(U+1IIti) n, a constant. For convenience, U in equation (1)
                                                                                           -
 is assumed to depend only on contemporaneously unexpected inflation,

 and not on lagged values. These additional terms could be introduced without

 changing the main results (see below).

    The policymaker's (and society's) objective for each period is summarized

 by cost, Z, that depends on that period's values for the unemployment rate
                                    —6-




and inflation. A simple quadratic form is assumed:



     (3)        =      -
                    a(U kU)2
                               +
                                   b(Tr)2;
                                             a, b >   0; 0 < k   <   1.


This paper does not consider any divergence across individuals in their

assessments of relative costs for unemployment and inflation.

     The first term in equation (3) indicates that costs rise with the

departure of Ut from a "target" unemployment rate, kU', which depends

positively on the contemporaneous natural rate.       In the absence of external

effects, k = 1 would correspond to an efficiency criterion--that, is, departures

of Ut from LJ in either direction would be penalized. In the presence of

unemployment compensation, income taxation and the like, U will tend to

exceed the efficient level--that is, privately-chosen quantities of marketable

output and employment will tend to be too low. The inequality, k c 1, captures

this possibility.4 Not surprisingly, k < 1 is a necessary condition for

activist policy to arise in the present model.

     Governmental decisions on taxes and transfers will generally influence the

value of k. However, given that some government expenditures are to be carried

out, it will generally be infeasible to select a fiscal policy that avoids

all distortions and yields k = 1.     We assume that the government's opti-

mization on the fiscal side--which we do not analyze explicitly--results

in a value of k that satisfies 0 c k c 1. The choice of monetary policy

is then carried out conditional on this value of k.


     Equation (3) regards departures of        from zero as generating costs. We

do not offer explanations here for the sources of these costs due to inflation.

However, the form could be modified to (1r             where         might involve the
                                                               ir
                                         -7-




optimal rate of taxation on cash balances. A later section expands the

analysis to consider the revenue from money creation.

       The policymaker is assumed to control an instrument--say, monetary


                                                                '' in
growth, Pt__which has a direct connection to inflation,                 each period

This specification neglects any dynamic relation between inflation and

monetary growth or a correlation between (i -          and the real disturbances, -

CJ c.1,      ...   In   effect, the analysis is simplified by pretending that the

policymaker chooses ir directly in each period. A later section expands the

analysis to allow a separation between inflation and monetary growth.

       The choice of       at each date is designed to minimize the expected present

value of costs, as calculated at some starting date 0,


                                                t
       (4)    Minimize
                                      Z/(l+r)
                                t=l

where 10 represents the initial state of information and r is a constant,

exogenous real discount rate. It should be stressed that the policymaker's

objective conforms with society's preferences.

       The determination of inflation and unemployment can be characterized as

a "gamet' between the policyinaker and a large number of private-sector agents.

The structure of this game is as follows. The policymaker enters period t

with   the information set, ttV The inflation rate,             is   set based on 't-l
                                                          ii,
in order to be consistent with the cost-minimization objective that is set

out in equation (4). Simultaneously, each individual formulates expectations,

    for the .policymaker's choice of inflation for period t.         These   expecta-
tions are assumed to be based on the same information set, 'tl' as that

available to the policyinaker. Most importantly, in forming inflationary
                                     -8—




expectations, people incorporate the knowledge that             will emerge from the

policymaker's cost-minimization problem that is specified in equation (4).

Finally, the choices for        and ir,    together   with the random disturbance,

determine      and the cost, Z, in accordance with equations (i)--(3).



The Expectations Mechanism

     In order to determine ir,     agents    must consider the policymaker's optimiza-

tion problem, which determines the choice of irs.          Suppose for the moment that
the policyinaker when selecting ir    treats          and all future values of inflationary

                                                          will affect Ut through the
expectations, Wfi as given. Variations in
usual Phillips-curve mechanism in equation (1). As the model is set out,

this effect would not carry forward to direct effects on future unemployment

rates, although this channel of persistence could be incorporated. The

current choice of inflation, 1Tt     is    assumed also to imply no direct.constraints

on future policy choices, itt..      Therefore,       with current and future infla-

tionary expectations held fixed, the determination of              involves only a

one-period tradeoff between higher inflation and lower unemployment in

accordance with the cost function of equation (3)

     In the present framework the determination of              is divorced from the

particular realization of itt.     At the start of period t, agents form ir        by
forecasting the policymaker's "best" action, contingent on the information

set, 1t-l The expectation, n, is not conditioned on                itself. Therefore,

the policymaker (possessed with "free will") faces a choice problem in

which       is appropriately held fixed while           is selected. Further, in

formulating ir,    the   private agents understand that the policymaker is in

this position.
                                           -9-




      The connection between ir and future inflationary expectations, 7r.,

is   less clear. As noted above, the present model allows for no direct con-

nection between          (even with ir held fixed) and future "objective" character-

istics of the economy. There is also no scope for learning over time about

the economy's structure; in particular, ir supplies no additional information

about the objective or technology of the policymaker. Accordingly, one would

be inclined to search for an equilibrium in which                did not depend on

"extraneous" past variables, such as ire.          However, the severing of a link
beween 7r and ir. eliminates some possibly interesting equilibria in which

the government can invest in its reputation--that is, in "credibility.t' •The

nature of these solutions is discussed later. For present purposes we examine

situations in which future expectations, ir., are invariant with

      Given that future values of Ii and            are independent of n, there is

no channel for iv
                    t
                        to   affect future costs, Z ..
                                                     t+t   Therefore,   the objective

posed in equation (4) reduces to the one-period problem of selecting tr1 in order

to minimize Etllt.

      In a solution to the model the public will view the policymaker as

setting      in accordance with the information set, 't-l' which is available

at the start of period t. Suppose that people perceive this process as

described by the reaction fimction, he(Il).s Therefore, inflationary

expectations--formed on the basis of I 1--would be given by6

                    =
       (5)
                        he(I_l).
      A solution to the model involves finding a function he(O, such that

setting ir   = he(Il)        is a solution to the policymaker's cost-minimization

problem, given that          =
                                 he(Il).     Expecting inflation as specified by he(.)
                                             -10-



must not contradict the policymaker's minimization of expected costs, as

set out in equation (3). The previous discussion suggests that lagged values

of inflation will not appear as parts of the solution, he(D. That is, we

are looking for an equilibrium where                          =               = 0 applies for

all i >          0.   We also look for a solution where the policymaker understands that

iTt
      is    generated from equation (5).


       The unemployment rate is determined from equation (1) after substitution

for          from equation (2) and for            from equation (5) as



                                                     -
           (6)
                      Ut AU1 + (l-A)U         +



Costs for period t           are   determined by substituting Lot        and       in

equation (3) as



                                                                               ) j }2
                                                                                                   2
       (7)               = a{ (1-k)   [A1 + (l-X)U+ e]       - a   [ - h6(I             + b   ()

           that inflationary expectations for period t are i he(Il), the
       Given

policymaker will select    in order to minimize       where Z appears in
equation (7). The first-order condition, — CEt_11t) = 0, implies that the
chosen inflation rate, denoted by , will satisfy the condition,


       (8)               =             -
                                           h(I)]    +    (1-k) [AU1 +


The property, E(ctIi) = 0, has been used here. .me second-order condition

for a.minimum is satisfied.

       Although the policymaker is not constrained to follow the anticipated

rule, he(Il), the public is assumed to understand the nature of the
                                           —11—




policymaker's optimization problem in each period. In particular, it is

understood that the actual choice,                will satisfy equation (8). Therefore,

rationality entails using equation (8) in order to calculate he(Il) in

equation (5). Consistency requires he(Il) =              1t. The   unexpected inflation

term, _he(Il), then cancels out in equation (8), which leads to the

formula for the expectations function,


                                                             n   = aa
     (9)             =
                         hecIl)     =
                                        {l-k) (AU1 + (lA)UJ        -c(lk)Et1U.

Equilibrium     Policy

     By the construction of the problem, a policymaker who faces the expecta-

tions given in equation (9) willbe motivated from the first-order condition of

equation (8) to choose an inflation rate,                that coincides with

Therefore, the equilibrium involves



     (10)                (l_k)Et..iU =      ir.
Since       =
                'U       =
                             U   applies also as part of the equilibrium.

                                                                         in the
      Equation (10) provides an equilibrium (Nash equilibrium)
                                                               e                  e
 following sense. Given the public's equilibrium perceptions. ir
                                                                                  h (J'

 minimization of E   Z (for a given value of 1T) induces the policytnaker
                  t-l t
 to choose       =   he(.)   in each period.7 Expectations are rational and

 individuals optimize subject to these expectations (as summarized in

 equations (1) and (2))
                                                                 framework; it us useful
        In order to provide perspective on the present

 to consider an alternative manner in which the policytnaker's choice problem

 could have been formulated. Policy could have been viewed as the once-and-
                                                    e = e
                                                        h (.) = h(.)
 for-all choice of reaction function, h(D, so that
                                        —12—




would hold automatically in every period for all choices of h() .                This

perspective is suggested, for example, from the analysis of macropolicy

in Sargent and Wallace (1975). In this setting the choice of the function,

h(•), affects not only n, but also             in each period. The independence

of    from    is necessarily broken in the context of a once-and-for-all

selection of policy functions. The condition,                    =
                                                                        n_he(Il)    =   0,
could then have been substituted into equation (7) .           In    particular, with

guaranteed to move one-to-one with changes in ir, the policymaker would have

                                        as invariant with h[')          Given the simple
regarded unemployment, U =      U,
objective, from equation (3), which penalizes departures of tr              from zero, the
choice of h(•) that minimizes EZt for all periods would then be a variant

of the constant-growth-rate-rule,8



     (11)     n =
                    h(Ii)      =   0.


Note that U =       obtains   again as part of this solution.

     Given the public's perceptions,            =
                                                    he(Il),   U depends on the term,

       =     - hecIl).        It has been observed (Taylor (1975), Friedman (1979))

that the policymaker can fool the public and reduce unemployment ("temporarily")

by setting    >     =
                        h(I1)       in period t. This 'possibility is ruled out in

the case where a once-and-for-all choice of h(.) is made. However, there

may be no mechanism in place to constrain the policymaker to stick to the

rule, h(It1) as time evolves. This consideration leads to the setup for

policy choice that has been assumed above--namely, for given initial conditions

at each date, including':the expectations mechanism,                =   1e(1)     set n in
                                      -13-




order to minimize Et1Zt. The policymaker is not required to select an

inflation rate to equal the given expected inflation rate. However, people

also realize that the policymaker has the power to fool them at each

date. Since the formation of expectations takes this potential for

deception into account, a full equilibrium will ultimately involve            =


The crucial point is that--unlike for a once-and-for-all choice of policy

rules--the policymaker does not regard          =     as occurring automatically for

all possible choices of lTt.      For this reason the (non-cooperative) equilibrium

does not correspond to equation (11).

         Compare the equilibrium solution,      from equation (10), with the choice,

     =   0,   that would arise from a once-and-for-all selection of policy rules.

The equilibrium solution delivers the same unemployment rate and a higher rate

of inflation at each date. Therefore, the equilibrium cost,               exceeds that,

      which would arise under the precommitted rule. (Note that, with U the

same in both cases, costs end up depending only on the path of the inflation

rate.) Of course, this conclusion neglects any costs of setting up or

operating the different institutional environments. Notably, the

costs involved in enforcing precommitments are excluded. With this cost

neglected, the present type of result provides a normative argument (and

positive theory?) for policy rules--that is, for precommitment on future choices

of n. This aspect of the results is highlighted later.

         It may be useful to demonstrate directly that         = 0 is not an equilibrium

for the case where the policymaker optimizes subject to given expectations in

each period. Conjecture that           =
                                           he(Il)   = 0   holds. In this case the choice

of        > 0 would reduce unemployment for period t. A tradeoff arises between
                                     -14-


reduced costs of unemployment and increased costs from inflation. The

balancing of these costs determines the chosen inflation rate, as shown in

equation (8). Under the assumed conditions (marginal cost of inflation is

zero at       = 0 and marginal benefit from reduced unemployment is positive

when U =           the selected inflation rate will be positive. Howeve±, since
             U),
people are assumed to understand this policy choice, the result               >   0 is

inconsistent with the conjecture that           =   0.   Zero inflation is not a

reasonable expectation for individuals to hold.

         An analogous argument can be used to find the positive rate of inflation

that does provide an equilibrium. If a small positive value for                   had been

conjectured, the policymaker would still have been motivated to select

     >
         1T, which would be inconsistent with equilibrium. The equilibrium
obtains when        is sufficiently high, so that          =    is   the policymaker's best

choice, given this value of w. At this point the policymaker retains the

option of choosing w. >        (or    <
                                          ir)   so as to accomplish a tradeoff between

lower unemployment and higher inflation (or vice versa). However, the level

of        is sufficiently high so that the marginal cost of inflation just balances

the marginal gain from reducing unemployment.9 The inflation rate that

corresponds to this equilibrium condition is given in equation (10).

         Suppose that precommitment on policy choice is absent, so that optimization

occurs on a period-by-period basis, as we have been assuming. Under this

"discretionary" regime, the solution for             in equation (10) constitutes a

positive theory of inflation (and monetary growth). The major implications

are as follows:

         1) The average inflation rate exceeds the value (zero in this model)

that would be optimal if policy precommitment were feasible. Therefore, an

exogenous shift from a regime that involved some precommitment on nominal
                                      -15—




values--such as a gold standard or possibly a system with fixed exchange

rates--to one without such restraints would produce a rise in the average rate

of inflation (and monetary growth).

       2) Within a discretionary regime, an increase in the long-run average

value of the natural unemployment rate, U, raises the average rate of

inflation (and monetary growth). A significant rise in         is generally

thought to have occurred in the U.S. over the last 10-15 years.

       3) Under a discretionary policy, the inflation rate (monetary policy

and aggregate demand management more generally) responds positively to the

lagged unemployment rate. (The positive correlation of U1 with IJ__that is,
A >   0—-is crucial here). The rational policymaker acts countercyclically.

In a larger model it would be possible to distinguish the countercyclical

response of monetary growth (which seems empirically to be important) from

that of inflation--however, these two variables are directly linked in the

present model. See the analysis below.

       4) The extent of countercyclical response rises with a--the Phillips-•

Curve slope parameter in equation (1)--and the relative value of the cost-

coefficients, a/b, attached to unemployment versus inflation.

      The results listed under 3) and 4) are the sorts of normative implications

for aggregate demand policy that are delivered by Keynesian models in which

policymakers can exploit a systematic (possibly dynamic) tradeoff between

inflation and unemploynent. However, in the present model

      5) unemployment, Ut =   U,   is invariant w..th the systematic part of

inflation.'0 In this sense policy ends up with no effect on real economic

activity.
                                       -16-




      It   has been argued that policymakers do not face a "cruel choice"
between     inflation and unemployment in a natural-rate environment. This

argument is misleading in a context where monetary institutions do not allow

for policy choice to be precommitted. Although U. =
                                                          U   emerges in equilibrium--

that is, unemployment is invariant with policy in this sense---policymakers

do optimize in each period subject to the appropriate givens, which include

the formation of expectations. Given these expectations, the choice.of            does

influence the unemployment rate "right now"--that is, for date t. The social

tradeoff between unemployment and inflation, as expressed by the preference

ratio, a/b, is central to the policyinaker's decision.11 No cruel choice arises

and        = 0 follows only if the policymaker can precommit future actions.

Within the present model, this outcome is infeasible. Counselling stable

prices (or constant and small rates of monetary growth) in this environment

is analogous to advising firms to produce more output with given inputs.

Policymakers in a discretionary regime really are finding the optimal policy,

subject to the applicable constraints, when they determine a countercyclical

inflation/monetary reaction with positive average rates of inflation.



2. Monetary Growth as the Policy Instrument

      We develop a simple model to illustrate some consequences of treating

monetary growth, rather than inflation, as the policy instrument. Real

balances held, Mt/Pti are assumed to be directly proportional to period Vs

                                        times a constant. That is, (1 -     is   viewed
real output, which equals (1 -    U)
as the fraction of.a fixe4 ?!potential output" that is actually produced. Real
                                         -17-




money demanded depends inversely on expected inflation, 1T.                    We use the


functional form,

                                        871t et,
     (12)       Mt/Pt =   A(l_U)e

where B > 0, A > 0 is a constant, and                  is a stochastic term. Taking first

differences of logarithms, writing v =                      - -l     as the stochastic shift to

                                                  -         yields a relation between money
Velocity, and approximating log(l _U)                  Ut
growth and inflation,


     (13)
                          -     -
                              (U U1)
                                             -
                                                 (ir    -          - Vt.

We treat v. as a white-noise error, which is independent of the real shock, c.

     Supose that the policymaker determines the mean of monetary growth for

period t as i, but the actual growth,                       differs from      by the random error,

     We treat      as a white-noise error, which is independent of                      and Vt.

     Using the expressions for Ut from equations (1) and (2) and the condition

from equation (13), the inflation rate can be written as



                                                                                    -
     (14)             t +           * Vt + Ct -
                                                       (l_A)Ct   1
                                                                     -
                                                                         A(l-A)(2

                                    - a(lr   -1T) + cN1_iri) +
                                                                                            ÷
The inflation rate equals the growth rate of money and its velocity,

   ÷ Vt,    plus terms that measure the negative growth rate of output, U -

plus a term that captures the effect on velocity of a change in expected inflation.

In particular, the current (adverse) supply shock, c, appears as a positive

influence on ir•
                                         —18—




       Given ir, equation (14) can be solved for ITt in the form,




                         (adjusted monetary instrument) + (white-noise error)



  (15)      =
                    1
                          - (lA)c1   -
                                         AR-A)     (U      -            t-l -   litl)   +       -




                     1    R
                +
                    (1) (u + Vt +
The   adjusted monetary instrument modifies the controlled part of money
growth,, to account for the additional inflationary effects that are known
and taken as given by the policymaker at the start of period t. (The effects of
                              e
the given expectation, ,r, are included in this term.) These added infla-

tionary effects arise via the money-demand function from either the anticipated

movement in theunemploymentrate (and, hence, in output) or from the change in

expected inflation. The adjusted instrument equals the policymakerts forecast

for        given        and TT. The white-noise error term in equation (15) is regarded

by all agents at the start of th tth period as distributed with zero mean and a
                                          R
given variance. (The effect of                + v +               is less than one-to-one

                                              -
                                                   e
                                                        on Ut.) The error term determines the
because of the inverse effect of
                                                  lii
difference between          and the policymaker's beginning-of-period forecast for

inflation.
         The cost, Z, for period t is still given in equation (7) .               Rather than
      being chosen directly by the policymaker, as it was in the original setup,

there are two differences now:           first,           is determined indirectly by the

value of the adjustment monetary instrument for period t, as noted in equation

(15) ,   and second,        can be influenced only up to the uncontrollable random
                                            -19—




term   that is shown also in equation (is). If this random term were absent,

the model wauld coincide with the previous framework once the substitution of

the new variable, (adjusted monetary instrument). were made for ire. The

solution for       that is given in equation (10), together with the formula for

the adjusted instrument that is shown in equation (15), would determine the

value of the monetary control,                  Further, with the quadratic-cost structure

that is assumed to hold inthepresent model, this conclusion is undisturbed

by the presence of the stochastic term in equation (15). The policymaker

chooses       in each period so as to equate the adjusted monetary instrument

for period t--and hence the policymaker's forecast for w-to the value of

   that is determined in equation (10).

       In an equilibrium each agent who understands the policymaker's choice

problem and has access to the same information set as the policymaker will

derive the same inflation forecast, .                Therefore,         will again be

part of the equilibrium. Using this fact and the form of the adjusted monetary

instrument for period t, as given in equation (is), the solution for the

monetary control, u, can be shown to be



                                                            + (1—A) 6t—l + A (1—A) (U2 — U)
                                    (i1 + v1
       (16)              —                   +
                             (-E—

                                            -




The solution for Q, which also equals ir, appears in equation (10)                 The

remaining parts of the equilibrium solution are, for actual inflation,




       (17)
                     A       1      R
                                        +   v +
                ITt t + (14c)U•it
                                        —20—




and for the unemployment rate,




     (18)       Ut z AU1 + (l-X)U"        +    (i.)6 - (_2_.)(R + vt).

     The new influences on monetary growth in equation (16) involve the effects



The monetary control, '         j
on inflation from anticipated output growth and changes in expected inflation.

                                    set so as to offset these forces in order to

                                                                         For example,
generate a prescribed mean value for the inflation rate, .

since (p +     v1)      temporarily raised last period's output (equation (18)),

there is an expectation of lower than otherwise growth in output from date t-l

to date t. Therefore, M is reduced in order to maintain the value of

The model predicts that past shocks to money or velocity will be offset in

future   periods.
                                -
     A high value for               U") leads, through the persistence that is

governed by the A-parameter, to the expectation of high output growth for

period t (as well as for period t-l) .          Accordingly,   p   is raised--this channel

produces a positive reaction of monetary growth to lagged unemployment. This

type of countercyclical reaction would not be matched by the inflation rate.

     Last period's supply shock, 6t-l' enters into equation (16) with an

apparently ambiguous sign. This effect would be positive on ut--thereby

paralleling the influence of (U2 - iJ'5 --if we had assumed that the unemploy-

ment effects of inflation shocks persisted over time in the same manner as

did the effects of real shocks, e. We neglected the persisting influences

of inflation shocks solely for convenience (see below)

     Changes in expected inflation,             -
                                                    .l'   raise velocity. The negative

response of         maintains       at the prescribed level. Equation (10) implies
                                    -21-




that ttl depends positively on last period's supply shock,              tl'
and negatively on (Ut 2 U").
                          -

     Equation (17) indicates that unexpected inflation arises from a combina-

tion of monetary, velocity and supply shocks,            +
                                                             v + e.   Equation (IS)

yields the familiar conclusion from expectational-Phillips-curve models

that shocks to money and velocity,         +
                                               v,   produce reductions in the

uneMployment rate. The effect on unemployment of the supp'y shdck, e,

reduced below unity because of the positive response of unexpected inflation.



3. Some other Extensions

     The model could be modified to allow effects from inflation shocks to

persist over time-—that is, equation (1) could be modified to allow Ut to

depend on current and lagged values of (w - lTe).        This extension complicates

the policymaker's first-order condition in equation (8) to include effects on

a distributed lead of prospective future values of unemployment and inflation.

The ultimate equilibrium is altered in that expected future values of U and it

appear as influences on       in equation (10)

     The magnitude pf change in the inflation rate could be included as an

additional argument of the cost function in equation (3). For example, the

term, c(lT_wl)2l where c > 0, could be added to the expression for

This element might capture the costs for the economy to adapt to a different

inflationary environment. The policyniaker's choice of            then becomes a

dynamic problem. The model would describe a transition path between a

given initial inflation rate and a steady-state (mean) inflation rate. The

overall nature of the results would not change from that discussed earlier.
                                   —22—




4. Revenue from Money Creation

    A substantial literature (e.g. Bailey, 1956, Aueniheimer, 1974, Calvo,

1978) considers the outcomes when the government attempts to maximize the

(present value of) revenue from paper money creation. This problem is reasonably

straightforward if the government can precomniit its course of future monetary

actions. The solution is the one described by Auernheimer (1974), where

the usual monopoly formula arises. However, when choices of monetary growth

cannot be precoinmitted and the private sector forms expectations rationally,

taking account of the government's revenue objective, Calvo (1978) has shown

that a dynamic inconsistency arises. Given inflationary expectations at

each date, the government can generate more revenue if it chooses a.. higher

than anticipated rate of monetary expansion. Since the private sector is

assumed to understand the government's objective, they will anticipate this

outcome. Therefore, the prior expectations on money growth and inflation are

revised accordingly. But, the government can then choose a higher rate of

monetary expansion, and so on. Without prior restraints, the government's

period-by-period optimization entails a higher-than expected--possibly

infinite--rate of monetary growth. There is no equilibrium because the

systematic surprises implied by this behavior are inconsistent with

rationality on the part of money holders.

     This dilemma disappears if the inflation rate enters the government's

objective function as a cost element. For example, suppose that the

policymaker's objective entails minimization of costs, as given by



                  =
     (19)             Z(R   ¶Tt)
                                        -23—




where Rt          p-od t's real revenue from.money creation. It is assumed

that 3Z/3R < 0 and               >   0--that   is, rises in revenue are viSed as a

benefit item. These preferences could reflect society's desire to raise a

given total revenue at minimal deadweight loss. A larger value for

implies less revenue raised by other methods of (distorting) taxation.

          Real revenue from money creation is generated by a function of the form,



           (20)       =
                          R(,   ¶-li:.


For   simplicity, we do not distinguish between the inflation rate and the
monetary growth rate in this formulation. The first argument of the k-function
describes the effect on real revenue of fully anticipated inflation and monetary
growth--3R/3w > 0 applies in the range where real money demanded is less
than unit elastic with respect to the expected inflation rateJ2 The second
term   indicates, the effects of unanticipated inflation__aR/3Or -
                                                                           ir}   >    0 applies

because real cash balances, which are the base of the inflation tax, are fixed
      e
by
       For a once-and-for-all choice of inflation rules, where           and         are

effectively chosen together, the policyinaker's solution would again be

straightforward. The actual and expected inflation rate--call it w--would

be lower than that chosen by Auernheirner's monopolist, because of the direct

positive effect of         on Z.
       Without precommitment and with           treated as given for each, period, the

policymaker recognizes that Rt can be. raised by generating inflation in excess

of expectations. The setting,              is no longer an equilibrium because of this
                                     -24-




possibility. Rather, the policymaker will choose            ir. Under ratiotal

expectations this outcome would be anticipated, so that         and    are both

higher--that is, the (wt -   r)   term in the R-function of equation (20) equals

zero inequilibrium. An equilibrium obtains when          is sufficiently high that

the policyinaker no longer finds it worthwhile, at the given value of iTt, to

generate more revenue by setting        > 1r. At this point the direct marginal

cost of inflation, 3z/91r balances the gain from added revenue that would be

produced by a hypothetical increment in unexpected inflation,I9Z/3RtN[Rt/3(1Tt_1T)I

        Note that, with       =     obtaining   as part of the equilibrium, the policy-

maker does not actually generate revenue via unanticipated inflation. However,

the potential for this sort of revenue enters into the determination of the

equilibrium inflation rate.

     The nature of this equilibrium corresponds to that in the previous

example where the unemployment rate substituted for revenue, R, in the

policymaker's objective function. In both cases the driving element is the

impact of unexpected inflation, which is negative on Ut and positive on Rt.



5. Government Bonds

     Besides the direct revenue from money creation, inflation has additional

dynamic effects on government receipts. We consider here the example of

nominally-denominated, interest-bearing public debt. The nominal interest

rate paid on government bonds incorporates inflationary expectations, T1,

over the pertinent horizon for the debt. Given these expectations, increases

in actual inflation and rises in nominal interest rates1 which would reflect

upward revisions to ,e generate capital losses to holders of nominal

bonds. The government enjoys a corresponding capital gain. As
                                     -25—




  with other forms of ex post capital levies, this type of revenue mechanism

  entails no economic distortions. (The distortions arise because the

  possibility of this type of taxation is recognized, ex ante.) As before,

  the policymaker's objective could involve the raising of revenue at minimal

  overall deadweight loss. This objective implies that unexpected inflation,
    -      would appear as a benefit term, because of its negative effect on the

 real value of existing govertiment debt.

        As in earlier analyses, the rational expectations equilibrium involves

 an inflation rate (actual and expected) and a corresponding nominal interest

 rate that are sufficiently high to deter the policymaker from systematically

 exploiting the ex post power of generating departures of     from ir. The

 equilibrium inflation rate and nominal interest rate are determined so as

 to equate the marginal cost of inflation to the marginal benefit from reducing

 the real value of government debt through unanticipated inflation. Note

 that zero revenue from unexpected capital losses on bonds results in this

 equilibrium, but the potential for generating this type of ex post levy enters

 into the determination of ITt}4 Indexation of bonds would remove the govern-

 ment's ex post power to create this type of surprise capital loss and would

 thereby affect the equilibrium growth rate of money and prices. In effect,

 institutionalized inflation correction is a form of long-term commitment

 that is analogous to the once-and-for-all selection of a monetary rule. From

 the present perspective, the implementation of indexing on public debt would

 reduce the equilibrium inflation rate. However, if the cost attached to

 inflation--that is, the b-coefficient in the cost function from equation (3)--

• were reduced by the existence of indexed bonds, then an opposite force would

 arise.
                                            -26-



6.    Reputational Equilibria

       A different form of equilibrium may emerge in which the policyinaker

foregoes         short-term gains for the sake of maintaining a long-term "repu-
tation." Consider again the initial setting where costs depend on
unemployment and inflation, as in equation (3). The "rules equilibrium"
generates U = U and iTt = 0, while the non-cooperative, period-by-period
solution yields the inferior outcome, U = U and     =      0.
       Another possible form of solution, which has been discussed in the

related game-theory literature (e.g. in Friedman, 1971), takes the following
                                                                                  =    0,   unless they
form. Private agents anticipate the cooperative result,

have seen something else. Once observing a different value for inflation,
                                                                                  16



                                                                                       l
agents henceforth expect the non-cooperative policy, ir =                               Confronted

by this behavior, the policymaker has two options: first, 'l =                              can be

chosen in period one.            In conjunction with the initial expectation, w =                    0,

the choice of iT1                generates a favorable first-period tradeoff between low
                                 and high inflation. For the first period this outcome
unemployment, Li1 <        1J,
                                                                 and     =   0.    In subsequent
is preferred to the rules solution, where U1 =              (J
periods individuals would set               =      and the policymaker selects                =       as

the best possible response, given these expectations. Therefore, the non-

cooperative equilibrium, Ut =           U   and      =
                                                         ' arises      from period 2 onward.

                                                                  = 0   in each period. Since
            The policymaker's second option is to set

      = 0    is sustained under this policy, the coopexative solution, Ut =

and          =   0, obtains in all periods. Under this option the policymaker fore-
goes the hypothetical short-run gain in order to sustain "credibility" and

thereby enjoy the benefits of future cooperative outcomes.
                                     —27—




     Prom the policynaker's viewpoint the central new feature is the linkage

between current policy choices and subsequent inflationary expectations.

In particular, the policymaker knows that       =   0 will apply only if      = 0

has been set for all i >   0--that   is, at all previous dates. Whether the

reputational equilibrium will arise depends on the policymaker's weighing

of the benefits from the two possible modes of behavior. The first optiop

would be preferred if the hypothetical one-period benefit from low unemploy-

ment outweighs the present value of the losses from higher inflation in future
           17
periods.

     There are many features that can cause the reputational equilibrium to

break down. First, any known, finite horizon for the game rules out these

types of equilibria. The cooperative solution is clearly non-sustainable in

the final period--working backward, period-by-period, this breakdown can be

shown to be transmitted to all earlier periods.18 However, if the

game ends only probabilistically, the reputational equilibrium might be

sustainable. A higher probability of termination effectively raises the

discount rate that is applicable to outcomes in future periods. This higher

discount rate lowers the benefits from long-term reputation (low inflation)

relative to those from short-run gains (low unemployment). Accordingly,

while a finite expected horizon for the game does not make the reputational

equilibrium impossible, it does make it more difficult to maintain.

     Second, at least the simple form of cooperation is lost if option one

becomes preferable to option two during any period. In the present example,

a runup in the natural unemployment rate could make the hypothetical short-run

benefit from reduced unemployment exceed the present value of losses from

higher future inflation.
                                   -28—



    Third, in a context of partial information, agents may have difficulty

verifying the underlying monetary policy (such as the value of      in the

example discussed above in Section 2) .   Some form of stochastic decision

rule would have to be implemented. Policymakers would have a corresponding

incentive to cheat- -such situations would be characterized by claims that

inflation and/or monetary growth was not caused by past governmental actions.

Similarly, policymakers would desire to proclaim the end of a previous regime

that involved excessive inflation in order to restore matters to the "first

period" in which    =   0 was based on trust, rather than on performance.

     The essential problem is the lack of an objective link between current

actions,     and future expectations, 1r+.. An enforced rule ties actual

and anticipated values together. In this sense the reputational equilibrium

amounts to a fragile approximation to the rules equilibrium. Despite the

apparent difficulties with sustaining reputational equilibria, casual observa-

tion suggests that reputational forces, unreinforced by formal rules, can

generate satisfactory outcomes in some areas. Further investigation seems

warranted into the factors that allow reputational equilibria to be sustained.



7. Rules versus Discretion Once Again

     The presence or absence of precommitment coincides with the meaningful

distinction between rules and discretion. It is useful to eliminate two

common, but irrelevant, distinctions between rules and discretion that have

arisen in previous literature:

     1) Policy is described by a once-and-for-all choice of reaction function,

h(I1). but discretion allows ttl to encompass a larger set of arguments
                                      -29—




than does a (simple) rule. This viewpoint makes rules look like a silly

constraint on the options of the policymaker. From this perspective, rules

are defensible only if the policymaker is incompetent or nontrustworthy,

in the sense of using an inappropriate objective.

     2) Ignorance     about the workings of the economy favors a simple rule
for policy.   -
                  While this outcome is possible, the conclusion is not general.

It is readily imaginable that uncertainty about variables or about model

structure would magnify the number of factors to which feedback was justified.

     The meaningful dimension of a rule is its capacity to precommit the manner

in which future policy choices will be determined. In many private arrangements,

as with governmental policies, efficiency requires the potential for advance

commitments--that is, for contractural obligations. Kydland and Prescott

(1977) describe numerous public policy areas in which formal or implicit

ex ante constraints on future actions are important, including patents, flood

plain projects, and energy investments. Other areas include repudiation of

national debt and taxation of capital income generally. Actual methods for

framing government policies seem to be successful to different degrees in

each case.

     In the unemployment/inflation example the outcome is sub-optimal relative

to that generated by a policy rule, if the costs of erecting and enforcing

the rules are disregarded. The "optimal" solution,         = 0 and T.J =        is
                                                                           U,
then attainable through a (costlessly-operating) mechanism that restricts

future governmental actions on inflation. Under a discretionary regime,

the policymaker faces an unemployment/inflation tradeoff at each date and

performs accordingly. The policymaker does as well for the public as

possible within an environment where precommitments--that is, long-term

contracts with the public--are precluded. Rather than rules being less flexible
                                  -30—




than discretion, the situation is reversed. Discretion amounts to disallowing

a set of long-term arrangements between the policymaker and the-public. Purely

discretionary policies are the sub-set of rules that involve no guarantees

about the government's future behavior!9



8. Monetary Institutions and Policy Choice

     The spirit of this paper is to characterize monetary growth and inflation

as reflections of optimal public policy within a given institutional setup.

Under a discretionary regime, the policymaker performs optimally subject to

an assumed inability to preconiinit future actions. The framework assumes

rationality in terms of the day-to-day actions that are carried out repeatedly

within the given institutional mode. The intention here is to model the

regular behavior of a monetary authority, such as the Federal Reserve.

Excessive inflation, apparently unrewarding countercyclical policy response,

and reactions of mOnetary growth and inflation to-other exogenous influences

can be vieved as products of rational calculation under a regime where long-term

commitments are precluded.

     The model stresses the importance of monetary institutions, which deter-

mine the underlying rules of the game. :A purely discretionary environment

contrasts with regimes, such as a gold standard or a paper money constitution,

in which monetary growth and inflation are determined via choices ambng

alternative rules. The rule-of-law or equivalent commitments about future

government behavior are important for inflation, just as they are for other

areas that are influenced by possibly shifting public policies.,
                                —31-




    We are less comfortable about specifying frutiful approaches for

framing positive theories of monetary institutions.20 If we had retained

the optimality criterion that we utilized for analyzing day-to-day monetary

actions, and if we had assumed that the costs of implementing and enforcing

monetary rules were small, then discretionary monetary policy would not be

observed. Within the natural—rate setting of our model, a positive theory

might predict the selection of a rule (or its equivalent)-—and the establish-

ment of an accompanying enforcement apparatus--that would guarantee low and

relatively stable rates of inflation.   But, we have abstracted completely

from the evolution of economic theory and its place as a research and

development tool for designing policy institutions. Thus, we simply do not

address the source of technological change in the "production" of policy.

     Presumably, the substantial setup costs that are associated with erecting

monetary or other institutions mean that changes in regime will be observed only

infrequently. The relatively small experience with alternatives suggests--

unlike for the case of regular operations within a given regime--the potential

for substantial, persisting errors. Although we would be uncomfortable

attempting to forecast a systematic direction of error in future institutional

choices, we might be willing to label a particular past choice--such as the

movement away from the remnants of the gold standard and fixed exchange

rates--as a mistake.

     The distinction between institutional choice and operating decisions

within a given regime relates also to the economist's role as a policy

adviser. In our model the economist has no useful day-to-day advice to
                                 -32-




offer to the monetary authority.21 If monetary institutions were set optimally,

then the economist's counsel would also not enter at this level. The most

likely general role for policy advice consists of identifying and designing

improvements in present policy institutions. In the monetary area the

major issue concerns arrangements that are preferable replacements for

the present discretionary setup. It is important to identify mechanisms--

such as commodity standards and legal restrictions on the behavior of paper

money--that would effectively (and cheaply) preconunit the course of money

and prices. This topic appears to be the central issue in controlling

inflation.
                              Footnotes




     LThe model that we consider is sufficiently simple to allow for

unanimity about desirable governmental actions.

     2Many people respond with a willingness to view public policy as irrational.

Despite the obvious attractions of this viewpoint, it does leave one without

a theory of systematic governmental behavior.     An earlier attempted reconcilia-

tion with rationality (Barro, 1977, .p. 104) was based on public finance

consIderations associated with cyclical changes in the revenue obtained

frOm printing money. This avenue appears to be quantitatively insufficient

to explain the facts about countercyclical monetary response. However, the

revenue motive for money creation would be important in some extreme cases.

For example, see Hercowitz (1981) for an analysis of monetary behavior and

government spending during the German hyperinflation.

     3The prior expectation of inflation for period t       could   be distinguished

from the expectation that is conditioned on partial information about current

prices. This distinction arises in models, such s Lucas (1972, 1973)- and

Barro (1976), in which people operate in localized markets with incomplete

information about contemporaneous nominal aggregates. In this setting the

Phillips—curve slope coefficient, a, turns out to depend on the relative

variances for general and market-specific shocks.

     4                              .           .n <   n
                                                            The formulation implies
      The target unemployment rate is U =   kut        U.
also that 3U/aU < 1.     The last condition, which is important for some of

the conclusions, is more difficult to justify.

         the present setting the policymaker has no incentive to randomize

policy choices--therefore, the reaction function will end up being purely

 deterministic. Some uncontrollable random parts of monetary growth are

 considered later.
                                            -34-




        6Because there are many private agents, they neglect any effect of

their methods for formulating ir on the policyinaker's choice of


        7Note that no equilibrium exists if the policymaker gives no direct

weight to inflation--that is, if b = 0 holds. More generally, it is necessary

that the marginal cost of raising                  be positive at a point where ir = ire
                                                                                  t    t•

            =                                                                               The
                would     emerge if Z in equation (3) depended on (iTt -r)2.

result in equation (11) corresponds to Kydland and Prescott's "optimal" solution

(1977, p. 480). They contrast this outcome from policy rules with a "time-

consistent," but less desirable result, which corresponds to our equation (10)


        9Consider the more general case where               =              lit) and U =
                                                                Z(Ut_kLJ
                                                                                            -
U f(ir
   -        -
                1T).   The first-order condItion entails f' =         (9Z/alr)f[3Z/3(U kUfl.
                                                                      =     and Ut =            An
This expression will be evaluated in equilibrium at                                    U.
equilibrium will be found if aZ/a7r rises sufficiently with                    (as in the

quadratic case considered in the text) or if V declines sufficiently with

       (f'' = 0 was assumed in the example)             (This discussion ignores any cross-

effect of          on 3Z/3(Ut_kU).) The condition V' c 0 would tend to be

                              -         is likely to enter multiplicatively with the level
satisfied, because                lr)
of real cash balances in influencing U. (The product of (iT_1r) and (MIP)

determines the capital loss or gain on money holdings in commodity units that

is induced by surprises in the inflation rate.) Further, (M/P)t would be

declining in ir. In other words the reduction in Ut that is bought bya
                          e                                           e
                              is likely to diminish as            and i rise. If this
unit rise in (rt -
                         w)
 element is added to the model, it is no longer essential that inflation

 involve increasing marginal costs--32Z/BiT > 0.
                                      —35—




    '0Formally, changes in the parameters a, b, a, or k——which alter

       for all dates t   in   equation (lO)-—have no significance for the time

path of unemployment.


    UOne is tempted to say that setting n                  in equation (10) would

deliver Ut >
               U.   (As an analogue, a firm that ends up in equilibrium with

an ordinary rate of return would end up with below-normal rates of return

if it did not strive to maximize profits at all times.) However, the

choice of      c
                     is inconsistent with the prescribed form of the policy—

maker's objective.

     12This statement neglects the distinction between the expected

inflation rate and the nominal interest rate as the measure of the tax

rate on real cash balances.


     13Suppose that Rt =
                              litL(),   where L is the downward-sloping real

                                  =          +
money-demand function, and
                                      _Rt        f(n).   The equilibrium inflation

rate is then determined from the condition, L(lrt) =           f'   .   The level of real

balances--which equals            when           is held fixed--is equated to the

marginal cost of inflation,              =

            would be possible for unexpected inflation to arise, conditional

on the realization of some stochastic variables. For example, the govern-

ment might depreciate the real value of the public debt during wartime.

     13The result is not fully cooperative because of the underlying

externality that makes the natural unemployment rate "too high."

     lOThe reaction can be modified so that               =    applies     only for a

finite time period. However, a shorter "punishment interval" makes it

more difficult to induce the policymaker to opt for the cooperative result.
                                         -36-




         17The form of behavior described under the first option cannot arise

in equilibrium in the present model.            If this option were attractive for the

policymaker, private agents would anticipate this outcome. In that case

     = 0 would not be maintained. The non-cooperative solution,                =       and

     =         would then arise for all periods, including the first. However,

there will always exist some intermediate values of                 where 0        <


such that a cooperative solution based on             would be sustainable. Assuming

an infinite horizon for the problem (see below), a sufficiently high value

of        within this interval must make option two preferable to option one.

However, the admissàble range for            would depend on the realizations for

 n
U and other variables.

         18
              Some attempts to avoid this conclusion in analogous contexts have been

explored in Kreps and Wilson (1980) and Radner (1979), et. al.

         191f the desirability of precommitments on monetary growth and inflation

is accepted, there are numerous procedures within the present model that can

generate outcomes that are equivalent to those produced by a once-and-for-all

choice of rules. For example, discretion could be maintained, but the

parameters of the policymaker's preferences could be artificially manipulated in

order to generate anon-cooperative solution where               =   0.   This result follows if

the policyinaker gives infinite weight to inflation (b =            o), zero   weight to

unemployment (a =        0),   or regards the natural unemployment rate as optimal

(k =     1).     In the context of discretionary policy, outcomes may improve if

there is a divergence in preferences between the principal (society) and

its agent (the policymaker)
                                   —37-




     2rhe distinction between choices of institutions and selections of

policies within a given regime parallels Buchanan and Tullock's (1962)

dichotomy between decisions at the constitutional and operating levels

of government. Buchanan (1962) stresses the importance of the constitutional

perspective in designing a satisfactory monetary/inflation policy.
     21
          Perhaps this observation accounts for the Federal Reserve's attitude

toward the unsolicited advice that is provided to it by economists. The

Federal Reserve appears interested mostly in "efficient" operation within a

given policy regime--specifically, on what to do "right now." Although many

economists offer advice of this sort, there is little reason to believe that

these suggestions would improve on the Fed's period-by-period optimization.

More recently, much of economists' advice to the Fed has amounted to proposals

for altering the underlying "rules of the game." It is likely that the Federal

Reserve is powerless to utilize these types of constitutional-like suggestions.
                                    -38-

                                   References


Auernheimer, L..,   "The Honest Government's Guide to the Revenue from the

     Creation of MQney," Journal of Political Economy, 82, May/June 1974,

     598—606.

Bailey, M., "The Welfare Cost of Inflationary Finance," Journal of Political

     Economy, 64, April 1956, 93—110.

Barro, R.J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy,"

     Journal of Monetary Economics, 2, January 1976, 1-32.

___________     "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in   the United

     States,"   American Economic Review, 67, March 1977, 101—15.

____________    "Unanticipated   Money Growth and Economic Activity in the

     United States," in Money; Expectations, and Business Cycles, Academic

     Press, N.Y., 1981.

Buchanan, J., "Predictability: the Criterion of Monetary Constitutions,"

     in L. Yeager, ed., In Search of a Monetary Constitution, Cambridge,

     Mass., Harvard University Press, 1962.

Buchanan, J. and G. Tullock, The Calculus of Consent, Ann Arbor, University

     of Miciügan Press, lb2.

                                                          Journal of Monetary
Calvo, G., T0ptima1 Seigniorage from Money Creation,"

      Economics, 4, August 1978, 503—17.
                                                         Information Assumptions
 Friedman, B., "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme

      of 'Rational Expectations' Macromodels," Journal of Monetary Economics,

      5, January 1979, 23-42.
                                      -39-




Friedman, J.W., "A Non-cooperative Equilibrium for Supergames,"

     Review of Economic Studies, 38, January 1971, 861-74.

Gordon, D.B., "Dynamic Equilibria with Purposive Policymaking," unpublished,

     University of Chicago, November 1980.

Hercowitz, Z., "Money and the Dispersion of      Relative   Prices,"

    Journal of Political Economy, 89, April 1081, 328-56.

Kreps, D.M. and R. Wilson, "On the Chain-Store Paradox and Predation:

      Reputation for Toughness," unpublished, Stanford University, July 1980.

Kydland, F.E. and    E.C. Prescott, "Rules Rather than Discretion: the

     Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy, 85,

    June   1977,   473—91.

Lucas, R.E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,'t Journal of Economic

     Theory, 4 April 1972, 103-24.

__________ "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"

     American Economic Review, 63, June 1973, 326—34.

Radner, R., "Collusive Behavior in Noncooperative Epsilon-Equilibria of

     Oligopolies with Long but Finite Lives," unpublished, Bell Laboratories,

     August 1979.
 Sargent, T.J. and N. Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary

      Instrument, and    the   Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political

      Economy, 83, April 1975, 24l—S4.

 Taylor, J., "Monetary Policy During a Transition to Rational Expectations,"

     Journal of Political Economy, 83, October 1975, 1009—22.
