NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SECULAR PATTERNS IN CORPORATE FINANCE

Robert A. Taggart, Jr.

Working Paper No. 810

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
December 1981

J. L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern
University. The author is grateful to the National Bureau of
Economic Research for financial support and to Michael Burda and
Wing Woo for research assistance. The research reported here is
part of the NEER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics and project on the Changing Role of Debt and
Equity Finances in the United States, which is being financed by a
grant from the American Council of Life Insurance. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 11810
December 1981

Secular Patterns in Corporate Finance

AB STRACT

Trends in the financing of the corporate sector have been widely

discussed in both business and academic circles. It is frequently argued, for
example, that corporations' use of debt financing has increased dramatically

in recent years. These discussions have been hampered, however, by the lack
of a unified theoretical framework. In this paper, an attempt is made to
develop such a framework using existing corporate finance theory and some

extensions thereof. This theory is then used to interpret available data on
aggregate corporate financing patterns over the course of the twentieth
century.

It is found that corporations' use of debt has undeniably increased in

the post—World War II period. vertheless, the relative corporate debt level
was unusually low in the 1940's and current debt levels are not unprecedented

when viewed in the context of the entire century. The tax system, in
conjunction with inflation, has probably played an important role in the
postwar increases in corporate debt, but these factors appear insufficient to

explain longer—term trends. it is argued, then, that supplies of competing
securities, such as federal government bonds, as well as the secular
developnent of the financial intermediary system, may also be important
determinants of long—run corporate financing patterns.

Robert A. Taggart, Jr.
J,L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
Evanston, Illinois 60201
(312) 492—3562

SECULAR PATTERNS IN CORPORATE FINANCE

For many years patterns in the corporate sector's sources of

finance have been observed, discussed and sometimes decriedJ Yet
there is little consensus on how to interpret these patterns and even

some disagreement over what the patterns have been. Some studies
argue that corporate debt ratios exhibit a secular upward trend, for
example, while others assert that the debt—equity mix has shown remarkable stability.2
Apart from differences in measurement techniques, a major contributor to this lack of consensus has been the absence of a theoretical

framework. With few exceptions, the trends observed in previous
studies have been discussed without reference to any detailed model

of the determinants of corporate finance.3 This state of affairs
may seem odd in view of corporate capital structure's role as one of

the central theoretical questions in finance.4 However, a number of
these empirical studies were completed before theoretical work had progressed very far, and in many cases these studies discussion of
corporate financing patterns has been a by—product of some broader
concern, such as capital formation, tax policy or the evolution of the

financial system as a whole. More important, perhaps, most theoretical
work has been aimed at the individual firm and, until very recently,
little analysis has been explicitly devoted to the determinants of
corporate finance at the aggregate level.5
This paper attempts to improve upon the existing literature by the
first developing a detailed theory of capital structure for the corporate
sector as a whole and then using that theory as a guide in interpreting

—2—

empirical regularities. Existing theory is culled and extended with a
specific eye toward isolating those factors that should influence the
aggregate corporate financing mix over time.

The paper consists of three sections the first of which develops

the theory. The major aim of that theory is to identify the forces
affecting aggregate supplies and demands for corporate securities re—

lative to competing securities in the capital market. It is argued
that 'previous theoretical work has tended to rely on extreme assumptions

about supply curves, demand curves or both, and that these assumptions
may not be appropriate when the aim is to understand secular patterns

in corporate finance. The second section presents a variety of measures
of corporate financing activities. Observations from a number of previous studies are gathered and updated in order to present the broadest
possible perspective on capital structure trends from the beginning of

this century to the present. The third section offers some preliminary
explanations for these trends based on the theoretical considerations
of Section I.

To preview some of the major conclusions, it is found that there
has been an undeniable trend toward greater use of debt financing by

corporations in the post—World War II period. Nevertheless, the relative level of corporate debt was unusually low around the time of World
War II and current debt levels are not unprecedented when viewed in

the context of the twentieth century as a whole. The tax system, in
conjunction with inflation, has probably played an important role in
the postwar increases in corporate debt, but these factors appear insufficient to explain the trends over longer periods of time. In

particular, it is argued that supplies of competing securities, such
as federal government bonds, as well as the secular development of the
financial intermediary system, may also be important determinants of
long—run corporate financing patterns.

I. A Theory of the

Aggreate

Corporate Capital Structure

A. The Place of the Corporat- eccor It! the Overall Financial System

One contention of the ch. o be developed in this
sectibn is that the corporate sector's financing activities
should be viewed in the context of the other sectors of the

economy. Accordingly, the paragraphs that follow offer some
prefatory remarks on the corporate sector's place in the over-

all financial system. The aim of this discussion is to develop
a general framework for understanding the determinants of the

supply and demand for corporate securities. In Section LB.
some existing theoretical contributions are briefly surveyed
with an eye toward drawing out their implications for these
supply and demand curves, while in Section I.C. an attempt is
made to flesh out the theory and provide a more complete picture of how the supply and demand curves are conditioned by the
other sectors of the financial system.
Let us begin by considering a stylized three—sector
economy consisting of households, nonfinancial corporations and

financial institutions. If we consolidated the balance sheets
of the three sectors all financial assets would cancel, as

—4—

they have both issuers and holders, and we would be left
with just tangible assets on the left-hand side and household

net worth on the right. We could thus conclude that the economy's ultimate wealth is its tangible assets while the household sector is the ultimate wealthholder.
Nevertheless, this consolidation masks the role of the
financial system in reconciling the characteristics of the tan—

ible assets with households' planned consumption patterns.
That role emerges if we examine the separate balance sheets of
the three sectors, as shown in Figure 1.

Households accumulate assets because of discrepancies between their desired consumption plans and their patterns of

labor income. To some extent tangible assets, such as houses
and consumer durables, serve this purpose by producing streams

of services that households can consume directly and by act-

ing as inflation hedges. In other respects, however, tangible
assets may not be the ideal household savings vehicle.

Productive equipment, for instance, requires special expertise
to maximize the value of its return stren. Tangible assets are
rarely traded on organized markets and may not be easily convertible into cash. Moreover, their pattern of returns may not
coincide with households' desired consumption patterns.
Tangible assets may provide riskier return patterns,

for

example, than most households desire or may not yield sufficiently high payoffs under contingencies
to households, such as death or illness.

that are important

—5—

To help reconcile these desires by households with the
tangible asset characteristics, then, the economy develops a
financial structure, consisting of nonfinancial corporations,

securities markets and financial institutions. Corporations
specialize in holding and operating tangible assets and issue
claims against these assets in the form of debt and equity

securities. Households may prefer allocating some portion
of their wealth to such securities because they require less
management than tangibles, are more easily traded and can be
combined in varying proportions to transform and rearrange

the tangible assets' return streams. Even the degree of transformation possibilities inherent in corporate securities may
not be fully adequate to match households' desired consumption
patterns, however, and this creates a role for financial

institutions. Banks, insurance companies, pension funds and
mutual funds, for example, hold corporate securities and in
turn issue their own claims having different liquidity charac-

teristics and differentpatterns of return. Furthermore, some
of these institutions purchase household debt securities as
well, thus affording individuals further transformation opportunities on their own account.

Viewing the financial system from this perspective emphasizes the idea that corporate capital structure in the
aggregate is ultimately a matter households' demands for asset
characteristics on the one hand and the corporate sector's

—6—

financial transformation technology on the other. On the
demand side, households' desires for various asset characteristics will reflect such factors as their attitudes toward

risk, their expectations, their stage in the life cycle and

personal tax considerations. Moreover, the elasticities of
these demands depend on substitutability among assets, which

in turn depends on the degree of competition among corporations,
financial institutions and households themselves in performing

the desired transformations. The more highly developed the
financial intermediary system and the broader the range of
transformation opportunities possessed by households on their
own account, the less likely it is that corporate securities
will possess unique characteristics, and the more elastic the

demands for these securities will be. On the supply side,
the corporate sector's willingness to transform the return
streams from its real assets by issuing various combinations
of financial securities depends on the costs of doing so,
including transaction costs and tax considerations.
A theory of aggregate corporate capital structure, therefore,
should explain the interaction of both supply and demand factors
and should illuminate the ways in which the corporate sector
responds to changing household demands over time, in competition
with similar responses from financial institutuions and house-

holds themselves.6 In Section I.B., it will be argued that
previous analyses of corporate capital

structure have tended to

—7-.

make extreme assumptions about either the supply or demand

side of the market or both. Although such assumptions have
proved useful in isolating the role of such factors as taxes
and agency costs, they may not be appropriate if what one
wishes to understand is the unfolding of corporate capital
structure over time.

B.

Implications of Existing Theory for the Determinants of
Aggregate Corporate Capital Structure
Although much of previous theoretical work has examined
the financing decisions of individual firms, it nevertheless
contains implications for corporate finance in the aggregate.
The purpose of this section is to draw out those implications.
To provide a uniform framework, we will analyze the aggregate
supply and demand curves for corporate debt implied by a
number of previous contributions. Iii the diagrams that follow,
the aggregate amount of corporate debt, B, will be measured
along the horizontal axis, and since investment will be held
fixed, movements along this axis represent substitutions of

corporate debt for equity. On the vertical axis will be
measured the certainty equivalent yields on corporate debt,

r, and on corporate equity, r.7
Modigliani and Miller's (MM, 1958) analysis of corporate
capital structure is the logical place to begin, both because
it remains the most widely—cited paper on the topic, and because

—8—

it represents the furthest extreme in assumptions about the

elasticities of supply and demand for corporate debt. As
depicted in Figure 2, both elasticities are assumed to be

infinite. Supply is perfectly elastic because corporations
can costlessly transform their financing mixes from all—equity

to any degree of leverage. Thus they are willing to freely
substitute one form of financing for the other as long as

both have the same certainty—equivalent cost. But demand is
likewise perfectly elastic- because households can costlessly

perform the same transformations on their own account, and
thus they will be unwilling to accept any yield differential
between the two securities.

This configuration of supply and demand implies that
corporate capital structure is indeterminate not only at
the individual firm level but also at the level of the corporate sector as a whole, since corporate and household

financial transformation are perfectly substitutable.8 ile
this analysis emphasizes the important fact that corporations
face competition from other sectors in their financial transformation activities, however, it also doesn't tell us much
about factors that would cause the corporate financing mix to

change over time. As long as equilibrium in the capital
market were continuously maintained, such changes would be
largely random events.

Following MM's (1963) correction,which took the effect
of corporate taxes into account, a theory that gained

—9—

considerable support took the tradeoff between bankruptcy
costs and tax savings from the deductibility of interest to
be the primary determinant of corporate capital structure.9
Under this theory the demand for corporate debt is still
perfectly elastic, because investors are willing to freely
substitute debt for equity as long as their certainty—equivalent

yields are equal.1° The supply of debt is no longer perfectly
elastic however, Because of the tax—deductibility of interest,
corporations would be willing to pay a certainty—equivalent
yield on the first dollar of debt equal to (l/l_tc) times

the certainty—equivalent yield on equity, where t is the
corporate tax rate. As more debt is issued, the probability
of bankruptcy increases, and if bankruptcy imposes costs on
firms, the premium rate that they are willing to pay to issue

debt decreases. Thus the supply curve for corporate debt
is downward sloping, as deiicted in Figure 3. Equilibrium
is reached when the corporate sector has issued that amount of
debt which drives the certainty—equivalent yields on debt

and equity into equality. Furthermore, since bankruptcy costs
are firm—specific, the optimal capital structure is determinate at the individual firm level as well as at the aggregate
level.

According to this theory, the primary determinants of
changing patterns in corporate finance would be changes in
corporate tax rates and changing perceptions of bankruptcy

costs. As corporate tax rates increase, the supply curve for

—10—

corporate debt shifts upward, and the equilibrium amount of

debt increases. An unappealing implication, however, is that
if the corporate tax rate goes to zero, the supplycurve for
debt will slope downward from the point r on the vertical
axis and thus no corporate debt at all should be issued. This
is clearly contrary to observed corporate capital structures
in the U.S. prior to the imposition of the income tax in 1913.
Changes in the impact of bankruptcy costs would also shift

the supply curve for debt upward or downward. This might
occur if the efficiency with which bankruptcies are resolved
increases or decreases over time or even if the perceived
risk of bankruptcies changes over, say, the course of

the business

cycle.

The agency theory of Jensen and Meckling (1976) is dia—
grammatically similar to the tax savings —

bankruptcy

costs

theory, but some of its implications are different. Again
the demand curve for corporate debt is perfectly elastic at

the level r. Likewise the supply curve has its intercept
at a point above re, because, starting from all—equity financing,

the firm can reduce total agency costs associated with outside financing by substituting a dollar of debt for a dollar

of outside equity. Thus the firm would be willing to pay a
higher certainty equivalent yield on debt to reflect this

advantage. As more debt is issued, however, its ability to reduce agency costs at the margin declines and eventually turns

—11—

negative, so the supply curve is downward—sloping, as

depicted in Figure 4. The difference between this theory
and the previous one is that the curves would look like

this even in the absence of corporate taxes.11 The
primary determinants of changing patterns in corporate
capital structure would be changes in relative agency costs
of debt and equity.

The theory that contains perhaps the most implications
for the aggregate corporate capital structure, and indeed
the only one that is explicitly aimed at the capital structure of the corporate sector as a whole, is Miller's

(1977) "Debt and Taxes" model. Here, the supply curve is
horizontal since, apart from tax considerations, corporations can costlessly split their return streams into debt

and equity portions. Furthermore, because of the tax—deductibility of interest they are willing to pay a premium

yield (re/l_tc) to issue debt. Unlike the three theories
discussed above, however, personal taxes are considered,
and the demand curve is upward sloping, starting from
12
re.

This is because investors are arrayed in groups

subject to successively higher personal tax rates and because tax arbitrage restrictions make it costly for them to
mitigate the differing tax consequences of different
securities. Thus, since returns on corporate debt are taxed
more heavily at the personal level than returns on corporate
equity, investors in successively higher tax brackets must

—12—

be enticed with successively higher yields to buy these

bonds. As depicted in Figure 5, equilibrium occurs when
enough bonds have been issued to drive the corporate bond
rate up to r /l—t c
e

In contrast to the tax savings—bankruptcy cost theory
and the agency cost theory, however, corporate capital
structure is determinate only at the aggregate level, not at

the individual firm level. As in the original MM model,
corporations and households compete with one another to perform financial transformations, but here they do not all

compete on equal terms. Corporations that issue debt reap
tax savings at the rate t per dollar of interest, and thus
they have a comparative advantage in borrowing over those
investors with personal tax rates lower than t c.

It will

thus pay corporations to keep on borrowing until the marginal
shareholder is just indifferent between buying levered shares
and borrowing on his own account to buy unlevered shares.
This will occur when the marginal shareholder's tax rate is

just equal to t. Nevertheless, this comparative advantage
applies to the corporate sector as a whole, but not to any in-

dividual firm. One corporation's debt is as good as any
other's, and thus in equilibrium capital structure is of no

consequence at the firm level.

One appealing feature of Miller's model is that the
equilibrium condition, which may be written as
1 —

r

0

(l-t c

)

= o,

(1)

—13—

lends itself particulary well to comparative statics
exercises on the determinants of the aggregate amount of

corporate debt. The equilibrium condition itself can be
thought of as an implicit function, H(B, f) = 0, of the
optimal amount of corporate debt, B, and a variety of
exogenous factors, f, such as tax tates, the inflation rate

and supplies of competing securities. Implicit differentiation can then be used to determine the effect of changes
in these factors on the equilibrium quantity of corporate

debt. Because of their usefulness in interpreting the
capital structure trends described in Section II, it is
worthwhile at this point to work through the details of a
few of these exercises.

The effect of a change in the corporate tax rate, t,
for example, holding all other factors constant, would be

given by

(l-t) )/t
(lt))/B
-

*

=

c
—

L°
-

°

The denominator is negative, since an increase in D will

increase r relative to r. Thus the whole expression will
be positive if the numerator is positive. An increase in
t, holding all security supplies constant, decreases the

(2)

—14—

availability of tax—exempt income from shares, and this will

induce high—tax—bracket investors to bid down r relative to r.

Nevertheless, jf tc is approximately equal to 0.5, r/r would
have to rise by about twice its original magnitude for the
whole expression in (2) to be negative, and thus there is a

strong presumption that increase in t will be associated with
increases in corporate debt. This exercise is represented
diagrammatically in Figure 6. The increase in the corporate

tax rate from t to t

shifts the supply curve upward and

brings about a higher level of corporate debt, B

.

Notice,

however, that the increase in debt is dampened by the slope of
the demand curve: the steeper is that slope, or, equivalently,
the larger is the change in relative interest rates that is
necessary to induce investors to absorb new bond issues into
*
their portfolios, the smaller will be the change in B
If the increase in the corporate tax rate is accompanied by

an increase in personal tax rates, t, on the other hand, the
resulting change in corporate debt is given by
r

*

—
c

=

- (1-t c
r
-o

--)
) )/tc t dt..
I

+ -1Q-

r

o

t

c

(3)

-(l-t)_Q -

Since increases in t increase the value of tax—exempt income
to investors, r/r would be expected to increase with t and any

—15—

increase in B* would be smaller than in the previous case

where only t increased. Diagrammatically, as shown in
Figure 7, the increase in t rotates the demand curve upward
from its intercept so that its slope is everywhere increased.
If the increase in personal tax rates is of the same magnitude
as the increase in corporate tax rates, it is even possible
that the shifts in supply and demand will cancel one another out,

leavin interest rates on bonds higher, but the equilibrium
quantity of corporate debt roughly unchanged.13
*

Another exogenous factor affecting B is the inflation rate.
Suppose the expected annual inflation rate suddenly jumps

from zero to some positive amount, i. The nominal expected
yields on taxable and tax—exempt securities, r and r ,
n
on

which

were previously equal to the real yields, rr and ror, will now

be given by

(1 + r)(l + i) = 1 +

r

(4)

and

(l+ror )(l+j)1+r on
respectively.

(5)

,

*

The effect of inflation on B ,

starting

from an initial equilibrium in which there is no expected
inflation, is given by

—16—

(r(1-t

5T
*

(6)

)\/

r0

—

/

Using (4) and (5), this becomes

r r ) - r(1-t C )(1+r or

—r (l—t )(1 +
c
o
*

(r) 2

-

o

)

____

_________ ,

(7)

'r(l—t

r

0

and using the equilibrium condition, r(l—t C)

= r0

14

gives

c /r o

t

*

> 0.

______________

—

(8)

fr(l—t C

r

0

Diagrammatically, as shown in Figure 8, the onset of in-

flation shifts the supply curve upward from or
r /1—t
c to

ron/1—t c, an upward shift of

r

on

r or

—

1—t

=

i(1+r or )
1—t

c

c

(9)

—17—

The demand curve also makes a parallel upward shift from

ror to r, a difference of i(1+r )J5

Thus the supply

curve shifts up by more than the demand curve resulting in
an increase in B

*16

In the preceding three cases, shifts in the amount of
corporate debt outstanding have been ultimately tax—induced.
Even in the case of inflation, it is not some sort of
T1debtor—creditor" hypothesis17 that explains the increase in

corporate debt, but rather the interaction between inflation

and taxes. In effect, inflation—adjusted interest rates
allow some of the real principal on corporate debt to be deducted for tax purposes, and this increases the tax advantage
to debt.

18

An additional feature of MillerTs model is that exogenous
changes in the supplies of other securities will also induce
*

changes in B .

An increase in the supply of tax—exempt bonds,

B, for example, will result in the following change in
corporate debt:

r(l-t )
—

r

c

/

/Bo
(10)

(r(l-t)
C1 /B
r

Since an increase in B increases r relative to r, expression
0
0
(10) will be positive. From a personal tax standpoint, tax—

—18—

exempt bonds are substitutes for equity in Millerts model,
and thus an increase in the supply of tax—exempts encourages
corporations to shift their financing mix more toward debt.

An increase in the supply of (taxable) federal government
*
bonds,G,on the other hand, has the opposite effect on B

*
-

-

r(l-t )\
c
r

ir(l—t

____c
\ r

(11)

<

)

/

Again, from a personal tax standpoint, taxable government bonds
are a corporate debt—substitute rather than an equity—substitute,
and an increase in the supply of debt—substitutes induces corporations to shift their financing mix more toward equity.

These last two exercises emphasize the fact that the de-

mand curve for corporate debt plays a special role in Millerts

model. In the three other models discussed above, this demand
curve is perfectly elastic, and thus investors are willing
to freely substitute corporate debt for equity securities as long

as their certainty—equivalent yields are equal.

In effect,

perfect elasticity stems from the perfect substitutes for corporate securities that can be created either on investors' own
accounts or through financial intermediaries acting on their

behalf. As long as perfectly elastic demands prevail, exogenous

changes in the suppliesof noncorporate securities will affect

—19—

neither relative yields nor corporate financing decisions.
In MillerTs model, by contrast, differing tax treatment implies that different types of securities are imperfect
substitutes and that the terms on which investors are willing
to substitute one type of security for another differ across

investors. This implies that exogenous changes in supplies of
other securities will cause changes in relative yields and
will in turn induce changes in the corporate financing mix.
Taken together, the four theories reviewed in this section
yield a number of possible determinants of changing patterns in

the aggregate corporate capital structure. These include
changes in corporate and personal tax rates and in the expected
inflation rate, shifts in the perceived agency and bankruptcy
costs associated with corporate securities, and exogenous

changes in the supplies of noncorporate securities. In two
respects, however, the picture seems incomplete.
First, these determinants of corporate financing patterns

rely heavily on tax considerations. Apart from the tax rates
themselves, the effect of inflation depends on its interaction
with the tax system, and the effect of noncorporate security
supplies rests on the fact that the tax system renders security

demands less than perfectly elastic. While these tax—related
determinants may have been important in recent years, they are
incapable of explaining corporate financing patterns in the pre—

1913 era. In the absence of taxes, we are left with only agency
dosts to explain these patterns, and while agency costs may be

—20--

an important determinant of cross—sectional variation in
corporate capital structures, it is hard to imagine that
these costs have shifted enough over time to cause major
changes in the corporate financing mix.19
Second, all of the four theories reviewed above rely
on extreme assumptions about the supply curve for corporate

debt, the demand curve, or both. In the Modigliani—Miller,
tax savings —

bankruptcy costs, and agency cost models, the

demand curve is perfectly elastic, while in the Modigliani—
Miller and Miller models, the supply curve is perfectly

elastic. This perfect elasticity implies that substitution
of debt for equity securities is costless either on the part
of corporations (perfectly elastic supply) or individual
investors (perfectly elastic demand).

On the demand side, at least, perfect elasticity is in-

dicative of a well—developed capital market: that is one in
which trading is competitive, transaction costs are low,
investors are not subject to trading restrictions, and a full
20

range of securities is available.

While this vision of a

well—developed capital market has proved to be a highly useful
abstraction, however, it may be more appropriate when applied
to short periods than to longer historical eras.

Over long

periods, economic forces would work toward making the capital
market more perfect and more complete, and if one is interested
in corporate financing trends over such periods, one is then

—21—

interested in understanding what role the corporate sector
has played in that process of capital market development.21
As argued in Section l.A., a theory of the aggregate corporate
capital structure should illuminate the interaction between the
corporate sector and the other sectors of the economy as they

respond to investors' demands for securities. Although perfectly
elastic demands might emerge as a limiting case toward which
forces tend over time, the theory seems incomplete if it does
not explain the evolving role of corporate finance as the capital
market develops.

C. Further Development of the Demand Side of Aggregate Capital
Structure Theory
The effect of the security suoplies and return—stream
transformation

afforded by other sectors of the

economy will manifest itself primarily in the shapes and

positions of the demand curves for corporate securities. A
logical place to extend existing capital structure theories,

then, is to attempt a richer development of the demand side.

As we have seen above, demands for corporate securities are
perfectly elastic in a complete and frictionless capital market.
In Miller's (1977) model, on the other hand, the tax system
and concomitant tax arbitrage restrictions on investors'

portfolio choices cause the demand curve for corporate debt

to be upward—sloping. Since these restrictions represent a

—22—

kind of transaction cost, a natural extension of Millers model
would be to explore the ways in which other types of transaction
costs would lead to upward—sloping demand curves.

In general, the presence of transaction costs implies that
return streams from corporate securities cannot be costlessly
transformed by individuals or financial intermediaries.

To

take an extreme case for illustrative purposes, let us suppose
that return stream transformation (combining shareholdings with
personal borrowing or lending, for example) is prohibitively

costly at the individual investor level. Ignore for the time
being the possible existence of financial intermediaries and
assume that corporations start out relying solely on equity

financing. Individuals, i, have initial endowments of cash,
as well as initial fractional shareholdings, c, in the
aggregate market value of corporate equity, V. There is no

second—period endowment, so individuals must make a consumption—

Li

saving decision that maximizes the expected utility, E (U ),

of first and second—period consumption, C1 and C2.

As

noted above, however, the only available savings vehicle is
holdings of corporate shares.

Firms in the aggregate are assumed to be subject to the
same uncertainty, and thus the shares of one firm are viewed

as perfect substitutes for those of any other firm. We will
ignore distinctions among firms, then, and simply think of the
corporate sector in the aggregate.

The aggregate net income

—23—

of firms in the second period is ®X, where ® is a random
variable. In general, individuals may differ in their views

of the distribution of C and their subjective probability
density functions will be denoted by f1(®).

A representative individual's consumption—saving problem
is

ma fu'(c , c)f1(C)d®,

(12)

c = y]

(13)

where

+ (1 - ai)V

and

=

(14)

The first order condition is

=

XE1(U

where

E1(UC) =
and

I

®)

- vE1(u)

=

0,

(15)

E1(U) =

(BU1/C)

f1(®)d®

Using the fact that cov(AB) — E(AB) —E(A)E(B) , where A and B
are any two random variables, (15) may be written as

=

(E1(

E1(O)

E1(U)

+

cov(U

(16)

E1(U))

That is, each individual buys or sells shares until his personal

valuation of corporate equity is exactly equal to the market's
valuatior., V.

As indicated by the right—hand side of (16), however,
the individual's personal valuation has two components, which

need not be equal separately for all individuals. If we
assume away differences in expectations for the moment and
let E1(e) = 1 for all individuals, the first component
(hereafter, tildes will be dropped for
convenience), can be thought of as a personal discount 'factor

for certain prospects and the second component can be thought

of as a personal risk—adjustment factor. From (16), those
investors with higher certainty discount factors (that is,
those who place a higher value on certain future consumption)

must have correspondingly larger (i.e., more negative) risk—
adjustment factors.22

If we aggregate by summing (16), weighted by individual
shareholdings, over all individuals, the result is

—25--

=V =

i

X(1

E(U1)
2

+

i E(U)

cov(U®)

i

•2

)

(17)

E(U)

and the cost of equity financing to the corporate sector
may
be expressed as

(18)

V

E(U)

i

E(U)

.

+
I

cov(JJ )
E(U)

That is, the cost of equity is determined by weighted averages
of investors' certainty discount factors and risk—adjustment

factors. Furthermore, since the second term in the denominator
of (18) can be thought of as the overall market risk—adjustment

factor, the market certainty—equivalent cost of equity, r, is
given by

r

1

=

(19)

e

:OL

.E(tJ)

E(U)

If

firms

were now to begin substituting some debt financing

for equity,23 those investors with highest certainty discount

factors (that is, those placing the highest personal value on

this debt), would be the first to buy it. Since these investors

—26--

would have higher—than—average certainty discount factors
relative to the market as a whole, (19) indicates that
firms could sell at least an initial increment of debt at a

lower certainty—equivalent cost than that on equity. In
effect, the corporate sector is able to gain by splitting
off part of its total return stream, packaging this part in
the form of riskless securities and selling them to the most
risk—averse segment of the investing population.
As more corporate debt were sold, it would be purchased by
investors requiring progressively higher certainty—equivalent

yields. Thus we would have an upward sloping demand curve
for corporate debt, just as in Miller (1977). In Miller's model,
the upward slope is attributable to tax arbitrage restrictions,
whereas here it is attributable to restrictions on individuals
creating their own bonds, so in both cases demand is less than
pefectly elastic because investors find it costly to transform
corporate return streams on their own account.

The supply curve,

on the other hand, would be perfectly elastic at r, since
transformation by firms is costless and thus firms would be
willing to freely substitute debt for equity financing as long
as their certainty—equivalent yields were the same. The resulting equilibrium is depicted in Figure 9, with corporations
*

issuing

that amount of debt, B ,

sufficient

to drive the cost

of debt, r, into equality with re.

As in Miller's model, the aggregate amount of corporate debt
is determinate, but in equilibrium the capital structure decision

—27—

is irrelevant at the individual firm level. Because of
trading restrictions on investors, there is a demand for
transformation services on the part of the corporate sector,
and firms compete with one another to supply these services.
Since all firms compete on equal terms, however, profits
from financial transformation are squeezed out, and the most
risk—averse investors reap a "bond—holders' surplus," just as
those investors in the lowest tax brackets do in Miller's
model.

Differences in investor expectations would play a similar
role to differences in their attitudes toward risk in this

model. If we held risk—adjustment factors constant across
all investors in equation (16) but allowed expectations to
vary (as represented by differences in E'(®)), those investors

who were most optimistic about the corporate sector's prospects
(i.e., who had higher values of E1(®)) would have lower certainty

discount factors. The most pessimistic investors, conversely,
would be willing to accept the lowest return on corporate debt.
The demand curve for corporate debt would thus be upward—
sloping as before, and equilibrium would be reached when enough
debt had been issued so that the marginal bondholder were exactly
as optimistic about firm's prospects as the marginal shareholder.
In summary, then, it is investor characteristics such as

risk—aversion and expectations, that drive the equilibrium

corporate financing mix in this model. Loosely speaking, the

—28—

larger is the segment of the investing population exhibiting
high degrees of risk aversion and pessimistic expectations,
the greater will be the amount of corporate debt.24 In models
with perfectly elastic demands for corporate securities,

differences in these investor characteristics are capable of
being exploited through financial transformations elsewhere
in the economy, and hence they play no role in the determination

of corporate capital structure. In the model presented in this
section, by contrast, the sole purpose of issuing a mix of corporate securities is to exploit those differences.

The transaction costs that impart positive slope to the demand curve in this model are, of course, unrealistically severe.
In practice, one would expect firms to face competition in
their efforts to overcome transaction costs through financial

transformation. Overcoming such costs and helping to satisfy
divergent investor demands, in fact, is one of the primary rationales given for the existence of financial intermediaries.
In general, then, not only the corporate sector but also
the financial intermediary and household sectors will have access

to financial transformation technologies. To the extent that
the corporate sector's technology exhibits cost advantages over
those of other sectors, the corporate sector will tailor its

financing mix to exploit these advantages. In this case, shifts
in such investor characteristics as expectations and attitudes
toward risk will be important determinants of changing patterns

—29—

in corporate finance. To the extent that financial intermediaries or investors themselves can transform return streams at relatively low cost, on the other hand, demand curves for corporate securities will be highly elastic, and divergent investor

characteristics will have little role in determining the cor-

porate sector's financing mix. Moreover, it might be reasonable
to suppose that the progression from the first case to the second
would bear some relationship to the development of the capital

market over time. In earlier times, when investors faced a
less plentiful array of financial transformation opportunities,
one would expect the intermediation role of corporate finance to

be relatively important. As the capital market develops, however,
and as investors come to rely less on corporations for financial
transformation, this role would be expected to diminish.
To draw together some of the threads of Section I as a

whole, the most general representation of the supply and demand
for corporate debt would be one in which both curves exhibited

less than perfect elasticity. This is depicted in Figure 10.25
The shape of the supply curve will reflect such aspects of the
corporate sector's transformation technology as bankruptcy
costs, agency costs and the costs of issuing and servicing

securities. The less important are these costs, the more elastic
the supply curve will be. Moreover, the level of the supply
curve will be determined by such factors as corporate taxes and
-

the

expected inflation rate as well as the general level of

—30—

real interest rates in the economy. The shape of the demand
curve reflects the transformation technology available to
investos, either on their own

account

or through financial

intermediaries. The lower the costs of using this technology
the more elastic the demand curve will be. Conversely, the
higher the costs associated with this technology the less
willing investors will be to freely substitute one type of

corporate security for another. In this case investor expectations and attitudes toward risk, personal tax considerations,
and supplies of competing securities (government bonds) will
all affect the shape and position of the demand curve for corporate bonds.

This general representation of the supply and demand for
corporate securities contains each of the theories revied in
Section 1.13. as a special case. It has the advantages that is
does not rely solely on tax considerations to explain the
corporate sector's financing patterns and that it is capable of
taking into account the evolving role of the corporate sector in

the financial system as a whole. Trends in the major determinants of corporate finance implied by the theory will be compared
with the actual patterns in corporate financing over the course
of the twentieth century to see which factors may have been

most important. First, however, it is necessary to establish what
those financing patterns have been.

—31—

II. Measurement of Capital Structure Trends
Identification of the secular trends in corporate financing

is hampered by a variety of measurement problems. Comparable data
series often are not available over long periods of time. Accounting
conventions are subject to change, and fluctuations in economic
conditions, especially the rate of inflation, may destroy the corn—

parability of accounting numbers between periods. Market value
numbers may be used in their stead, but these must be estimated with
some error, and it is unclear to what extent market values reflect
the actual financing decisions of corporations and to what extent
they reflect other exogenous factors.

The approach taken here will be to present a variety of different
measures of corporate financing trends and to then try to infer the

common patterns that emerge. Four different types of data have been
used in previous studies of corporate financing and all four will be

presented sequentially in the sections that follow. These include
book value, market value, replacement cost and flow—of—funds data.
Each type of measurement has its problems and advantages, and these
will be discussed as the data are presented.
..

Book Value Balance Sheet DatA
Perhaps the simplest approach to assessing corporate finan-

cing patterns is to examine changes in the composition of the

liability side of the corporate balance sheet. This was the
approach adopted by Miller (1963), for example, in a study

undertaken for the Commission on Money and Credit. The Internal Revenue Service compiles balance sheet data for both

—32—

U.S. corporations in the aggregate and for U.S. manufacturing
corporations, and Miller's study examined these data for the

period 1926—56. Using data through 1975, Table 1 presents a
variety of balance sheet ratios from this source.

As Miller pointed out in his study, the ratios of long—
term debt to total long—term capital remain impressively stable

through the mid—1950's. They fluctuate somewhat, but virtually
no trend is evident. The ratios of total debt (including liabilities of all kinds) to total assets show some tendency to
rise in the late 1930's and early l9'0's but exhibit no trend,

thereafter until at least the late '50's.26 The use of preferred
stock, on the other hand, exhibits a steady secular decline
through the early 1960's.27

Data that was not available to Miller at the time of his
study, however, suggest that debt ratios have tended to drift

steadily upward since the late 1950's. This may indicate a
fundamental change in corporate financial policy, although Miller
(1977) has warned that at least some of this apparent trend may be

spurious. Liberalized depreciation allowance since the early
1960's, for example, would tend to depress reported equity values

and would automatically tend to increase debt ratios. By the same
token,inflation in the 1960's and 1970's may have caused reported
asset values to be understated, thus giving a misleading impression
of the size of corporate debt relative to assets.28
If capital markets are efficient, investors should see
through these accounting changes and should also adjust for the

—33—

effects of inflation.29 In an attempt to circumvent these
problems, then, we turn next to balance sheet ratios in market
value terms.

B. Market Value Balance Sheet Data
Since market value data are not available for the nonfinancial corporate sector as a whole, they must be estimated.

A

variety of estimates using somewhat different techniques is presented in Table 2.

The most common approach is to take dividend and interest
payments reported by corporations and to capitalize these at
appropriate rates to obtain estimates of the market values of

equity and debt respectively. This approach has been followed by
Holland and Myers (1979), using the dividend yield on the Standard
and Poor's Composite Index and Moody's Baa corporate bond rate

as capitalization rates. Their estimates, updated through 1979,
are shown in column (1) of Table 2. Like the accounting numbers
in Table 1, these estimates suggest that there has been a considerable increase in corporate debt ratios since the late l950's.

A major portion of this increase has apparently occuned during

the decade of the '70's. The increase is not nearly as smooth as
the accounting numbers suggest, however, as dips occur in the
early and late l960's and again in the early and late '70's.
Furthermore, although the l930's and '40's might hardly be
characterized as a normal period the estimates at least suggest
that the debt ratios occurring in the 1970's are by no means
unprecedented.

—34—

The estimates in columns 2 and 3 are from von Furstenberg

(1977) and they differ in two respects. First, dividend payments for common and preferred stock have been separated and

capitalized at different rates. Second, von Furstenberg
argued that the weighted average rating of corporate bonds
outstanding has tended to be A or slightly better. He thus capitalized interest payments using the A—rated bond yield and also
attempted to take into account the maturity composition of cor-

porate debt. His estimates give consistently higher values for
corporate debt ratios than those of Holland and Myers, partly
because of the lower capitalization rate for corporate debt and
partly because the higher dividend yield on preferred stock gives
a lower estimate for the combined market value of common and

preferred stock. Nevertheless, the two series move in unison
and von FurstenbergtS estimates suggest a considerable rise in
corporate debt ratios since the mid—1950's and the same higher

plateau in the 1970's. The estimates also reveal •that the relative value of preferred stock has remained low throughout and
has generally tended to decline, with the exception of a modest

comeback in the mid—1970's.

A third approach has been followed by Gordon and Malkiel
(1981), who use the sample of nonfinancial corporations for which
data is reported on the Standard and Poor's Compustat Tapes.
Market values of common equity can be observed directly for these

companies. Market values of debt and preferred stock have been

—35—

estimated using methods similar to von Furstenbergs but with
the estimates derived from bond and preferred stock prices

sampled at the two—digit industry level. Again, the estimated
debt ratios, shown in column 4 of Table 2, move in parallel
with the other two series, with their absolute magnitudes

generally falling between the other two. The estimates suggest
the same increase in debt ratios, particularly since the late

1950's. Since both the von Furstenberg and the Gordon and
Malkiel estimates range over a shorter period than those of
Holland and Myers, however, they may give the impression that
current debt ratios are higher by historical standards than is

rlly the case.
The last approach to estimating market values, followed
by Ciccolo (1981), uses observed market values for all securities

for samples of roughly fifty U.S. manufacturing firms. Ciccolo
has reported market value balance sheet ratios for the aggregate
of his sample firms for selected years, and these are shown in

the last two columns of Table 2. The debt ratios are generally
much lower than those in the other series and do not move in
parallel with the Holland and Myers estimates for the early

years. The fact that the debt ratios are so much lower for all
years suggests that the sample may not be representative of the

nonfinancial corporate sector as a whole. Nevertheless, Ciccolo's
figures reveal the same increase in debt ratios since the 1960's

that the other series do. Moreover, the preferred stock figures

36—

confirm the secular decline in the importance of preferred
stock that appears in the accounting data of Table 1.

C. Replacement Cost Data
Another ratio that has been used in previous studies to
measure corporate leverage is that of the market value of

debt to the replacement value of total assets. On theoretical
grounds, this ratio may be a better measure than those in
Table 2 of how much debt firms have relative to their debt

capacity0 Furthermore, measuring assets at replacement cost
alleviates the overstatement in book value ratios during inflationary periods that results from the understatement of

corporate assets. In any case, estimates of the ratio of the
market value of debt to the replacement value of assets are
available over a long period.

Two series of these ratios are available. One is from
von Furstenberg's (1977) study and runs annually from 1952
to 1976, while the other is from Goldsmith's (1963) study of

national balance sheets. Goldsmith's estimates are available
for selected years from 1900 to 1945 and annually from 1945 to

1958. The two series are shown in Table 3. The figures from
Goldsmith suggest that nonfinancial corporations' use of debt
financing relative to the replacement value of their assets
was markedly lower in the decade following World War II than

it had been earlier in the century. The figures from von
Furstenberg indicate that, after remaining essentially flat for

—37—

much of the 1950's, corporate debt ratios began a gradual
but steady rise that carried through the late 1970's.

It can be seen from t1 years of overlap in the 1950's
that there are some discrepancies between the two series.
The ratios derived from Goldsmith's data, for example, are con-

sistently somewhat lower than von Furstenberg's.31 Moreover,

Goldsmith's series itself may not give comparable da between
pre—war and postwar periods.

Balance sheets from the pre—war

period are from Goldsmith's A Study of Saving in the United
States (1958) while the annual data from 1945 to 1958 are from
his Studies in the National Balance Sheet of the United States

(1963). Some changes in sectoral definitions and estimation
methods occurred between these two studies, and the only year
of overlap, 1945, indicates that these changes may have caused
some differences in the debt ratios.

Nevertheless, some tentative conclusions can be drawn.
Between 1952 and 1958, Goldsmith's and von Furstenberg's series
move quite closely together, and it may be that they would exhibit

similar trends throughout the whole period 1900—1978. If so, it
appears that even though corporate debt ratios increased substantially in the postwar period, particularly from the mid 1950's
to the mid 1960's, the debt ratios of recent years are not un-

usual by historical standards. Even if it is argued on the basis
of the two 1945 estimates that the pre—war figures are overstated
by a third, the debt ratios of the 1960's and 1970's would still

—38—

represent a return to roughly the levels that prevailed over

the pre—war period. The replacement value data, then, provides
some further support for the impression gained from market value

data that, while debt ratio have increased in recent decades,
after a relatively flat period in the 1940's and '50's, they are
nevertheless not unusual by prewar standards.

ID.

Flow of Funds Data
The final method for measuring corporate financing patterns
makes use of flows of funds over periods of time as opposed to

stocks at particular dates. While this method does not take into
account valuation changes, as market value and replacement value
estimates do, it may nevertheless come closest to recording the

actual decisions made by corporations. Furthermore, since capital consumption allowances are included as a component of in—

ternalequity financing, this method is not subject to Miller's
criticisms about understatement of equity financing in the wake
of changes in depreciation accounting.

Between Goldsmith's Study of Saving data, which run from
1900—45, and the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Accounts which
cover the period 1946 to the present, it is possible to put together a fairly lengthy record of corporate financing flows.

The data are shown in Table 4. Since the emphasis of this
paper is on secular patterns in corporate finance, the flows
are divided into periods covering roughly a decade each.

—39—

The same data have previously been examined by Kuznets

(1961), Sametz (1964) and Friedman (1980). Kuznets and
Sametz were limited to the period 1900 through the late 1950's.
Both were struck by the sharp decline in the use of stock
issues as a financing source and both argued that internal funds,
disregarding the aberrant years of the Depression and World War II,
had shown at least a modest upward trend relative to other finan-

cing sources. Both authors also pointed out that, although
short—term liabilities fluctirated considerably, they generally

increased relative to both total financing sources and total debt

through the late 1950's. Finally, Sametz emphasized that despite trends in internal funds and external equity and in short—
term and long—term debt, the use of total debt financing relative to total equity financing appeared to have remained roughly
constant over long periods of time.

Friedman, confining his attention to the postwar period,
pointed Out that internal funds first increased relative to

total sources in the 19501$ and then decreased in the '60's
and '70's. He also emphasized the continued decline in stock
issues, an increased use of debt, and in the late '60's and '70's
an increase in the use of short—term debt.

Looking at the whole period, as shown in the data in
Table 4, the trends discussed by all three authors are evident,
and at the same time some longer—run trends come into sharper

focus. It is clear, for example, that the use of debt financing has increased in the 1960's and 1970's after recovering in

—40—

the years following World War II to pre—Depression levels.

Use of long term debt, however, is by no means unusual, even
after steady postwar increases, relative to the levels pre--

vailing in the first decade of the century and in the 1920's.
The increased use of debt, then, seems largely attributable

to an increase in short—term liabilities. It should also be
noted that short—term liabilities have shown considerable
fluctuations over time, with substantial increases occurring
in the 1913—22 period and again during the World War II years.
Although it cannot be denied that short—term liabilities have
been much higher in the postwar period than in the pre—war
years, it is not clear if the recent surge represents a temporary phenomenon or the continuation of a trend.
On the equity side, the greatly diminished use of stock

issues appears to be a long—term trend. Stock issues staged a
modest comeback in the 1970's, compared with the 1960's, but

they remain very low by pre—war standards. As has been widely
noted, fnternally generated funds have also declined relative

to total sources during the postwar period. The data indicate,
however, that the depressed levels of internal funds experienced
in the 1970's are not unusually low relative to the levels of

the first decade of the century and the 1920's. It might be
inferred, instead, that the use of internal funds was unusually
high during the period 1930—1960 and that the past two decades
have witnessed a return to roughly the levels experienced during
the pre—Depression era.

—41—

E. Common Trends
Viewing the different measures of corporate financing
patterns simultaneously, some common threads appear .

First,

the use of debt financing has increased considerably in the

postwar period, particularly in the 1960's and '70's. This
trend emerges regardless of the method of measurement employed.
There is considerably more doubt, however, as to whether current
debt levels are unusually high relative to those of the pre-

war period. The accounting—based data of Tables 1 and 4
suggest that they are, but the measures that make some attempt
to correct for valuation changes, as shown in Tables 2 and 3,

indicate that this may not be true. At the very least, the
trend in corporate debt ratios has not been unindirectional.
Rather, these ratios appear to have been somewhat low in the 1920's

and especially in the years surrounding World War II. Thus the
postwar surge in corporate debt does not appear to be as dramatic

when viewed in the light of the whole century's experience as
it does when the postwar period is considered in isolation.
Second, some changes have occurred within the debt and equity

components of corporate finance. Although it is traceable only
in the sources and uses of funds data, there appears to be
little doubt that short—term liabilities have increased in im-

portance over time. Again, however, the trend is not unidirec-

tional. Within the equity component, there is no doubt that
issues of both preferred and common stock have declined considerably in relative importance. Internally generated equity

-42-

on the other hand is currently low relative to the previous few
decades, but whether it is unusually low when a longer—run view is
taken is far less clear.

III. Interpretation of Capital Structure Trends
Having reviewed the secular patterns in various measures of cor-

porate financing activity, the remaining step is to interpret these
patterns in the light of the theory developed in Section I. This
interpretation will be drawii from a comparison of the trends in

corporate capital structure's determinants, as suggested by the theory,

with the capital structure trends themselves. The primary determinants that can be readily traced are corporate and personal tax
rates, the rate of inflation, the relative supplies of substitutes
for corporate securities, and the extent of financial intermediation

in the economy. These will be examined in turn in the paragraphs
that follow.

This paper should be regarded as a preliminary attempt to link
theory and evidence, and this secti9h does not contain a rigorous

empirical test of the theory. It is hoped, in fact, that the empirical regularities discussed here will stimulate further refinement
of an aggregate corporate capital structure theory.

Nevertheless,

existing theories are assessed in terms of their ability to explain
these regularities.

A. Corporate and Personal Tax Rates
As was seen in Section I, tax considerations are an important
element of capital structure determination in both the tax

—43—

savings—bankruptcy costs and Miller (1977) models. They
would also play a role, though not necessarily the preeminent
one, in the more general supply—and—demand model with which
Section I concluded.

Movements in marginal corporate and personal tax rates

from 1913 to the present are shown in Table 5. Personal tax
rates for those investors in the lowest and highest marginal
brackets are shown in columns (1) and (2), respectively, while
the corporate tax rate is shown in column (3).

The implications of these rates for corporate financing
decisions may perhaps be drawn mcre sharply if we compute what

Grier and Strebel (1980) have referred to as the "net debt
incentive tax ratios," 5, for investors in the lowest and

highest tax brackets. This ratio is defined as

1—t
(20)

pB

where tc is the corporate tax rate and tB is the personal
tax rate on ordinary income.33 Columns (4) and (5) of Table
5 give time series for L' the debt incentive tax ratio for
investors in lowest tax bracket, and cSH, the ratio for

investors in the highest bracket, respectively.
Expression (20) indicates that

will be positive for

investors in tax brackets lower than t and negative for
C

investors in tax brackets higher than t. In effect, low tax—

—44—

bracket investors will prefer to borrow through corporations
so as to maximize the tax advantage of debt, and conversely,

high tax—bracket investors will prefer to borrow on their own

account.34 Looking at values of

for investors in the

lowest and highest tax brackets, then, gives some idea of the
strength of the demand for corporate leverage from low tax—
bracket investors and of the aversion to corporate leverage on
the part of high tax—bracket investors.

35

Inferences must be

limited, of course, without further knowledge of the distribution of wealth generally and shareholdings in particular
among investors in different tax brackets. Nevertheless, one
would expect that if

values tend to increase over time for

both high and low tax—bracket investors, the demand for cor-

porate leverage would also increase. In addition, during times
when S values are small, even for low tax—bracket investors,
one would expect that any tax advantage to corporate debt would
be more easily offset by such factors as bankruptcy and agency
costs.

Turning to the values of

in Table 5, the tax code

apparently gave little or no incentive for corporate leverage

in the early years of its existence. Until the early 1920's,
even investors in the lowest tax brackets had little incentive,
purely from a tax standpoint, to hold shares in levered firms,
while high tax—bracket investors often incurred a substantial

tax disadvantage from corporate leverage. During the 1920's
this tax disadvantage for high tax—bracket investors grew much

.45...

smaller, but at the same time the tax advantage for low tax—

bracket investors remained small. It was not until the 1940's,
when corporate tax rates rose dramatically, that the (5 values

grew very much for low tax bracket investors. From 1940 to
1954, these (5 values for low tax—bracket investors approximately

doubled, whereafter they have remained essentially unchanged to

thepresent. Since top—bracket personal tax rates were very
high in the 1940's and l950's, the (5 values for high—bracket

investors were also very negative during this period. These (5
values have become less negative in the 1960's and 1970's.
Overall, then, it can be inferred that the tax system should
have given rise to a demand for corporate leverage on the part

of at least a segment of the investing population. This demand
should have shown particular growth, moreover, between the

1920's and the early 1950's. In addition, the less negative
values of

from the mid—1960's to the present may indicate

an atmosphere more conducive to corporate debt in recent years.
Comparing these trends with those discussed in Section II,
however, it is apparent that tax considerations are not the sole

determinant of patterns in corporate sector financing. Although
the values of

were small iuunediately following the advent

of the income tax system, they roughly doubled in the 1920's,

again in the 1930's and again in the 1940's. Despite the
apparent increase in the demand for corporate leverage, however,
the tables in Section 2 indicate that corporate debt usage
fell for at least the first two decades following 1913 and that

—46—

it remained low at least through World War II. The increases
in both

and

that have occurred since the 1940's are

broadly consistent with increased corporate leverage that has
occurred since that period, but the two trends are not closely

synchronized.36 According to Tables 2 and 4, the largest
increases in corporate debt financing appear to have occurred
during the 1970's, for example, whereas the debt tax incentive
ratios have been relatively flat during that time.

B. Perceived Bankruptcy Costs
If the tax system alone is not sufficient to explain the
patterns in corporate financing, some supplementary determinants

must be invoked. One possibility is perceived bankruptcy costs.
There is some plausibility, for example to the notion that increased tax incentives for corporate debt in the late 1930's
and early '40's were overwhelmed by a tremendous increase in
perceptions of bankruptcy risk in the wake of the Depression.
In a similar vein, Gordon and Malkiel (1981) point to the
figures in Table 2 and argue that increased economic instability
since 1974 has again increased perceptions of bankruptcy risk,
causing corporations to retreat somewhat in their use of debt

financing. Bankruptcy costs have the disadvantage, however, that
they cannot ben measured with any precision, and the timing of

any shifts is especially hard to pin down. One might wonder why
bankruptcy ars would not have been allayed sooner following the
Depression, especially in view of the increased tax incentives

—47—

for debt. Moreover, one might ask why corporate debt financing
was apparently relatively small in the 1920's, even though tax
incentives increased and investors are generally believed to have
been unusually optimistic about firms' prospects.

C. Inflation
Another supplementary factor is the inflation rate. As discussed in Section I, inflation can enhance the real tax advantage
to debt, and thus the interaction between taxes and inflation
may produce an explanation of corporate financing patterns that
is superior to that of taxes alone.

Some idea of inflation trends can be gained from the yearly
percentage changes in the implicit GNP price deflator, shown in

Table 6 for the years 1901 to the present.37 From these it might
be concluded that the relatively high inflation rates of the
late 1960's and the 1970's interacted with relatively high debt
tax incentive ratios to produce an increase in corporate debt

financing during this period. There was also a temporary increase in corporate debt usage coinciding with both the increase
in debt tax incentive ratios and the inflationary burst of the

immediate post—World War II years.38 Earlier, however, the
years surrounding World War I were also years of relatively high
inflation rates coupled with rising debt tax incentive ratios
(at least for investors in low tax brackets) .

The data in

Section II indicate, though, that corporate debt financing was

lower in that decade than in the one preceding it. Again,

—48—

therefore, although the interaction between taxes and inflation
probably contributed to increased debt usage in recent years,
it does not appear to be the sole determinant of corporate
financing patterns.

D. Supplies of Substitute Securities and the Evolution of the
Financial Intermediary System
It will be recalled from Section I that changes in relative
security supplies or in the extent of financial intermediation
played no role in models with perfectly elastic demands for

corporate securities. In the more general model with costly
financial transformation, however, these factors can affect
the portfolio opportunities available to investors and hence
the equilibrium yields and quantities of corporate securities.
Some idea of the relative position of corporate debt in the
economy may be gained from Table 7, which shows the total

liabilities of the nonfinancialcorporate, federal government,
state and local government and financial institution sectors as
well as the mortgage liabilities of the household sector, all
expressed as percentages of total domestic liabilities

outstanding. Data are available from Goldsmith (1963) for selected
years from 1900 to 1945 and annually from 1945 to 1958. Annual
data are also available from the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds

Accounts for the years 1945—'78. The series for U.S. government
debt and household mortgage debt are intended to reflect supplies
of securities that might act as close substitutes for corporate

—49—

debt in investors portfolios.

39

As indicated in one of

the comparative statics exercises in Section I, the supply
bf state and local government debt acts, from a tax standpoint
at least, as a substitute for corporate equity. Finally, the

series on financial institution liabilities is intended to
serve as a rough index of the strength of the financial inter-

mediary system. As indicated in Section I, the importance of
corporate finance as an intermediation device may be conditioned
by the development of this system.

The data suggest that in the post—World War II years, corporate liabilities have been much smaller relative to total

liabilities than in the pre—Depression era. There has also
been little if any trend in the share of corporate liabilities

since the 1950's. While the data in Tables 1—4 indicate that
corporate debt financing has increased relative to equity
since that time, therefore, corporate debt has still only kept
pace with the postwar expansion in liabilities for the economy

as a whole. The share of corporate liabilities dropped sharply
during the Depression and World War II before recovering some-

what during the years 1945—'50. Since that time a modest upward trend seems to have occurred through the mid—l970's
followed by a mild decline.

Liabilities of the federal government by contrast, were
quite small at the beginning of the century and remained so
until the Depression, even including the increase surrounding

World War I. During the Depression and especially during World

—50—

War II, however, federal government debt mushroomed relative

to that of the other sectors of the economy. Thereafter,
it declined steadily before reaching an apparent plateau around
1970.

On the whole, state and local government and household
mortgage liabilities have been smaller than those of the corpor-

ate and federal government sectors. State and local government
debt has remained relatively small throughout, with the highest
plateau being reached in l96OTs and early 170's. Household
mortgage debt hovered around five percent of total liabilities
in the pre—Depression era, before falling somewhat by the end

of World War ii.° Since then it has increased at a slow but
steady pace and in recent years household mortgage debt has been
larger than that of the federal government and only slightly
smaller than corporate liabilities.

Finally, the share of financial institution liabilities
appears to have followed a secular upward trend. An increase
seems to have occurred in the late l9aO's, although there is

some conflict between the Goldsmith data and the Flow of Funds
data as to whether this represented a dramatic upward shift.
After remaining steady between 1945 and 1960, the share of financial institution liabilities again appears to have begun
increasing in recent years, albeit at a relatively slow pace.
The theory in Section I suggests that if the demand curve
for corporate debt is not perfectly elastic, exogenous increases in the supplies of substitute securities will reduce

—51—

the equilibrium amount of corporate debt.

Broadly speaking,

this proposition appears to receive some support from the

data in Table 7. Particularly in the first half of this century,
the share of corporate liabilities has tended to move in the
opposite direction from that of federal government liabilities.
At the same time that federal government debt was taking its
great upward leap during the Depression and World War II, for
example, the share of corporate liabilities declined dramatically,

as did the share of debt in total corporate financing. Similarly,
in the immediate postwar years the share of corporate liabilities
staged a modest recovery, and corporate debt financing increased
relative to equity, at the same time that the share of government

liabilities was declining. Corporate debt financing generally
continued to increase relative to equity from the 1950's through
the present at the same time that the share of federal government
liabilities has continued to fall.

There are some points at which the data and the theory do

not coincide exactly. Little can be inferred, for example,
about the relationship between corporate financing patterns and
movements in state and local government liabilities or household

mortgage liabilities. If anything,the share of corporate
liabilities seems to have moved in the same direction as that

of

household mortgages.

41

.

Moreover, corporate debt financing

has shown its largt increases of the postwar years during the
1970's, a time when the relative supply of government securities
has been essentially flat.

—52—

Nevertheless, the effect of relative security supplies shows at
least enough promise to warrant further investigation in future

work.42 The potential explanatory power of this factor seems
particularly great during the early decades of the century when
tax considerations were non—existent or of lesser importance.
In addition, substitution relationships may have some bearing on

aspects of corporate finance, such as the maturity structure of
debt, that are unrelated to tax considerations.43

It is more difficult to formulate precise hypotheses about
the effect of financial intermediation on corporate finance.

It

seems clear that the development of the financial intermediary
system facilitates corporate external financing by making it
easier for new issues of corporate securities to be absorbed by

the capital market. It is less obvious, however, whether the
system's capacity to absorb these issues would favor debt financing over equity by corporations or vice versa.
To the extent that corporate securities themselves play
the role of an intermediary between the characteristics of firms'
real assets and investors' portfolio needs, the scope for that
role would seem greatest when the system of financial intermediar-

ies is less highly developed. In particular, investors may have
limited access to relatively safe securities at such times and

thus their demand for corporate debt may be high. A tentative
interpretation of the data in Table 7 that is consistent with
corporate securities playing an intermediary role, then, is as

follows: In the earlier decades of the century, corporations

—53—

may have played a more substantial intermediary role than has

been true in recent decades. Investors' demands for relatively
safe, fixed—dollar claims were not met to such a degree in the
earlier decades by either the government or financial institu-

tions as has been the case in more recent times. These factors
may help account both for the relatively high proportion of

debt in total corporate financing and for the relatively high
proportion of corporate debt in total domestic liabilities in

the early part of the century. In the years following the
Depression, however, this intermediary role of corporate debt
has probably been reduced, both by increased relative supplies
of federal government and household mortgage debt and by the
increased extent of financial intermediation.
By the present time, both the market for corporate debt and

for corporate stock have become heavily institutionalized and
it would be much more difficult to describe convincingly an overt
intermediary role played by these securities. Still, certain
shifts in corporate financial structure may at times be linked

to shifts in the costs of financial intermediation. It is
widely held, for example, that recent interest rate volatility
has made it increasingly dangerous for financial institutions
to intermediate between long—term financial assets and short—

term liabilities. This may account in part, then, for the shift
in corporate liabilities toward increasingly short maturities.45

E. Summary and Conclusions
Overall, it has been argued in this paper that in order to
explain the secular patterns in aggregate corporate financing,

—54—

it is necessary to employ a theory explicitly aimed at the

aggregate corporate capital structure. The outline for such a
theory has been developed here, building on previous theoretical
contributions, and containing those contributions as special

cases. The feature of this theory that is somewhat novel is
the emphasis on the costs of financial transformation and hence

on the role of corporations as intermediaries. It has been argued,
then, that in addition to such factors as taxes, inflation and
perceived bankruptcy costs, the supplies of substitute securities
and the development of the financial intermediary system may
exert an important influence on corporate financing behavior.

A preliminary examination of available data confirms the
trend cited in other studies toward greater use of debt financing

by corporations in the post—World War II period. Nevertheless,
the evidence suggests further that corporate reliance on debt
financing was unusually low around World War II and that current
debt proportions may not be entirely out of line with those experienced in the earlier decades of the century.

Since the study encompasses periods when the tax system was
non—existent, tax considerations alone seem incapable of ex-

plaining these overall trends. Rather, the explanation suggested
here is that nonfinancial corporations played a more substantial intermediary role in the early decades of the century and
that corporate debt helped satisfy investors' demands for relatively

safe securities. That intermeidary role diminished by the end of
World War II in the face of rising federal government debt and
the continued development of financial institutions, and

—55—

corporations as a whole may now have relatively little comparative advantage in performing financial transformations.
Nevertheless, tax rates and inflation in the postwar years have
combined with the declining relative size of federal government

debt to stimulate corporate debt financing again. Although
corporate debt has never approached its earlier importance relative to total domestic liabilities, corporations' reliance on
debt financing relative to equity has returned, by some measures
at least, to roughly the proportions experienced in the early
part of the century.

It is clear that many details remain to be filled in here.
In particular, if the costs of financial transformation are an
important element in the corporate sector's financing behavior,
one would like a better understanding of these costs and of
where, specifically, corporations might be expected to possess

a comparative advantage over financial institutions and indi-

vidual investors. In addition, hypotheses should be developed
about the ways in which technological and regulatory changes

affect these comparative advantages.46 On the basis of the
data examined in this paper, further development of an aggregate
capital structure theory along the lines suggested here appears
to offer some promise for explaining the secular patterns in
corporate finance.

Financial Institutions

Nonfinancial Corporations

Plant and Bank Loans

Loans to Corporations
Corporate Bonds
Corporate Shares
Mortgages
Consumer Credit

Equipment

Inventories Bonds
Bank Deposits' Equity Shares

Households

Houses
Consumer Durables
Corporate Bonds
Shares in Corporations and
Financial Institutions
Deposits
Insurance
Pension Obligations

Consumer Debt
Mortgages
Net Worth

Figure 1

Balance Sheets of the Three Sectors in
a Hypothetical Economy

-'

Deposits
Insurance
Pension Obligations
Equity Shares

r

S ,D

B

Figure 2

Supply, S, and Demand, D, for Corporate
Debt Implied by Modigliani and Miller (1958).

r

r

e

C

re

N
B

*
B

Figure 3

Supply and Demand for Corporate Debt
Implied by the Tax Saving—Bankruptcy
Cost Theory. Equilibrium Amount of
Corporate Debt is B

r

r

D
S

B
B

*

Figure 4

Supply and Demand Curves for Corporate Debt Implied by the
Agency Cost Theory of Jensen and Meckling (1976).

r

D

S

r /l—t
C
e

re =r 0

B

Figure 5

Supply and Demand for Corporate
Debt Implied by Miller (1977).

D
r /l—t
0

St

r0 /l—t C

S

r0

B

*
B

*t

Figure 6

Change in Equilibrium Quantity of Corporate Debt
Caused By an Increase in the Corporate Tax Rate

B

r

U

U

r /l—t
o
C

St

r o /1—t C

S

r0

I

I

I

I

I

I

'1

B
B

*

B

*'

Figure 7

Change in Corporate Debt Caused By
Simultaneous Increases in Corporate
and Personal Tax Rates.

r

r

on
S

1 .—t

C

ror
S

1—t

c

I

I

'I

I

B
B

*

B

*

Figure 8

Change in Corporate Debt Caused By
an Increase in Expected Inflation

r
D

r

S

e

B
B

*

Figure 9

Equilibrium Amount of Corporate Debt When
Return—Stream Transformation is Costless
for Corporations But Not for Individuals

r

D

B

*

Figure 10

Supply and Demand for Corporate
Debt: the General Case

B

TABLE 1

All

Selected Book Value Balance Sheet Ratios,
U.S. Corporations and U.S. Manufacturing Corporation
All

I

U.S.

(1)

Corporations

Manufacturing Corporations

(2)

(3)

I

D/A

(4)

(3)

(6)

ITC

D/A

Year

LD/TC

'/TC

1926

.21

7
8
9

.22
.23
.23

.11
.11

1930

.24

.09

.10

.12

.25

.10
.11

.10
.11
.10

.13

1

LD/TC

.09
.09
.10
.09

.10
.09

.14
.14
.13
.12
.13

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

.26

1940

.26
.26
.24
.23
.23

.09
.08

.63

.08

.64

.21

.08
.07
.07

.64

.10
.09
.09
.09
.10

.63

.11

.06

.62

.12

.23

.06

.62

.12

.23

.05

.63

.11

1

.23

.05

.63

.13

.06

.30
.30
.31
.31
.28
.31
.35

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

.24

.05

.65

.15

.05

.36

.25

.04

.65

.15

.05

.25

.04
.04
.04
.04
.03

.65

.15

.05

.36
.34
.35

.65

.17

.03

.66

.17

.03
.03

.66
.66

.17
.18

.28
.28

.68
.68

.17
.18

.28
.29

.69

.19

.69

.21

.29
.30

.69

.21

.70

.23

.42
.45

1

2

3
4
5

.10

.10

.11

.10

.14

.26

.10

.10

.13

.26
.27
.27

.10

.21
.22
.23

6
7

8
9
1950

.24

.25
.26

.26

1960

.27
.27

1

.28

.11

.10
.09

4
5
6
7

8
9

.53
.54
.55
.57

.08

.58

.08

.61

2
3

.14

.26
.26
.26

.02

.65

.66

.10
.11
.11
.11
.11

.15

.65

.16

.65

.17

.14
.12

.13

.26
.25

.12
.11
.10

.27

.10

.35

.25
.31

.09

.36

.09
.09
.09
.08
.07
.07
.06

.34

.04

.04

.36
.38
.37

.03
.03

.38

.38
.43

.38
.39
.40

.02

.43

.31

.70

.24

.47

1970

.32

.71

.26

.49

1

.33

.27

2
3

.33

.72
.72

.26

.49

.26

.34

.73
.74

.51
.53

.34

.74

.34

4
5

.27

.49

Source:

Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income
LD = Long—Term Bonds and btes

P = Preferred Stock
Total Long—Term Capital
+ Common Equity
D = Total Debt

TC

A

=

Total Assets

Long—Term Debt + Preferred Stock

Table 2
Market Value Balance Sheet Ratios

(2)

(1)

Rolland
Year

& Myers

D/(D+p+E)

(3)

von Furstenberg

ID/(p+E) /(D+P+E)

(4)

(5)

Gordon & Malkiel
01(D-I-P+E)

.13

1930

.18

1
2

.25
.39

3

.37

4
5

.32
.36

6

.24

7

.27

8
9

.32

1940
1

2
3
4
5
6
7

.069

.155

.082

.091

.133

.058

.084

.016

.080

.018

.132

.017

)3Q

015

.16

.17

.22

.26

.16

.22

.15

.24

.17

.28

.17

.25

.03

.23

.02

.26

.02

.17

.23

.02

.27

.02

.24
.22
.22

.02

.16
.18
.17

.02

.16

.02

.16

.28

.02

.19

.25

.02

.18

8
9

.16
.18
.16
.21
.18
.17
.17
.22
.19
.18
.22

.21
.17
.16

.23

.02

.02

1970

.27

.02

.18
.21
.22

1

.26

.27
.32
.32

.02

.23

2
3
4
5
6
7

.24
.31

.30

.02

.23

.35

.02

.28

.38

.45

.03

.36

.32

.40

.03

.32

.32

.38

.03

7

.120

.28

.04
.04
.04
.03
.03
.03

2
3
4
5
6

.O42

.25

.29
.30

1

.097

.28

.23
.18
.19
.21
.21

1960

.057

.44

9
1

.102

.33

.38

.17

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

.085

.41

8
1950

/(D+P+E)

I

1926
7
8
9

(6)
Ciccolo

.29

.32

.32

8

.35

.33

9

.38

Sources: Cited in Text

)

Table 3

Balance Sheet Ratios with Debt and Preferred Stock
Measured at Market Value, Assets at Replacement Cost
(1)

Goldsmith

D/A

.15
.15

.17

.02

.17

.02

.15

.18

.03

.15

.17

.03

.16

.18

.03

.17

.19

.02

.17

.20

.02

.19
.21

.02

D/A

1900

.32
.42

.28
.28
.35
.33

(.15)1.10
.13

7

.14

8
9

.14

.14

1950

.13

1

.14

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

1960

.02

.22

.02

2
3

.23

.02

.24

.02

4

.24

.02

5

.25

6

1

-

.02

.25

.02

7

.24

.02

8

.23

.02

9

.23

.02

1970

.23

.02

1

.24

.02

2
3

.26

.02

.27

.02

4

.25

.02

5

.02

7

.24
.26
.272

8

.28

6

Sources:

vpn Furstenberg

TD/A

Year

1912
1922
1929
1933
1939
1945
6

(3)

(2)

.02

Cited in text

'Figure in parentheses is from Goldsmith (1956) Other figure is from
Goldsmith (1963).

2Gordon and Malkiel (1981) update von Furstenberg's figures, using the
same estimation method, through 1978. They do not report figures
for preferred stock, however.

Table 4
Flow of Funds Data: Proportions of Total Financing
Accounted for by Particular Sources of Funds

(1)

Total Debt

Period

1901—12
1913—22
1923—29
1930—39
1940—45
1946—59
1960—69
1970—79

Total Sources

(2)

Long—Term Debt

Total Sources

(3)

Short—Term
liabilities

(4)

Internal Funds

Total Sources Total Sources

(5)

New Stock
Issues

Total Source:.

.31

.23

.08

.55

.29
.26

.12

.17

.60

.22

.04

.55

.14
.11
.19

negative
negative

negative

1.14

.19

.20

.80

.05

.16

.14

.64

.05

.36

.18

.18

.62

.02

.45

.21

.24

.52

.03

negative
.15

.30

Sources: Goldsmith (1963) and Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Accounts.

Table 5
Corporate and Personal Tax Rates and Jbt Incentive Tax Ratios
(1)

Year

Lowest Value
of
B

(2)

(3)

(5)

(4)

Highest Value
B

.100

.810

.310

.190

.880

.400

.26

.230

.940

.400

.22

.190
.166
.174

.865
.821
.910

.380

.23

.380

.26

.420

.30

.204

.910

.508

.38

.222

.920

.520

.38

—0.06
—0.15
—1.85
—2.83
—2.33
—0.99
—0.99
—0.62
—0.16
—0.15
—0.15
—0.17
—0.17
—1.33
—3.05
—3.86
—3.02
—2.63
—2.47
—9.00
—3.60
—2.47
—5.44
—4.47
—5.00

.200

.910

.520

.40

—4.33

1964

.160

.770

.500

.41

1965—67
1968
1969

.140

.700

.480

.40

.140

.753

.480

.40

—1.17
—0.73
—1.10

.140

.770
.718
.700

.480

.40

.480
.480

.40

1913—15
1916
1917
1918
1919—21
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926—27
1928
1929
1930—31

1932—35
1936—37
1938—39
1940
1941
1942—43
1944—45
1946—47
1948—49
1950
1951

1952—53
1954—63

.010

0.00

.020

0.00

.060

.040

.070
.150
.670
.770
.730

.040

.560

.125

.04
.06
.06
.09

.030

.560

.125

.10

.015

.460

.125

.11

.011
.011
.011

.250

.130

.12

.250

.135

.12

.250

.120

.11

.004

.240

.110

.11

.011

.250

.120

.11

.040

.630

.138

.10

.040

.790

.150

.11

.040

.790

.190

.16

.044

.811

.240

.21

.23

.010

.020
.020

.060

1970

.140

1971—

.140

Source: Pechman (1977)

.120
.100

.40

—1.26
—0.84
—0.73

Table 6
Yearly Changes in Implicit GNP Price Deflator
Year

% Change in

Deflator

1901

—0.8

2
3
4
5
6
7

3.3
1.2
1.2

2.4

2.3
4.1

8

—0.7

9

3.6

1910

2.8

1

—1.0

2
3

4.1

4
5
6
7

% Change in

Deflator

1929\

1957

3.4

)

8

1930
1

2'

9)

1940
1

1

—16.7

2

1

5\

6/
7\
8j

4

9

1960

4\

2
3

1920

—2.1

31

2.0

12.1
24.2
12.5
14.1
13.9

% Change in
Year

—0.7

4.6

Deflator

Year

—0.8

2.2
7.5

9.9
5.3
2.4

1.7
2.4
1.6
0.9

2

1.8

3

1.5

4
5

1.5
2.2

6

3.2

7

8

3.0
4.4

9

5.1

1970
1

5.4
5.0
4.2

—0.9

—8.1

8
9
1950

2
3
4
5
6
7

2.4

2.1

8

1

4

6.6

7.3

3

—0.2

8.5

2

1 .4

9
1980

5

1.4

6
7

—1.5
—2.2

3
4

1.6
1.2

8

1.6

5
6

2.2
3.2

8
9

5

2.4

6
7

15.7
12.9
6.9

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States and
Economic Report of the President.

5.7

8.7
9.3
5.2
5.8
9 .0

Table 7
Ratios of Sectoral Liabilities Cxitstanding to
Total Domestic Liabilities Outstanding

Nonfinancial
Corporation
Liabilities

Federal Govt.
Liabilities

State and
Local Govt.
Liabilities

Financial
Institution
Liabilities
Flow
of

Flow
of

Flow
of

Flow
of

Flow
of

Household
Mortgage
Liabilities

ear Goldsmith Funds Goldsmith Funds 1Goldsmith Funds Goldsmith Funds1 Goldsmith Funds
(1)

(2)

(3)

900
912
922
929
933
939
945

.34

.01

.36

.01

.30

.29

.06
.03
.06

.19

.11

.11

.10

.38

6
7

.12

.12

.34

.30

8
9

.13
.14
.14

9.50

.15

1

.16

.37

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)
.31

.06
.04
.04
.06

.32
.33
.35

.04

.05

.35

.04

.04

.44

.02

.04

.42

.38
.38

.38

.02

.02

.34

.03

.02

.03

.05

.43

.02

.03
.04
.04

.05

.43

.06

.43

.38

.06

.43

.38

.03

.05

.07

.42

.37

.07

.43

.37
.37
.37
.38
.37

.28
.26

.03

.16

.30
.28
.27

.24

.03

.03

.05

.26

.23

.03

.03

.05

.08

.43

.43

.13

.32

.31

.14
.13
.15

.31

.29

.16

.15

3
4
5
6

.16

.15

7

.17
.17

(10)

.02
.02
.02
.03

.03
.03
.03

2

8
9

(4)

.03

.03

.04

.06

.08

.04

.06

.09

.43

.04

.09
.10
.10

.42
.42
.42

.11

.42

.16

.15

.24

.22

.16

.15

.23

.20

.04
.04
.04

.17

.16
.16
.15

.22
.21
.20

.19

.04

.04

.18

.04

.04

.07
.07
.08

.17

.04

.04

.08

.25

.23

.11

.37

.38
.38

.38

.16
.15
.15

.05

1

.15
.15
.15
.16
.16
.16
.17
.17
.18
.17

.14
.13

.2

.17

.09

3
4

.18

5

.17

.08
.08
.09
.09

.04

.09

.04
.04

.13

.41

.16

960

.16

1

.15

2
3
4
5

6
7

8
9

.970

6
7
8

.18
.16

.16
.16

.13

.12

.05

.11

.38

.05

.12

.39

.05

.05
.05
.05

.12
.12
.12
.12

.39
.39

.05

.12

.40

.12
.12
.12
.12
.12

.40

.11
.11

.05

.10

.05

.10

.05
.05
.05
.05

.09

.09

.09

.40

.40

.40
.40
.40
.41

.12

.42

.04

.13

.41

.04

.13

.04

.13

.41
.41

.13

.41

.13

.41

Sources: Goldsmith (1963) and Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Accounts.

FOOTNOTES

1. Academic studies of aggregate corporate financing patterns include Kuznets
(1961), Goldsmith (1958, 1963), Miller (1963), Sametz (1964), Friedman
(1980) and Gordon and Malkiel (1981). Business journalists have also
surveyed trends in corporate finance particularly in conjunction with the
"capital s.hortage" discussions that were popular in the mid—1970's. See
for example Business Week (1974).

2. Discussions that emphasize the postwar period fall primarily into the
former category. Examples include Friedman (1980) and Gordon and Malkiel
(1981). More popular discussions have also tended to emphasize
deterioration in corporate balance sheets by pointing to increases in debt
ratios. Business Week (1974) is a goad example. Studies emphasizing
stability in debt—equity proportions have tended to take a longer run
view. These include Miller (1963) and Sametz (1964). Updated versions of
these arguments also appear in Miller (1977) and Sametz and Keenan (1981).
3. An exception is Gordon and Malkiel (1981).
4. The literature on the topic is v.ast and no attempt will be made here to
provide a complete list. Some of the more important contributions will be
discussed in Section I below.

5. Miller's (1977) paper was perhaps the first to provide a theory explicitly
aimed at the aggregate corporate capital structure.
6. Although a government sector is not included in this stylized economy, it
will be seen in subsequent sections that securities issued by the
government my also have an important impact on the demand for corporate
securities.

7. In keeping with most previous literature, corporate capital structure will
be taken to represent the mix of debt and common equity financing. The
framework employed is more general than that, however, and could also be
used to include preferred stock and a variety of other hybrid financing
instruments.
8. The financial institution sector is introduced in Stiglitz's (1974)
generalization of MM. Even if financial transformation were costly for
households on their own account, their demand for corporate debt would
still be perfectly elastic if financial intermediaries could costlessly
perform these services.

9. Examples of this theory may be found in Robichek and Myers (1966) and
Kraus and Litzenberger (1973).
10. Implicitly, there are no personal taxes, or at least corporate debt and
equity securities are subject to identical tax treatment at the personal
level.

11. The vertical intercept of the supply curve in Figure 4 thus cannot be
identified precisely as it can be in Figure 3. Corporate tax
considerations could of course be grafted onto the analysis, resulting in
an upward shift of the supply curve. An example of work in this vein is
Myers (1977), in which debt is subject to an agency cost but equity is
not. In the absence of taxes, the supply curve for debt would slope
downward starting from re and in equilibrium no debt would be issued (in
Myers' simple example, at least). When corporate taxes are introduced,
however, the supply curve shifts upward and there is a positive
equilibrium quantity of debt.
12. In the simplest version of Miller's model, equity is assumed to be free
from personal taxation. Thus re, the certainty—equivalent return on
equity, is the same as the certainty equivalent return, r0, on tax—exempt
bonds.
13. Suppose, for example, that initially r0 = .05 and t = .5. Corporations
will be willing to freely substitute debt for equity financing at an
interest rate r = .10. At this rate the marginal bondholders will be
those for whom t = .5. If tc then rises to .6, corporations i1l be
indifferent between debt and equity financing at r = .125. If the
personal tax rate of those formerly in the 50% bracket also rises to .6,
however, investors may wish to hold roughly the same amount of debt that
they did before, but now with r = .125. This ignores, however, any wealth
effects on portfolio choice caused by the increase in personal tax
rates. Asymmetric changes in personal tax rates may also yield extreme
results. If all investors were suddenly pushed into tax brackets higher
than tc for examp'e, there would be no advantage to corporate debt for
any investor and B would fall to zero.
14. Note that at the initial equilibrium, r =

rr,

and r0 =

rOr.

15. The assertion that the demand curve makes a parallel upward shift is
contingent upon personal tax rates remaining the same in the face of
inflation.
— bankruptcy costs
16. Inflation would have the same effect in the tax savings
model of capital structure. Referring to Figure 3, an increase in
expected inflation would shift both the supply and demand curves upward,
wth the supply curve rising by more. This would result in an increase in
B . The Gordon — Malkiel (1981) model, which is essentially a tax savings
— bankruptcy costs model, reaches this same conclusion about the effects
of inflation.

17. See Hong (1977) and the references therein for a discussion of this
hypothesis.

18. See Modigliani and Cohn (1979) for an elaboration of this point. A
somewhat related point has been made by DeArigelo and Masulis (1980) who
argue that inflation reduces the real value of tax shields such as
depreciation, and thus induces firms to issue more debt in order to
further shelter their real income.

19. The Ross (1977) signalling model, not included among the theories
reviewed, is another model of capital structure that does not rely on tax
considerations. It is a kind of agency model, in that corporate capital
structures are determined by a combination of information and managerial
incentive problems. It is hard to see a definitive theory of the
aggregate corporate capital structure emerging from the Ross model either,
because, although firms would be continually trying to re—sort themselves
in the eyes of investors, there seems to be no basis for linking this
activity to changes in the aggregate mix of corporate securities.
20. The widely—used "complete" market model would be one in which these
conditions are satisfied. Weaker conditions than market completeness (the
"spanning" assumption, for example) would also be sufficient to generate
perfectly elastic demands for securities if corporate financing choices
were confined to traditional debt and equity securities.
21. A considerable literature exists, tracing this process of capital market
development with particular emphasis on the role of financial
institutions. See, for example, Davis and North (1971), Silber (1975) and
James (1978).
22. A similar model of the firm valuation process is discussed in Senbet and
Taggart (1981). It is shown there that the risk—adjustment factor,

covG ')/E(), is negative for risk—averse individuals.
23. It will be assumed that this substitution is costless for firms.
24. Some qualification would be in order if corporate debt were subject to
default risk or interest rate risk.
25. Barnea, Haugen and Senbet (1981) forniilate a similar diagram to depict the
equilibrium quantity of corporate debt. Their theory ultimately rests
solely on tax considerations, however. In the absence of taxes, the
agency costs associated with debt would dictate a zero—debt equilibrium in
their model.
26. The total—debt—to—total—assets ratio was not examined by Miller,

27. After 1961, the I.R.S. generally stopped reporting separate figures for
preferred stock.

28. Some factors would tend in the opposite direction, however. The run—up in
interest rates accompanying inflation would depress the market value of
corporate debt and book values may thus tend to overstate the burden of
this debt. In addition book value debt ratios may be understated by the
omission of such off—balance—sheet" financing sources as leases and
unfunded pension liabilities. The use of these sources is believed to
have grown tremendously in the 1960's and 1970's. One indication of the
possible magnitude of this understatement is given in Gordon and Malkiel
(1981). They calculate the ratio of debt to debt plus equity for the
aggregate of firms included on the Compustat tape. Since 1973 the data on
the tape include lease and pension liabilities. The ratios with and
without these liabilities are as follows:

Debt Ratio Without
Leases and Pensions

Debt Ratio Including
Leases and Pensions

.367
.381
.374
.362
.358
.358

.497
.511
.499
.485
.473
.462

1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

29. See Modigliani and Cohn (1979) for an argument that the market does not
properly adjust for inflation in determining equity values. By their
argument, market value debt ratios would be substantially overstated.
30. Myers (1977), for example, has argued that a firm's capacity to issue debt
is closely related to its assets—in--place. The total market value of
assets, on, the other hand, reflects not only assets—in—place but also
future investment opportunities and Myers points out that firms may not
find it advantageous to borrow against these opportunities. Thus the
replacement value of assets, which reflects only assets—in—place, may be a
better measure of debt capacity.
31. One problem is that von Furstenberg's measure of debt is different from
Goldsmith's. In von Furstenberg, non—interest bearing liabilities have
been netted out against the asset side of the balance sheet, while
interest—bearing financial assets have been netted Out against the
liability side in computing this ratio. To make the figures as closely
comparable as possible, the same procedure has been used in calculating
debt ratios from Goldsmith's data. Nevertheless, the detail in
Goldsmith's data is not the same as that in the Flow—of—Funds accounts,
from which von Furstenberg worked, and thus ratios would not be expected
to be identical.
32. To the extent that some investment expenditures, such as research and
development, are expensed immediately, however, the extent of equity
financing may still be understated somewhat. There are also other
problems inherent in flow—of—funds data. Von Furstenberg and Nalkiel
(1977) argue that these data are misleading in inflationary times because
they fail to recognize the reduction in the real value of previously
outstanding debt caused by inflation. In addition the Flow—of Funds
Accounts published by the Federal Reserve System lump preferred stock
financing together with common equity financing.
33. In general, as discussed in Miller (1977), the expression should be
—
)/(1 — B where t is the personal tax rate
= 1 — (1 —
tc)(1
applicable to income frm corporae stock. This latter rate should be
some mixture of the ordinary income tax rate (for dividend income) and the
capital gains rate. In keeping with Miller, t is ignored here, on the
argument that deferral of capital gains will make the effective tax rate
is positive, however,
on stock income quite small. To the extent that t
it will increase somewhat corporations' incentive o substitute debt for
equity.

t

34. See Kim, Lewellen and McConnell (1980) and Taggart (1980) for discussions
of how investors in different tax bracketE sort themselves into clienteles
with respect to their preferences for corporate leverage. At Miller's

equilibrium, the marginal investor will have tpB t and

0.

Furthermore, this investor will be just indifferent between holding
=
taxable and tax—exempt bonds, so for him r(1 —
tpB) — r0. In equilibrium,
=
I
—r(1
—
—(1
—
)/(1
—
1
then,
tPB)
= 1 — r(1 —
£ 0 and thus (20) is consistent with
(1).

t)/r0

t

t)/r(1

35. The presence of tax—exempt investors might also add to the demand for
corporate leverage. Restrictions on the riskiness of individual
securities in their portfolios, however, might limit the ability of tax—
exempt institutions to purchase stock in highly—levered corporations.
36. The upward trend in corporate tax rates is also broadly consistent with
the secular decline in preferred stock financing.

37. In principle, expected rates of inflation would be preferred. Over long
periods, one might expect at least a rough correspondence between expected
and realized inflation rates.
38. This increase in debt financing is particularly apparent if one examines
yearly Flow of Funds data, In 1946 and 1947, for example, the years of
greatest inflation around that period, total debt accounted for 52% and
49%, respectively, of total sources of funds for the corporate sector. In
large part this increased debt financing was accounted for by heavy
reliance on short term liabilities, which made up 33% and 29%,
respectively, of total sources.
39. The supply of. government debt might reasonably be viewed as exogenous to
the system. Observed amounts of household mortgages, on the other hand,
will presumably be more affected by prevailing capital market yields.

40. The decline is much more dramatic in Goldsmith's data than in the Flow of
Funds data.
41. To the extent that tax considerations and inflation have affected
corporate liabilities and household mortgages in the same direction, this
may not be surprising.
42. Recent work by Friedman (1981) bears a relationship to this idea.
Friedman observes that the ratio of total debt to GNP has been remarkably
stable for the U.S. economy, even though the ratio of any one sector's
liabilities to GNP may have shown considerable trends. There appears to
be some sort of substitution relationship, then, between the liabilities
of the economy's various sectors.
43. One cannot look to federal government securities on this score, however.
The maturity structure of both federal government and corporate debt has
generally been shortened over the postwar period, so it is difficult to
make any broad argument that issues of long—term government debt have
pushed corporations to the short end of the market. Since 1975, though,
it is true that the average maturity of government debt has lengthened
considerably. See Friedman (1980).

44. In the immediate post—Depression years, of course, investors may have
become increasingly skeptical about the safety of corporate debt.
45. Ultimately, this involves a shift in the bearing of interest rate risk
from shareholders and other owners of financial institutions and from
liability insurance agencies to the shareholders of nonfinancial
corporations. A more complete explanation would detail the mechanism by
which such a shift might take place. In particular, the stance of
financial institution regulators might be an important factor.
46. See Greenbaum and Haywood (1971) for a discussion of the role of
technology and regulation in the intermediation possibilities open to
financial institutions.

REFERENCES

A. Barnea, R. A. Flaugen and L. W. Senbet, "An Equilibrium Analysis of Debt
Financing Under Costly Tax Arbitrage and Agency Problems," Journal of
Finance 36 (June 1981), 569—81.

Business Week, "The Debt Economy", speial issue, October 12, 1974.
J. C. Ciccolo, Jr., "Changing Balance Sheet Relationships in the U.S.
Manufacturing Sector", NBER Working Paper No. 702, June 1981.
L. E. Davis and D. C. North, Institutional Change and American Economic Growth
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971)
H. DeAngelo and R. W. Masulis, 'Optimal Capital Structure Under Corporate and
Personal Taxation", Journal of Financial Economics 8 (March 1980), 3—29.
Friedman, B. M., "Postwar Changes in the American Financial Markets" in M.
Feldstein, ed., The American Economy in Transition (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1980).
_______________ "Debt and Economic Activity in the United States", NBER
Working Paper No. 704, June 1981.

R. W. Goldsmith A Study of Saving in the United States. 3 vols. (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1956).

______________ Financial Intermediaries in the American Economy Since 1900
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1958).
______________ R. E. Lipsey and M. ndelson, Studies in the National Balance
Sheet of the United States. 2 vols. (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1963).

R. H. Gordon and B. G. Malkiel, "Taxation and Corporate Finance", in H. J.
Aaron and J. A. Pechman, eds. How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior
(Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1981).
S. I. Greenbaum and C. F. Baywood, "Secular Change in the Financial Services
Industry", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 3 (May 1971), 571—89.
P. Crier and P. Strebel, "The Empirical Relationship Between Taxation and
Capital Structure," Financial Review 15 (Fall 1980), 45—57.
D. M. Holland and S. C. Myers, "Trends in Corporate Profitability and Capital
Costs" in R. Lindsay, ed. The Nation's Capital Needs: Three Studies (New
York: Committee for Economic Development, 1979).

H. Hong, "Inflation and the Market Value of the Firm: Theory and Tests",
Journal of Finance 32 (September 1977), 1031—48.
J. A. James, Money and Capital Markets in Postbellum America (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1978).

M. C. Jensen and W. H. Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency, Costs and Ownership Structure", Journal of Financial Economics 3
(October 1976), PP. 305—60.
E. H. Kim, W. C. Lewellen and J. J. McConnell, "Financial Leverage
Clienteles: Theory and Evidence" Journal of Financial Economics 7 (March
1979), 83—109.
A. Kraus and R. Litzenberger, "A State—Preference Model of Optimal Financial
Leverage," Journal of Finance 28 (September 1973), 911—23.

S. Kuznets, Capital in the American Economy. Its Formation and Financing
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961).
N. H. Miller, "The Corporation Income Tax and Corporate Financial Policies" in
Commission on Money and Credit, Stabilization Policies (Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1963).
"Debt and Taxes", Journal of Finance 32 (May 1977), 261—75.
F.

?digliani and R. A. Cohn, "Inflation, Rational Valuation and the Market"
Financial Analysts Journal (March/April 1979), 24—44.

F. digliani and M. H. Miller, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and
the Theory of Investment" American Economic Review 48 (June 1958), 261—97.
A
_______________ "Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of Capital —
Correction" American Economic Review 53 (June 1963), 433—43.
S. C. Myers, "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing", Journal of Financial
Economics 5 (November 1977), 147—75.

J. A. Pechman, Federal Tax Policy, 3rd Ed. (Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution, 1977).

A. A. Robichek and S. C. Myers, "Problems in the Theory of Optimal Capital
Structure," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 1 (June 1966),
1—35.

S. A. Ross, •'The Determination of Financial Structure: The Incentive —
Signalling Approach", Bell Journal of Economics 8 (Spring 1977), 23—40.
A. W. Sametz, "Trends in the Volume and Composition of Equity Finance",
Journal of Finance 19 (September 1964), 450—69.
and W. M. Keenan, "Business Investment Demand" in M.E. Polakoff,
T.A. lAirkin et.al., Financial Institutions and Markets, 2nd Ed. (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1981.
L. W. Senbet and R. A. Taggart, Jr., "Capital Structure Equilibrium Under
Incomplete Market Conditions", NBER Working Paper No. 747, September 1981.

W. B. Silber, ed. Financial Innovation (Lexington Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1975).

J. Stiglitz, "On the Irrelevance of Corporate Financial Policy" American
Economic Review 64 (December 1974), 851—66.
R. A. Taggart, Jr. "Taxes and Corporate Capital Structure in an Incomplete
Market, Journal of Finance 35 (June 1980), 645—59.

G. M. von Furstenberg, "Corporate Investment: Does Market Valuation Matter in
the Aggregate?", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2, 1977), 347—97.

____________________ and B. G. Malkiel, "Financial Analysis in an
Inflationary Environment' Journal of Finance 32 (May 1977), 575—88.

