                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF THE FEDERAL
                         MINIMUM WAGE



                        John   F.   Boschen

                     Herschel I. Grossman


                     Working Paper No. 812




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         December 1981

Some of the content of this paper is based on research undertaken
for the Minimum Wage Study Commission under U.S. Department of
Labor Contract J—9-M--0-OO69 awarded to the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This material derives in part from tax—
supported research and may be freely reprinted with the customary
crediting of the source. We are indebted to C.F. Wymer for advice
about the estimation of model and to Olivier Blanchard, Alan
Blinder, Daniel Hamermesh, and William Haraf for constructive
criticisms of earlier related work. We also received useful com-
ments from participants at a meeting of the MWSC and at an NBER
research seminar. David Wilcox provided expert research
assistance. This project is part of the NBER's research programs
in Labor Studies and in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #812
                                             December 1981




                            SUMMARY
        EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF THE FEDERAL MINIMUM WAGE



     This paper describes an empirical study of the effects
of federal minimum wage policy on aggregate employment, on
the employment of various demographic groups, and on employment
in low-wage industries. The analytical framework permits
separate testing both for direct employment effects of the
level and coverage of the minimum wage and for indirect
employment effects resulting from a possible role for the
minimum wage as a cause of monetary nonneutrality. Another
innovation in this study is the inclusion of rational
expectations of expected future relative minimum wages as
determinants of the demands and supplies of labor services.

      The study finds that minimum-wage policy seems not to
affect aggregate employment or average wages either directly
or indirectly. Minimum—wage policy, however, has large and
statistically significant effects on the industrial and
demographic composition of employment, with employment
decreasing in certain low-wage industries and for teenagers
and for young men but increasing for young women and for
adults. A major part of these effects are associated
with anticipated future changes in the level of the minimum
wage.




John Boschen                          Herschel Grossman
Federal Reserve Board                 Department of Economics
Research and Statistics               Brown University
Washington, DC 20551                  Providence, RI 02912

                                      (401) 863—2606 or —2144
     This paper describes an empirical study of the effects of
federal minimum wage policy on aggregate employment, on the
employment of various demographic groups, and on employment in
low—wage industries. The analytical framework permits
separate testing both for direct employment effects of the
level and coverage of the minimum wage and for indirect
employment effects resulting from a possible role for the
minimum wage as a cause of monetary nonneutrality. The
implementation of these tests involves the estimation of
reduced form equations that use monetary variables, in contrast
to the usual reliance on endogenous variables such as aggregate
output, to distinguish the employment effects of minimum
wage variables from the employment effects of macroeconomic
disturbances. Another innovation in this study is the
inclusion of expected relative minimum wages in the near and
distant future, in addition to the current relative minimum
wage, as determinants of the demands and supplies of labor
services, together with the assumption that the expectations
of both workers and employers about future relative minimum
wages are "rational."
     To summarize briefly the main results, the study finds
that minimum wage policy seems not to affect aggregate
employment or average wages either directly or indirectly.
Minimum-wage policy, however, has significant effects on
the industrial and demographic composition of employment, with
employment decreasing in certain low—wage industries and for
teenagers and for young men but increasing for young women
and for adults. A major part of these effects are associated
with anticipated future changes in the level of the minimum wage.
     An earlier paper published by the Minimum Wage Study Corn-
mission-—see Boschen and Grossman (1981)--reported preliminary
results that were consistent with these findings, but were
ambiguous in some respects. The present study uses a full-
information maximum-likelihood estimation procedure and
                              —2—
analyses a comprehensive set of equations for employment of
demographic groups. These improvements provide a more complete
picture and firmer conclusions about the effects of minimum-
wage policy. In what follows, Section 1 sets up the
theoretical model, Section 2 solves the model, Section 3 describes
the data used in the empirical analysis, Sections 4, 5, and 6
describe the estimation of the aggregate wage and employment
equations, the employment equations for demographic groups, and
the employment equations for low-wage industries, and Section 7
presents conclusions.

I.   Analytical Framework

     The point of departure for the theoretical analysis is the
division of labor markets into one subset in which the minimum
wage is an effective constraint on the wage rate and another
subset in which the wage rate is free to adjust to equate
quantities supplied and demanded. The presumption that since
the establishment of the federal minimum wage the subset of
constrained markets has not been empty is based on the
observation that the wage distribution has continually
exhibited a cluster at the level of the federal minimum wage.
     The first part of the theoretical framework specifies the
supply and demand functions for labor services in the subset
of constrained markets and the proximate determination of
employment and excess supply in these markets. This specifica-
tion involves the determination of behavior in the representative
market in the subset of constrained markets and, also, the
determination of the size of this subset. One basic assumption
is that the ratios of supply and demand in the representative
constrained market to rtqgregate supply and demand depend on
the past ratio of employment in that market to aggregate
employment, on the current ratio of the average wage rate to
the minimum wage, on rational expectations of the ratio of
the average wage rate to the minimum wage in the near and
distant future, and on time trends. The importance of past
employment and expected future relative wages reflects
mobility costs for supply and technological adjustment costs
                                  —3—
for demand. The assumption that expectations are rational
means that workers and employers behave as if their beliefs about
future wages and policy actions are equal to the true mathe-
matical expectations implied by the current and past levels of
these variables and by the economy's stochastic structure.
Another basic assumption is that the number of constrained
markets depends positively on the current ratio of the
minimum wage to the average wage and on the current ratio of
employment covered by the minimum wage to aggregate employ—
merit. For simplicity, this assumption treats this coverage
ratio as strictly exogenous to the markets for labor services,
although it actually depends on the chosen distribution of
employment and on the size distribution of firms in addition
to depending on the legal designation of covered employment.
     Incorporating these basic assumptions into log—linear
supply and demand functions for the subset of constrained
markets yields the structural equations.


(1)          -
                 L = n(Nti-Lti)      -
                                         n5(Wt-2t)
                                                         —   n5

                   —   n5 E(Wt+2—2t+2) + n5          +       n5t   +     and

(2)         —
                 L = n(Nt_i-Lti)    +     d(WQ)      + nd
                                                                   Et(Wt+1-t÷i)
                   +fld   Et(Wt+2-Qt+2) +
                                             d       +       dt +
where   the variables are defined as follows:
NS, Nd, and N are the logs of supply, demand, and actual
employment, respectively, in the subset of constrained markets.
LS, Ld, and L are the logs of aggregate supply, demand,
and actual employment, respectively.
Each of these quantity variables is measured as a fraction
of the working-aged population.
W is the log of the average wage rate.
   is the log of the minimum wage rate.
                              —4—
C is the log of the ratio of employment covered by
the minimum wage to aggregate employment.
b and y are random variables with zero means. All random
variables in the model are assumed to be normally distributed
and uncorrelated with other random variables.
The subscripts date the variables. The empirical implemen-
tation of the model uses a periodicity of one year.
Et is an operator that designates a currently formed
rational expectation.
      Theoretical considerations suggest that the elasticity
coefficients in equations (1) and (2) are all unambiguously
                                 d   ci       s
positive with the exception of n, n, and n. The ambiguity
with regard to nd arises because an increase in the current
ratio of the average wage rate to the minimum wage rate
increases demand in the representative constrained market but
decreases the number of constrained markets. A plausible
                                                        ci       s
quantitative supposition, however, is that the sum of n and n
is positive. Another plausible quantitative supposition is
that nS is larger than nd, because, when the subset of
constrained markets expands due to    an increase in coverage,
the newly constrained markets add more to supply than to
demand. For simplicity, the analysis assumes that n  is
           d             s              d
equal to n    and that n   is equal to n . The empirical
           0             5                5

analysis treats the elasticity coefficients as constants.
      Actual employment in the subset of markets in which the
minimum wage is an effective constraint is equal to demand
and is less than supply. Thus, we have the structural equations,

(3)      Nt =   N       and

            =       -
(4)
                N       Nti
                             —5—
where X is the log of the ratio of supply to employment in
the subset of constrained markets. The presumption that
since the establishment of the federal minimum wage this subset
has not been empty implies that X has been positive over
this period.
     Note that the variable X, does not correspond to the
measured concept of unemployment. The analysis does not con—
sider the choice that persons who are not employed make between
the alternatives of active search for acceptable employment
and nonparticipation in the labor force and, hence, does
not attempt to explain measured unemployment.
     The second part of the theoretical model specifies the
aggregate supply and demand for labor services and the
proximate determination of aggregate employment and average
wages. The specification of aggregate supply involves a
distinction between aggregate notional supply, already repre-
sented by LS, and aggregate effective supply. Aggregate
notional supply measures the level of employment that would
be accepted by workers if they could obtain employment in
the markets that they prefer, given the current and expected
future structure of wage rates. The analysis assumes that
aggregate notional supply is an exogenous variable that grows
at an exogenous rate and is subject to random disturbances.
Specifically,

(5)
        L=A+r5t+X
where A and rS are constants
and A is a random variable with zero mean.
     In the present context, actual aggregate supply differs
from aggregate notional supply because the minimum wage causes
demand to be an effective constraint on employment in some
markets. Aggregate effective supply equals aggregate notional
supply less that part of excess notional supply in the subset
of constrained labor markets that does not result in increased
                              —6—
effective supply in the unconstrained labor markets. Specifically,
we assume the log—linear form,

(6)      L =   L aX
                  —


where LS    is the log of aggregate effective supply and a
is the elasticity of the ratio of aggregate effective supply to
aggregate notional supply with respect to the ratio of supply
to employment in the subset of constrained markets. The present
analysis treats a as a constant.
      The plausible range for a is from zero to exp (Nt—Lb)
A value of a of exp (Nt-Lt)       would mean that effective
supply in unconstrained markets is independent of excess
supply in the subset of constrained markets. The opposite
extreme, a value of a of zero, would mean that effective
supply in unconstrained labor markets increases one—for-one
in response to excess supply in the subset of constrained
labor markets. This response could involve either decisions
by affected low-productivity workers in constrained markets
to seek alternative employment in unconstrained markets or
decisions by other individuals, who otherwise would not choose
to be employed, to seek employment. The existing literature
has not emphasized the second type of response, the replacement
in the labor force of individuals for whom the minimum wage
is an effective constraint by other individuals. Such a
replacement could reflect either an income effect resulting
from the inability of certain family members to obtain
employment or a substitution effect resulting from higher
demand and higher relative wages for workers who can
substitute for low-productivity workers.
      The specification of aggregate demand involves the form of
an equation of exchange with employment velocity depending
positively on productivity growth, which the econometric analysis
represents as a simple time trend, and on the expecLed rate of
                                    —7—
wage   inflation      and also subject to random disturbances.
Speci fically,

(7)         =
                 Mt
                      —
                            + Vt with      =   rdt   +
                                                         v(EtWt+i_Wt)
                                                                        ÷

where M is the log of the money stock,
V   is the log of employment velocity,
    and v are constant coefficients,
and       is a random variable with zero mean.




       The final assumption regarding the proximate determination
of aggregate employment is that the average wage adjusts to
equate aggregate demand with aggregate effective supply, i.e.,

(8)      Lt =    L    =
                          L.
This aggregate market—clearing assumption means that any
excess supply in the subset of constrained markets that wants
alternative employment in unconstrained markets can obtain
such employment. Thus, in this model, although the minimum
wage depresses employment in the subset of constrained markets,
any effect of minimum—wage policy on aggregate employment
depends on     being positive--that is, on the effect that
inability to obtain employment in the subset of constrained
markets has on aggregate effective labor supply. In addition,
this aggregate market-clearing assumption implies, as is
verified by the calculations below, that any effect of monetary
policy on aggregate employment also depends on ci being
positive. Thus, this model generates the testable hypothesis
that the setting of the minimum wage as an effective constraint
provides the critical linkage between monetary variables
and aggregate employment.
       The third part of the theoretical model specifies minimum-
wage policy and monetary policy. Minimum-wage policy includes
                               —8—
the determination of the level and the coverage of the minimum wage in
both the short run and the long run. The history of federal minimum-wage
legislation suggests the following observations: (a) The law
has specified future time paths for the nominal minimum wage and
for coverage criteria.   (b) The law has been amended at intervals
ranging from four to seven years.   (c) These amendments have
raised the relative minimum wage to between 46% and 56% of the
average manufacturing wage rate and have steadily removed
coverage exemptions.  (d) Between amendments, the relative minimum
wage has declined to between 40% and 47% of the average manufac—
turing wage rate.
     These observations suggest that a policy objective has been to
avoid large variation in the relative minimum wage and to expand
coverage, but that policy execution has not been precise. In light
of these observations, it would seem appropriate to characterize
minimum—wage policy as allowing, at least implicitly, periodic
review and possible adjustment of future nominal minimum wages and
coverage, with the objective being to equate on average the
expected relative minimum wage and coverage to given target levels.
We suppose that the expectations on which this policy is based are
"rational," but not necessarily always correct. The failure to
achieve the policy objectives precisely results, in this formula-
tion, from imperfect foresight and from random factors that influence
the carrying out of policy.
       This representation of minimum—wage policy assumes that current
and near-future policy variables--, t+l' C, and C+1--are
currently predetermined and known exactly. The distant future
level of the minimum wage is determined according to

         t+i    Et+...i W1 +
                                +       for all   i =   2,3,4,   .   ..,
where  y is the constant long-run policy target for the log of
ratio of the minimum wage to the average wage rate and w is
a random variable with zero mean. The policy target, y, does
not represent necessarily the level at which the relative minimum
wage is set when the Fair Labor Standards Act is amended.
Rather, it is the desired mean over time of the level of the
                                   —9—
nominal minimum wage relative to expectations of the average wage.
The random policy error, w, results from stochastic factors that
affect either the timing of amendments to the law or the level at
which the minimum wage is set when the law is amended. In
incorporating the rational expectations of the future average
wage, equation (9) attributes the same form of rationality to
minimum—wage policy as to labor supply and demand behavior.
The distant future coverage of the minimum wage is determined
according to

(10)           =
                   C1_1   + c +         for   all i = 2,3,4,

where c is the constant long—run target growth rate for
coverage and U is a random variable with zero mean.
        Taking expectations of equation (9)        yields

           Et(2t+± —   Et+i W+1)    = y       for all i =      2,3,4,   ...,

which implies

(9.1)      Et(Qt+± — Wt+.) = y     for all      i =    2,3,4
Taking expectations of equation (10) yields

(10.1) EtCt+ =      C÷_      + c   for all       i =   2,3,4

These expressions imply that for the distant future, which in
this analysis means after next year, it is rational to expect
the minimum wage to be adjusted in line with average wages and
for coverage to increase at a constant rate.
        Monetary policy includes the determination of the current
money stock and of future increases in the money stock.
Observation of the actual formulation and reporting of monetary
policy suggests that a reasonable simplification is to treat
the current money stock as predetermined and known exactly, an
assumption that contrasts sharply with the assumption of
incomplete monetary information made in many macroeconomic
models that incorporate rational expectations. With regard
to the prediction of the future money stock, extensive
                             — 10 —


experiments with a variety of models suggest that a parsimoniously
specified univariate time series is not unrealistic. In
particular, we specify an AR(1,l) process,

(11)


where rn measures money growth, i.e., m+ = Mt+±
z and g are constants, and p is a random variable with
zero mean. An advantage of this model is that it explains a
substantial portion of observed money growth with the addition
of a minimum number of parameters to the analysis. Taking
expectations of equation (11) gives

(11.1) Em+1 = z + gm.

Note also that

(11.2)   EtMt+i = Mt +

These expressions imply that rational expectations of
future monetary policy involve an autoregression on current
and past monetary policy.
                                                 — 11 —




2.      Solution of the Model

     Econometric analysis of the model given by equations (1)  (11)

requires a solution that expresses the endogenous variables--the
average wage rate, aggregate employment, and employment in the
subset of constrained markets--as depending on minimum-wage policy,
on monetary policy, and on any other relevant predetermined
variables. The procedure followed is to obtain such a solution
for W t, and then to use this result to derive solutions for L.t
and for Nt-Lt.
     Combining equations (1) - (8) gives, after some algebraic
manipulation, the following expression for    as a function of
expected future values of the average wage rate, policy variables,
and other exogenous variables:

(i)        W =      K {(l—c) [Mt +          (rd_rS)t         +
                                                                  vEtWt+i +            A   —


                ÷ a[(ns + d                          s       d
                                           —             +
                                                             2'   E(W÷1_c2÷1)
                —   (S + d)           Et(Wt+2—Qt+2) +
                                                                       —
                                                                            nd)C   +           -
where     K =   ((1-c)(l+v)           +   a(n5   +

Substituting the known values of near—future minimum-wage policy
and the expected value of the distant—future relative minimum wage,
from equation (9.1) ,            into     equation (i) gives

                                            (rd_rS) t                        +     — A —
(ii)       W =      K   {   (1—a) [Mt +                      +
                                                                  vEtwt+i
                                  d                  s       d
                + a[(ns +                  —
                                                 (n2 + n) (EtWt+i—t+i)
                   s          s    d
                + (.n +n)y+
                       33
                            (n1
                                —n)C
                                   L t 13t -y ]}.
                                     +        t

       In equations (1) and (ii) ,                expectations             of future average wage
rates affect W. through two channels. First, the term, VEtWt÷iV
reflects the effect of expected inflation on velocity. This
                                                   — 12 —

term produces a positive effect on W. Second, the terms,
(nS + d)       Et(Wt+i-Qti) and                       (nS + d)   Et(Wt+2—2t+2) ,               reflect
the effects of expected future relative wages on supply and
demand in the subset of constrained markets. If ct is positive,
these terms produce negative effects on W.
        To obtain an expression for                           that we can implement
empirically, we use the method of undetermined coefficients to
solve out for these effects of expected future average wage
rates. To employ this method, we conjecture the following
solution for

                                                                  +               +
(iii)          =
                   110
                              +
                                       Hlt
                                             +
                                                 (EtWt+i—Qt+i)         HC             f[Ct+i

               +   HM + Hm + H7 t+ H (c t —X t            8
                                                                   )   + H
                                                                             9
                                                                                  (13—y),
                                                                                    t t
where H ,
           0
                ..., H                   are coefficients to be determined.                    The

objective of solving out for EtWt÷i suggests the inclusion of
the variable, m1, which according to equation (11.1) is a
determinant of expected future money growth, as well as the
variable,        The other variables in equation (iii) either
are carried over from equation (ii) or a captured in the
constant term,           II
                              0

        Updating    equation (iii) gives

(iv)               = II                + II t+ + H (Et÷iWt÷2—Qt+2) + 110t+l + llCt+2

                   + llMt+i +                         + H(t+l) +

                   + '

Taking a rational expectation of equation (iv) and using
equations (9.1) , (10.1) , (11.1) , and (11.2) gives

(v)        EtWt+i =               11     +        +           + HC      +    II
                                                                                   (Ct÷i   + c)

                         + fl(Mt + z + grn) + fl(z + gm) + 1T(t+1).
                                                      — 13 —


This calculation of EtWt÷l sets the current expectations of
the future values of the stochastic variables equal to their
zero means and relates current and future expectations according
to the example, Et(Et÷2Wt+2) = EtWt+2.
       To obtain the solution for W, we substitute into equa-
tions (ii) and (iii) the value of EtWt+i given by equation (v).
These substitutions give two equations for                                           that have the
same form,

(vi)                        A + AQt + AHt+i + ACt +
                                  +AM +Am +At+c(W)
                                             7     t
Equating the coefficient of each variable in equation (ii) with
the coefficient of the same variable in equation (iii) yields
the following system of equations:

       A           H + TI [H +11 y + H c + (II +H )z + II
           0            0         2   0    2                 5       6           7


               =            [H +fly+H c+(ll+ll         )z+J1 ][(1—a)v - a(n5               +

                                                                             -       (1-)A         + a(nS+nd)y}

       A =         II       = Kct(nS+nd)
                        1             1    1



       A = 1T(H—l)                    =   K[(1—)vll      + (5d) (1-fl H

       A       = ft         = Kcz(nS_nd)

       A =         H        (fl+H) +      H        K(ll+fl) [(l—)v —

       A           (1+11)11 = K[(1—a) (l+vH) —                       a(nS+nd)fl]

       A           fl(ll+fl)g +                6
                                                   = K(H+ll)g[(l—)v              -



       A       = (1+11           )H = K[(l—a)        (rd_rS+vfl )        — c1(n5+nd)fl         I
           7                 2     7                             7               2     7   7
                                                                 — 14 —

                                               +
                                                       fl(—)           K[(l—c)(t—Xt) +

       Although                  this system of equations is not linear in
II   ...       H,            its structure permits a recursive solution that
eliminates these undetermined coefficients and yields uniquely
the following expressions for the coefficients of equation (vi)

       A =             Kct(nS+nd)

       A = K[(1—a)vA                               +   c(nS+nd) (l—A)J
                                 —
       A           = Ka(n -nU
           3                     L4




       A           =   A(vA—A) (1—A)1
       A =1-A -A
           5                          1        2

       A           =   g(vA               -   A)   (1 +     v   -
                                                                    gv)1
       A = (rd_rS)A5
                   =   K[(l—c) (4—Xt) +

The constant term, A 0,                                is   a linear combination of the constants
A, y, c, and z.
     Inspection of these expressions reveals that, if ( iS
positive, A and A are positive but less than unity, A and A
are also positive, and the sign of A and A is the same, but is
ambiguous. Although both C1 and m have positive effects n
EtWt+i, A and A involve the net result of the positive
effect of EtWt+i on aggregate labor demand, which has a
positive effect on                                     and the positive effect of EtWt+i
demand and employment in the subset of constrained markets,
which has a negative effect on W. Alternatively, if                                      ci.   is
zero, A , A   A  and A are zero, A equals unity, and A6 is
                             ,            ,
               1         2            3                                    5


positive               but less than the parameter, v. The sign of A is
generally ambiguous, because this coefficient involves offsetting
                                                      — 15 —

effects         of trends in supply and demand. The final term, c(W)i
is stochastic and, being a linear combination of the random
variables in the structural equations, has mean zero.
        To obtain the solution for Lti we substitute into
equation (7) the values of                                from equation (vi) and EtWt÷i
from equation (v) and substitute into equation (8) the value
of Lt from equation (7). Referring to the expressions for
the coefficients A ... A                              yields the following equation for

(vii)           Lt
                            B +       B     +
                                                Bt+i           +
                                                                       BCt ÷ BCt÷1
                                + B   M + B 6t
                                      5t    m +                B t +
                                                                   7
                                                                          E(L)   t
where B is a linear combination of the constants, A, y, c,
and z,

        B
            1
                =   -(1+v)A       1



        B       =   —(1+v)A 2 + VA 1
            2


        B
            3
                =   —(i+v)A       3



        B            (1+v)2AA(l_A)l,
        B =         A       +   (l+v)A 2
            5           1

                                                          —1
        B6 = (l+v) 2 A (1              +    v   —
                                                    gv)
                      2


        B = (r d-rs )B +                   rs
         7            5


and     (L)t -(l+v) c(W) ÷
        The coefficients, B ...                            B,           of equation (vii) are all
linear functions of the coefficients of equation (vi). The
stochastic term, E(L)t, is a linear function of e(W)ts and
also has mean zero. These cross-equation relations result
from the form of the aggregate demand equation and from the
tssumpt.ions of aggregate market clearing and rational expectations.
                                                             — 16 —


With regard to the signs of B ...                                       B,     if   c.    is positive,

B and B are negative, B , B 5                                    ,   and B are positive, and B and B
 1               3                                      '+                6                           11




are ambiguous. If                      o.       is zero, all of these coefficients,
except B, are zero.
     To obtain the solution for Nt-Lti we substitute into equa-
                         d                    d                           .

tion (2) the values of Nt from equation (3),      from equa-
tion (8), W, from equation (vi) , EtWt+1 from equation (v) , and
Et(Wt+2-t+2) from equation (9.1) . Referring to the expressions
for the coefficients A ... A                                          yields the following equation

for

                               =                             +            +         +
(viii)           Nt -     Lt       D        +                                 DCt        DCt+i
                                            +
                                                DMt          +
                                                                 Dm + Dt       + D (N...i-Lt_i) +


where D is a linear combination of the constants, ,                                              y,   C,

and      z,

         D =
         D       =   n'A       +

         D       = ndA         +

         D       = ndA         +   nd(1+v)A,
         D =          dA       +   nd(l_A),
         D =         ndA       + nd     g(A+A),
         D = (rd-rs )D5 +                       d
                                                n
                                                    5
          7

             d
         D =n,
             8        0


 and     (N)t =            n(W)t            +
                               — 17 —

     The coefficients, D ...    D,      of equation (viii) are also
linear functions of the coefficients of equation (vi) and the
stochastic term, E(N)t is also a linear function of
with mean zero.   With regard to the signs of D ...            D,
regardless of the value of a, D          is negative, D, D, and D
are positive, and D is ambiguous. If a is positive, D, D,
and D are ambiguous. If a is zero, D 2 is negative, D is
     b                                                              II




zero, and D is positive.
     The solutions given by equations (vi) ,     (vii)   ,   and (viii)
show how the model focuses attention on the behavioral parameter
a.   This parameter, introduced in equation (6), measures the
effect that excess supply in the subset of markets in which the
minimum wage is an effective constraint has on aggregate labor
supply. First, the size of a determines the extent to which
the minimum wage variab1es--Q +' C., C+1--have a positive
effect on the average wage rate and an associated negative effect
on aggregate employment. If a were equal to zero, a value
that would mean that excess supply in the subset of constrained
markets causes a one-for—one increase in employment in uncon-
strained markets, the average wage rate and aggregate employment
would be independent of minimum-wage policy. In this case, the
sole effect of minimum-wage policy would be to reduce the proportion
of aggregate employment that occurs in the subset of markets in
which the minimum wage is an effective constraint.
     Second, the size of a determines the extent to which the
monetary variables--M and me--are not fully absorbed in the
average wage rate and, hence, have a positive effect on aggregate
employment. If a were equal to zero, the elasticity of
with respect to Mt would be equal to unity, the elasticity of W
with respect to m would be positive but less than the
parameter   v, and Lt would be independent of both Mt and
In this case, the sole real effect of expansionary monetary
policy would be to increase the proportion of aggregate
                                                 — 18 —

employment that occurs in the subset of markets in which the
minimum wage is an effective constraint.
          A related observation about the theoretical results is
that regardless of the value of a, the sum of coefficients
A + A + A is unity and that the sums of coefficients


                                                                      i'
    1         2         5

B
    1
        + B
              2
                  + B
                        5
                            and D1 +   D
                                           2
                                               + D
                                                     5
                                                         are zero. These summations
mean          that equiproportionate increases in '                          and Mt
would produce an equiproportionate increase in                           and no changes
in Lt and Mt. These implications about the interaction
between monetary policy and minimum-wage policy reflect the
property of the present model, which is tested empirically
below, that the setting of the minimum wage as an effective
constraint in a subset of markets is the only source of
monetary nonneutrality. This property results directly from
the assumed equality of aggregate demand and aggregate
effective supply, as specified by equation (8).
     Equations (vi), (vii), and (viii) provide a basis for
testing of derived hypotheses, for quantification of
empirical relations, and for the interpretation of empirical
observations. Most importantly, the econometric results
discussed below indicate that the data do not reject the
hypothesis that the effects of minimum wage variables reflect
a value of     equal to zero, but that the data reject the
hypothesis that the effects of monetary policy on employment
result from the existence of the minimum wage.

3.       Data

     The econometric analysis requires the development of
empirical proxies that conform as closely as possible to
the theoretical constructs. The endogenous variables are
the average wage rate, W, total employment, Lti and minimum—
wage employment, Nt.               As an empirical proxy for               we use
average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers
                             — 19 —

on private payrolls in manufacturing, calculated by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics from its establishment survey. This
series is the most inclusive average wage measure that excludes
the effects both of fluctuations in overtime premiums and of
changes in the proportion of workers in high-wage and low-wage
industries.   This series also seems appropriate as the
measure of average wages because, as noted above, minimum—wage
policy appears to be targeted in relation to the average
manufacturing wage rate. Experiments carried out with other
wage series, such as average wages adjusted for nonpecuniary
benefits, did not substantially alter the results.
     As an empirical proxy for Lti we use the total number
of civilians employed, calculated by the BLS from its
household survey. This measure of employment conforms most
closely to the data that we use to estimate the effects of
minimum wage policy on demographic groups, thereby allowing
a comparison between disaggregated estimates and the
estimates for aggregate employment. Experiments with other
measures of total employment, such as total hours worked,
did not yield substantially different empirical conclusions.
     The most difficult data problem is that no time series
are available that correspond to the theoretical concept     Nt.
Our strategy, therefore, is to focus on measures that appear
to involve a high incidence of minimum—wage employment.
(See Welsh (1978) for a discussion of wage distributions.)
One such measure is the number of teenagers (16-19 years old)
employed, calculated from the BLS household survey. Teenagers
are the demographic group reporting the highest incidence of
minimum—wage employment. In addition, in order to obtain a
complete picture of the effects of minimum-wage policy on the
distribution of employment among demographic groups, we also
use as dependent variables measures of the numbers of young
persons (20-24 years old) employed and adults (over age 24)
employed. In order to consider the possibility of male—female
                               — 20 —

or   white—nonwhite differences in the effects of minimum-wage
policy, we divide teenagers and young persons by sex, and
we divide adults and the sum of teenagers and young persons
by sex and race. Tests using finer demographic divisions
were not productive, a result that may be attributable to small
sample sizes and large measurement errors for these groups.
     Another measure possibly involving a high incidence of
minimum—wage employment is the number of production or non-
supervisory workers on private payrolls in those
SIC two digit industries that report relatively low average
wages. These data are calculated from the BLS establishment
survey and, thus, are not directly comparable to the data on
aggregate employment and employment of demographic groups
from the household survey. Nevertheless, the industry data
enhance our picture of the effects of the minimum wage.
     We consider nine low—wage industries: Lumber and Wood Products,
Furniture and Fixtures, Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries
 (which include jewelry), Food and Kindred Products, Tobacco
Manufactures, Textile Mill Products, Apparel and Other Textile
Products, Leather and Leather Products, and Retail Trade.
With the exception of Apparel and Other Textile Products and
Retail Trade, these industries represent the two-digit
industries that reported average wage rates below $1.10 in 1947.
We included Apparel and Other Textile Products because the
average wage rate in this industry was low relative to the
above industries throughout the latter part of the sample
period. We included Retail Trade because of the large coverage
increases that occurred in retail employment and the rela-
tively low average wage rate in this industry during the latter
part of the sample period.
      One problem with using these data series to infer the
effects of minimum-wage policy on minimum-wage employment
is that only a fraction of employment in any demographic group
or industry, including teenagers or low—wage industries, is
                             — 21 —

at the minimum wage. Consequently, estimated elasticities of
employment in these categories with respect to minimum—wage
variables would tend to understate the effects of minimum—wage
policy on minimum—wage employment.
     Another problem is that each one of these industries,
as well as the demographic group of teenagers, accounts for
only a small fraction of total minimum-wage employment.
Consequently, it seems appropriate to interpret these data to
be measures of employment in individual markets in the subset
of constrained markets, rather than total employment in this
subset. Thus, increases in the coverage of the minimum wage
can depress employment as measured by these data even though
increases in coverage presumably increase total minimum wage
employment.
     The exogenous variables in the model are the current
and near-future level of the minimum wage,    and       the

current and near—future minimum—wage coverage ratio, C and
and current level and rate of change of the money stock, Mt and m4
The measure of    and      is the log of the federal minimum
wage from published data of the Employment Standards Administra-
tion. The measure of C and         from unpublished ESA data,
is the log of the average of the estimated ratios of covered
workers to total employment of production and nonsupervising
personnel in the following industries: Construction,
Transportation and Public Utilities, Wholesale Trade, Retail
Trade, and Services. Almost all of the legal coverage changes
over the sample periods were in these industries. The measure
of the money stock is M1B per working person.
     As indicated above, each of the employment variables is
measured as a logarithm of a fraction of the working-aged
population. All of the data employed are annual averages. In
the estimated equations for employment of demographic groups,
available data on the dependent variables limits the sample
                                     — 22 —

period   to 1954 through 1981. For consistency the estimated
equations for average wages and aggregate employment use
the same sample period. The inclusion of       and      among
the independent variables and allowance for a possible
first—order autoregressive structure on the residuals mean
that all of these equations are fitted to observations of
the dependent variable from 1955 through 1980. In the
estimated equations for employment in low—wage industries,
the sample period is from 1947 to 1980.

4.   Estimation of Average Wage and Aggregate Employment
     Equations
     We estimate the equations for W and Lt jointly using
the full-information maximum-likelihood procedure in the
RESINUL program. This program selects coefficient values by
employing the Newton-Raphson iterative method to find the
maximum                 of   the concentrated likelihood function.
See Wymer (1978)        for a full description of this estimation
procedure.
     To test the various hypotheses associated with the
equations for    and Lt, we use a likelihood-ratio
statistic calculated as follows: Let SU be the maximized value
of the likelihood fnctiort under unconstrained estimation and
let    be the maximized value of the likelihood function when k
parameters are constrained during estimation. The test
statistic k =      —2    log(0/e) is 2-distributed with k
degrees of freedom.
     Because of the possibility of multiple local maxima in
the likelihood function, we used three different sets of
initial guesses for the parameters to start the estimation.
The guesses were a vector of zeros, a vector of unit values,
and the single equation OLS estimates of the parameters.
Because the estimates were essentially invariant to these
                                               — 23 —

different   initial guesses, we report only the estimates
associated with the zero vector of starting values.
      To deal with first—order serial correlation in the
residuals, we estimated the coefficient of the auto-
regressive disturbance term, denoted as p, simultaneously
with the rest of the parameters. The sample residuals did
not show significant evidence of higher-order serial
correlation in either equation.
      The estimated equation for the average waqe rate is

(I)            -1.7 +
              (—2.6)        (1.1)
                                 •°t + .06+i -
                                           (1.0)            (—0.4)
                                                                     00C
                                                                                 (—.4)
                        +
                             l.2Mt
                                           -
                                                   . 9Om    +        .Olt.
                            (6.9)         (—6.5)                (1.6)

            = .99            p   = .78
                                 (9.9)

      Hypothesis: A + A                  = 0,                                    = 2.0, Pr(i > ) = .16
      Hypothesis: A =
                        1
                                 A
                                     2
                                         = A
                                               3
                                                   =   A        0,      L
                                                                             1
                                                                                 = 4.2, Pr( > i ) = .38
      Hypothesis:      A +       A
                                     2
                                         + A
                                               5
                                                   =   1,              i,L

                                                                             1
                                                                                 z12.6,   Pr(ji
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                      ) =   .01.
The numbers in parentheses under the coefficients are the t—ratios.
The statistics reported after each indicated null hypothesis
are the computed value of the test statistic, '1'k' and the proba-
bility of finding under the null hypothesis a value of k greater
than the computed value.
     One clear implication of equation (I) is that minimum-wage
variables do not have a statistically significant effect on
average wages. The estimated coefficients on     and t+l are
positive, but the t-values indicate that neither of these
coefficients is significantly different from zero. In addition,
the likelihood-ratio test of the hypotheses A + A = 0
indicates that the total effect of current and near-future
minimum wages is not significant at either the 5% or 10% level.
                               — 24 —

Similarly,   although the estimated coefficients of C and
are negative, the associated t values indicate that neither
of these coefficients is significantly different from zero at
the 5% level.    (The coefficient of      however, is
significant at the 10% level, a result that foreshadows a
puzzling finding about C1 in the equation for aggregate
employment.) Finally, the likelihood ratio test for
A = A = A = A = 0 confirms that the date do not reject
 1    2      3

the null hypothesis that the minimum-wage variables all
have no effect on the average wage rate. All of these results
have in common the implication that we cannot reject the
hypothesis that c, the parameter that measures the effect
of excess supply in the subset of constrained markets on
aggregate employment, is zero.
     The estimated coefficient of Nt in equation (I) and
the associated t-value indicate that the current money stock
has a significant positive effect on the average wage rate.
Moreover, although the point estimate and estimated standard
error seem consistent with the hypothesis that this
coefficient equals unity, the likelihood ratio test for
A + A + A = 1 indicates that the data reject this
 1           5

null hypothesis at the 1% level. This implication that the
effects of '         and Mt do not sum to unity is
inconsistent with the theoretical model specified above.
Specifically, this finding means that monetary policy is
not neutral. However, the conclusion drawn above that
the data do not show that c. differs from zero suggests that
minimum-wage policy and the role of monetary policy in
determining the real value of the preset nominal minimum wage
do not account even in part for this nonneutrality.
     The estimated coefficient on m in equation (II) iridi-
cates that current monetary growth has a significantly
negative effect on the average wage rate. This result provides
an additional reason for rejecting the implication of the
                                                       — 25 —

model that. a value of a close to zero would produce monetary
neutrality.
       The estimated equation for aggregate employment is

(II)
          Lt
                 —1.6 +
                 (—5.2)
                                   .O5
                                 (1.3)
                                                   +
                                                      0t+i
                                                   (0.3)
                                                            —
                                                              .ooct
                                                           (—0.4)
                                                                                            +
                                                                                            (1.9)
                                                                                                 .0lC1
                             +
                                     .l7Mt                 .O7mt
                                                                        —   .Olt.
                                 (3.7)         (—0.4)               (—4.6)

          R2 =     .99                   p =   .05
                                           (0.4)

     Hypothesis: B =             B       = B           =   B       0,       'p            8.8, Pr(ip >   'p
                                                                                                                  ) =    .08
                         1           2                         4                 4

     Hypothesis: B =             B       = B           = 0,                 'p
                                                                                     =    3.2,   Pr('p   'p )         = .34
                         1                     3                                 3


     Hypothesis: B +             B       + B           = 0,                 'p           20.5, Pr('p >   'p       )   = .01.
                         1           z         5                                 1                            1



     The general impression from equation (II) is that minimum
wage variables do not have a statistically significant effect on
aggregate employment. The estimated coefficients on     and

are positive, contrary to what the theory implies, but the
t—values indicate that neither of these coefficients are
significantly different from zero. The estimated coefficient
on    is negative, but also not significantly different from
zero. Similarly, the likelihood-ratio test for B = B = B                                                                = 0

confirms that the data do not reject the hypotheses that
'         and C. all have no effect on aggregate employment.
These findings are consistent with the results in equation (I).
The implication again is that we cannot reject the hypothesis
that a is zero.
     A problematical aspect of equation (II) , for which we
have no obvious explanation, is that the estimated coefficient
of C1 is positive and, according to the t-value, is
significant at the 5% level. Associated with this result,
the likelihood-ratio test value for B = B = B 3 = B = 0,
                                                                        1            2
                                26 —


is significant at the 8% level. These findings are not con—
sistent with the conclusions drawn above, because the
theoretical analysis implies that, if c. is zero, the
coefficient of       like the coefficients of the other minimum—
wage variables in equations (I) and (II) ,   should be zero.
Note also that the point estimate for the coefficient of
in equation (II) is consistent with the point estimate for
the coefficient of      in equation (I), given that the other
coefficients   are zero.
     The estimated coefficient of Mt in equation (II) and
the associated t-value indicate that the currency money
stock has a significantly positive effect on aggregate
employment. The likelihood ratio test for B + B + B             0,

which rejects this hypothesis at the 1% level, is
consistent with this finding of monetary nonneutrality.
This result is also consistent with the effect of    0'

found in equation (I).
     We also performed likelihood-ratio tests of the relations,
implied by the theoretical analysis, between the coefficients
B ... B    of the aggregate-employment equation and the
coefficients A, A, and A        of the average—wage equation.
The data do not reject any of the individual relations at
the 5% significance level, but they reject the relations
associated with B , B , and B 5 at least the 10% level, and
                    2      '+



they reject the null hypothesis that all of these relations
hold at the 1% significance level. These results are not
surprising in light of the findings from the econometric
analysis of the two individual equations and do not seem to
have any important implications beyond those already drawn.
                                               — 27   —




For example, given that the unconstrained estimate of B, the
coefficient of                     in equation (II) , is          inconsistent with
the unconstrained estimates of the coefficients of the other
minimum-wage variables in equation (II) we should expect
the data to reject the cross—equation relation between
A , A
    2
        and B .
          3
              ,   Also, given that the data reject the within-
                      4

equation relations between A, A, and A                               implied by the

theory we should expect that they would reject the implied
relation between A , A , and B
                               1       2         5



5.       Estimation of Employment Equations for Demographic Groups

         Table 1 reports the estimates of the equations for the
employment of the various demographic groups relative to
aggregate employment. We estimate these equations individually,
but for consistency with the estimated aggregate employment
equation we use the same maximum—likelihood
procedure in the RESIMUL program. The only evidence of
first—order serial correlation was in the equation for
employment of female nonwhite adults. The estimates reported
in this case use p = -.56 as a correction. In the equation
for employment of nonwhite males, the value of R2 is .83.
In all of the other equations, the value of R2 is .97 or
higher.
     In Table 1, the columns headed by each independent variable
report the estimated coefficients of this variable and the
t-statistics in parentheses. In all of the equations, Wald
tests of the null hypotheses D = D = 0 and D = D = 0,
                                                 1        2

not reported in the table,   confirmed the implications about
statistical significance drawn from the t—statistics. The
columns headed by D + D     0, D + D = 0, and         3       4
                                   1       2


D       + D + D =         0   report the values of the Wald test for each
    1         2   5
of these null hypotheses with an asterisk indicating that
the test value is significant at the 5% criterion level.
                              — 28 —

     The Wald test statistic is specified as follows: Let
(D) be the maximum likelihood estimate of the covariance
matrix of the estimated coefficients, D, and let Z be a
transformation matrix containing the k coefficient relations
to be tested. The test statistic, k = (ZD—ZD) '(Z(D)Z')1(ZD—ZD)
is v-distributed with k degrees of freedom. The Wald test
statistic eases the computational problem involved in testing
multiple hypotheses because it does not require recalculation
of the constrained residual covariance matrix. See Berndt and
Savin (1977)  for a comparison of the Wald and the likelihood-
ratio test statistics.
     An immediate observation from Table 1 is that the estimated
coefficients of     in the equations for young persons, teenagers,
and the sums of young persons and teenagers are in the line
with the estimates for employment effects of the current minimum
wage reported in other studies. See, for example, Gramlich
 (1976) , Ragan (1977) , and Hamermesh (1981) .
                                                A fuller examination
of the results in Table 1, however, provides a more complete
and somewhat different picture of these effects. The
estimated coefficients of    and       the associated t-values,
and the Wald tests for D + D2 = 0      indicate that together
                          1

the current and near-future levels of the minimum wage have
negative employment effects that are statistically significant
for males aged 20-24, for females and males aged 16—19, and
for white males aged 16-24. For each of these male groups,
the estimated coefficients indicate that a 10% increase in both
   and      would cause about a 2.8% decrease in employment,
a much larger effect than estimated in studies that have looked
only at the current minimum wage, and also indicate that the
bigger part of this effect is associated with        A 2.8%

decrease in employment represents about 138,000 males aged
20—24, 85,000 males aged 16—19, and 198,000 white males
aged 16—24. For females aged 16—19, the estimatd coefficients
                                                                          Table 1
                                                  Employment Equations for Demographic Groups
                          Constant
                                           t         t+l        C
                                                                    t
                                                                          C
                                                                           t+l          M
                                                                                            t
                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                         t         t         N
                                                                                                                                 t1-Lt1   D   +D =0
                                                                                                                                              1     2
                                                                                                                                                         D +D =0
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                   D +D +D =0
                                                                                                                                                                    1     2
 (1)   Females               3.0          —.06                            —.00                                                                    79*
           ,
        )(\—
                            (5   . 9)   (—1.9)
                                                      .18
                                                    (4.3)
                                                                .01
                                                              (1.1)     (—0.1)
                                                                                         —.45
                                                                                       (—8.6)
                                                                                                       .14
                                                                                                     (0.8)
                                                                                                                    .01
                                                                                                                 (4.5)
                                                                                                                            .97
                                                                                                                        (17.9)
                                                                                                                                                           0.8          115. 1*
 (2)   Males                —2.0          —.13   —.15           .01       — .02           .09           .21         .02            .62        22.5*        1.4            7.8*
        20—24              (—3.4)       (—2.0) (—2.2)         (1.3)     (—2.3)          (1.1)        (0.7)        (3.1)          (4.4)
 (3)   Females              -1.5          -.13       -.11      -.03        .05            .02   —.27                .02             .65           8.8*     1.0            73*
        16—19              (—1. 7)      (—1. 5)    (—1 .1)   (—2.0)      (3.9)          (0.2) (—0.6)             (3.1)            (3.2)
 (4)   Males                 —.81         —.07       - .21     — .04       .02              .05       1.3          .01              .93       12.6*        2.4           28.8*
        16—19              (—1.2)       (—0.7)     (—2.3)    (—3.3)      (1.2)          (0.4)         (3.0)      (2.6)            (5.5)
 (5)   White Females         1.3          —.08        .03   '-.02             •   02     —.22         —.00          •   01          .95       0.8          0.2           54.8*
        16—24               (2.4)       (—1.9)      (0.8) (—2.5)         (3.2)         (-4.0)        (—0.0)       (4.0)          (11.9)
 (6) White Males            —1.2          —.09       -.19      —.01       —.00            .09           .63         •01             .83       28.8*        2.3            8.7*
      16—24                (—2.6)       (—1.6)     (—3.1)    (—0.9-)    (—0.5)          (1. 3)        (2.3)       (2.7)           (6.5)
 (7)   Nonwhite Females     -.4.0         —.06        .05       .02           .02        —.24           .47         .01             .45       0.0          57*            59*
        16—24              (—0.7)       (—0.5)      (0.4)     (1.4)      (1.5)         (—1.7)         (0.8)       (2.6)           (2.9)
 (8)   Nonwhite Males       —2.1          —.19   -.07           .00        .01           —.16               50      .02             .33           5.0      0.6            7.2*
        16—24                                                            (0.7)
                           (—2.0)       (—1.5) (—0.5)         (0.1)                    (—0.9)         (0.8)       (2.8)           (1.6)
 (9) White Females           —.57          .02    .05    .00               .00                  04    —.10         —.002            .77       18.1*        0.8
        over    24         (—3.6)        (0.9) (2.8) (0.3)               (0.5)          (2.3)        (—1.3)      (—3.5)           (9.4)
(10) Nonwhite Females       —1.8           .06 -.00 — .01                     .00               08    —.10         —.002            .84           75*     13.4*
        over    24         (—5.7)        (3.2) (—0.7) (—3.4)             (0.6)          (4.5)        (—3.6)      (—2.5)          (14.7)
(11) White Males                 .04       .03    .00    .00              —.01           — .07          .07        —.01             .16           5.0*     4.1
        over    24          (0.3)        (2.0)  (0.2) (2.0)             (—2.4)         (—3.0)         (0.8)      (—3.9)           (0.7)
(12) Nonwhite Males          —.91         —.01        .12      —.00       — .01          —.14           .17       —.004             .37           8.8*     59*
        over    24         (—2.5)       (—0.2)      (3.2)    (—0.7)     (—1.3)         (—3.0)         (1.1)      (—2.3)           (2.3)
 C.'
                               — 30 —

indicate   about a 2.4% decrease in employment, which represents
about 59,000 persons in this group.
     The statistics relating to the effect of      and      on

the employment of nonwhite males aged 16—24 are somewhat
puzzling. The estimated coefficients for this group are negative
and imply that a 10% increase in both ft and      would decrease
employment by about 2.4%, which corresponds to about 23,000
persons in this group.   This number equals within the margin
of rounding errors the number implied by the estimated effects
for the other male groups. However, both the t-values and
the Wald test of D ÷ D = 0 for the equations for nonwhite
males aged 16-24 indicate that the data do not reject the
hypotheses that the coefficients of    and      are zero.

     The results in Table 1 indicate that the effects of the
level of the minimum wage on employment differ markedly by
sex within each age group except teenagers. For employment of
females aged 20-24, the negative coefficient of   is
significant, but the positive coefficient of        is larger
and is also significant, and the Wald test implies rejection
of the null hypotheses D + D = 0. The estimated coefficients
                           1    2

for this group indicate that a 10% increase in      and t+l would
increase employment by 1.2%, corresponding to about 45,000
persons. This finding is consistent with the suggestion of
Gramlich (1976) and Grant and Hamerrnesh (1981) , also
supported by the results in Table 1 on females over age 24,
that employment of oldcr females replaces at least in part
the employment of younger males. For the employment of both
white and nonwhite females aged 16—24, the Wald tests
indicate that the data do not reject the null hypotheses
D + D = 0. This finding suggests that the increased employ-
ment of young women roughly balances any decreased employment
of female teenagers.
                             — 31 —

     These results for the effects of the level of the
minimum wage lead to three novel conclusions: First, the
relatively clear findings for the male groups and mixed
findings for the female groups suggest that the disemployrnent
effects are concentrated on young males. Second, the
relative importance of the coefficients of t+l suggest that
these effects involve significant changes in labor demand
in anticipation of future changes in the level of the minimum
wage. Third, the combined effect of current and near-future
levels of the minimum wage on the employment of teenagers
and young men is much larger than the effect of the current
minimum wage alone estimated in other studies.
     Turning to the effect of current and near—future levels of
the minimum wage on the employment of persons over age 24,
the results in Table 1 indicate that the coefficients on
are positive and significant for nonwhite females and white
males and that the coefficients on      are positive and
significant for white females and nonwhite males. Moreover,
the Wald tests indicate that for all four groups the data
reject the null hypotheses D + D = 0.      For the groups over
age 24, the estimated coefficients indicate that a 10%
increase in both    and      would cause approximate increases
in employment of 0.7% (about 130,000 persons) for white
females, 0.6% (about 17,000) for nonwhite females, 0.3%
(about 110,000 persons) for white males, and 1.1% (about
41,000 persons) for nonwhite males.
     If the minimum wage is an effective constraint on employ-
ment in some markets, the finding, from the estimation of
equations (I) and (II), that the level of the minimum wage
has no apparent effect on aggregate employment suggests either
that affected workers take alternative employment in other,
unconstrained markets or that a sufficient number of other
individuals, who otherwise would not choose to be employed,
respond by taking employment. The findings in Table 1 for
                             —32—
the effect of the level of the minimum wage on the employment
of various demographic groups           indicate both that
many constrained workers do not take alternative employment
and that the replacement in the workforce of individuals
for whom the minimum wage is an effective constraint to
employment by other individuals for whom the minimum wage is
not a constraint to employment is quantitatively important.
Specifically, females over age 19 and males over age 24
apparently enter the workforce to replace females aged 16—19
and males aged 16-24.
     The results in Table 1 for the effects of minimum-wage
coverage show that estimated coefficients of C and
are significant for many of the demographic groups. In most
cases, however, the coefficients of C. and     have opposite
signs and their effects on employment are offsetting. The
Wald tests of D + D = 0 indicate that the data reject
                3


this null hypothesis for only three demographic groups.
Specifically, an increase in both current and near—future
coverage would seem to decrease employment of nonwhite
females and males over age 24 and would seem to increase
employment of nonwhite females aged 16-24.
     The statistics in Table 1 relating to the effects of Mt
and m are consistent with the conclusions drawn from
equations (I) and (II) that monetary policy is not neutral,
but that this nonneutrality does not result from minimum-
wage policy. Equation (viii) derived from the theoretical
model indicates that relative employment in the subset of
markets in which the minimum wage is an effective constraint
should be positively related to Mt. In the equations for
employment of males aged 20-24, females and males aged 16-19,
and white males aged 16—24, which are the demographic groups
for which there is a significantly negative relation between
employment and the level of the minimum wage, the positive
                             — 33 —

coefficients   of   and m are consistent with the theory,
although only the coefficients of m for males aged 16-19 and
white males aged 16-24 are statistically significant. In
the equations for employment of females aged 20—24 and non-
white females, white males, and nonwhite males over age 24,
which are demographic groups for which there is a
significantly positive relation between employment and the
level of the minimum wage, the negative coefficients of Mt
and m are also consistent with the theory. However, the
statistically significant coefficients of Mt for other
demographic groups, negative for white females aged 16—24
and positive for white and nonwhite females over age 24
suggests that monetary policy affects the composition of employ-
ment at least partly for reasons not associated with minimum wage
policy. The Wald tests for D + D + ID = 0      confirm this
                              1       2   5


conclusion by rejecting this null hypothesis in every case.

6.   Estimation of Employment Equations for Low-Wage
     Industries

     Table 2 reports the estimated equations for employment in
the nine low-wage industries. The columns headed by each
independent variable report the estimated coefficients of
this variable and the t—statistics in parentheses. We
examined preliminary regressions for serial correlation in
the residuals using 2-tests of the null hypotheses that
the residuals are serially independent. Where necessary, we
used a first-order or a second—order Cochrane—Orcutt
procedure to obtain the final estimated equations. The
columns headed by p and p report the estimated values of
the autoregressive parameters used to correct for serial
correlation in the residuals. The columns headed by
D =D
 1    2
          0, D +D = 0, and ID +D =0 report the
                1   2             3

values of F-tests for these null hypothesis and, in
parentheses, the probabilities of finding F-values greater
                                                                 Table   2
                                          Employment Equations for Low—Wage Industries
                   Constant     .
                                 t          t+l
                                                     C
                                                         t
                                                             C
                                                              t+l
                                                                             N
                                                                              t          t
                                                                                                 t      N
                                                                                                         t1 —Lt1       1       2
                                                                                                                                      DDOD+D=OD+D(
                                                                                                                                      1     2     1     2
Lumber and           —7.1      —.21         .02     —.00      —.01               .50   2.5      —.02          .20    —.49     —.43        5.4         9.6     2.1
Wood Products       (—6.5)    (—3.2)      (0.3)    (—0.1)    (—0.9)       (5.1)        (6.7) (—5.3)         (1.8)   (—3.2)   (—3.0)       (.01)       (.01)   (.16:
Furniture and        —1.8        .03   —.12         —.00        .03        —.33        1.6       .00          .23                         1.5         1.7     0.7
Fixtures            (—1.9)     (0.4) (—1.7)        (—0.2)     (1.4)      (—2.6)        (3.0)   (1.0)        (1.4)                         (.25)       (.21)   (.42:
Miscellaneous        —1.3       —.11       —.01      —.02       .01          —.06       1.4      .00          .68     —.88     —.55       6.9     10.7        4.0
                    C—2.8).   (—2.7)      (—0.2)   (—2.7)     (0.7)      (—1.6)        (6.0)   (0.8)        (7.2)   (—5.9)   (—3.7)       (.01)    (.003)     (.07:
Manufacturing
Industries
Food and              -.84          .03      .00      .00       .01        -.04   -.13   -.01                 .69                         1.5         2.2     4.6
Kindred Products    (—1.5)     (1.5)       (0.1)    (0.0)     (1.7)      (—1.2) (—0.9) (—2.6)               (4.5)                         (.24)       (.15)   (.04
Tobacco              —4.4       —.08        —.08      .02        —.02      —.19   —.37   —.02                 .10      .45                1.1         2.3     1.2
Manufactures        (—3.3)    (—1.4)      (—1.2)    (1.3)    (—1.7)      (—1.2) (—0.9) (—2.9)               (0.5)    (2.8)                (.35)       (.14)   (.27:
Textile Mill          —.09      —.15         .05     —.00       .02        —.14         1.1     —.00          .73     —.74     —.50       4.8         3.9     1.9
Products            (—0.1)    (—3.2)       (0.9)   (—0.2)     (1.7)      (—2.8)        (3.9)   (—0.7)       (7.1)   (—5.0) (—3.4)         (.02)       (.06)   (.18
                                                                                        1.0       .005        .56     —.79     0.62       5.4     10.8        0.5
Apparel and            .68      —.05        —.04     —.01       .01        —.36
Other Textile        (3.5)    (—1.9) (—1.3)        (—2.9)     (2.1)      (—6.7)        (6.2)    (5.2)       (8.4)   (—4.6) (—3.6)         (.01)    (.003)     (.48:
Products
Leather and            .25       .05   —.01          —.03         .01      —.21          .38   —.00           .77     —.34                0.9         0.4     1.4
Leather Products     (0.4)     (0.9) (—0.1)        (—2.1)     (1.0)      (—1.1)        (1.1) (—1.5)         (5.3)   (—2.0)                (.41)       (.52)   (.25
Retail               —1.1        .00   —.03           .00         .00            .06     .15      .002        .68                         31          4.2     2.0
Trade               (—2.4)     (p.2) (—2.2)         (0.2)     (1.3)          (1.9)     (1.5)    (2.2)       (5.7)                         (.06)       (.05)   (.17
                             — 35 —

than the computed F—values under the null hypotheses. In the
equation for Furniture and Fixtures, the value of R2 is .71.
In all of the other equations, the value of R2 is .98 or
higher.
     The regressions reported in Table 2 indicate that either
the current minimum wage or the near-future minimum wage have
a significantly negative effect on employment in seven of
these nine industries. Based on computed t-statistics less
than -1.4, which corresponds to significance at the ten
percent level, we can conclude that an increase in the current
minimum wage depresses current employment in Lumber and Wood
Products, in Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries, in
Tobacco Manufactures, in Textile Mill Products, and in Apparel
and Other Textile Products, and that an increase in the near-
future minimum wage depresses current employment in Furniture
and Fixtures and in Retail Trade. The F-tests for the joint
importance of    and      and for the total effects of
and t+l indicate that depressing effects on employment are
significant at the six percent level in five industries:
Lumber and Wood Products, Miscellaneous Manufacturing, Textile
Mill Products, Apparel and Other Textile Products, and Retail
Trade. In these five industries, the sums of the estimated
coefficients on    and t+l range from -.03 to -.19. It is
worth noting that in no industry did the F-tests indicate a
significantly positive effect of    and      on employment.
     The results reported in Table 2 for the effects on
employment of current or near—future minimum wage coverage are
less clear. We estimated significantly negative coefficients
on C. for Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries, Apparel
and Other Textile Products, and Leather and Leather Products,
and a significantly negative coefficient on C11 for Tobacco
Manufactures, but we estimated significantly positive
coefficients on      for Furniture and Fixtures, Food and
Kindred Products, Textile Mill Products, Apparel and Other
                             — 36 —

Textile Products, and Teenage Employment. The F-test for the
total effect of C and c1 indicates that the sum of the
coefficients is significantly negative in Miscellaneous Manu-
facturing and significantly positive in Food and Kindred
Products.

7.   ConcluSiOnS

     The main conclusions from this study are the following:
(1) Neither the level nor the coverage of the federal minimum
wage seems to have a direct effect on aggregate employment
or average wages.  (2) The level of the minimum wage, however,
has significant and pervasive effects on the demographic
composition of employment. Specifically, increase in
the current or near—future minimum wage cause the employment
of teenagers and young men to decrease and cause the employ-
ment of young women and adults to increase. The empirical
analysis of both aggregate employment and employment of
demographic groups indicates that this replacement of teenagers
and young men in employment by young women and adults is
approximately one-for-one.  (3) A major part of these
effects is associated with the anticipation of future changes
on the level of the minimum wage. The effect of combined
increases in current and near-future levels of the minimum
wage is much larger than the effect of the current minimum
wage estimated in previous studies. A ten percent increase in
the level of both the current and near-future minimum wage
would decrease employment of teenage males and young men by
about 2.8% and teenage women by about 2.4% and involve a
 turnover of about 300,000 workers.   (4) The employment
 reductions associated with the level of the minimum wage
 are concentrated in certain industries that apparently
 have a high proportion of minimum-Wage workers.
  (5) changes in the effective coverage of the federal minimum
 wage, as estimated by the Employment Standards Administration,
 have effects on the demographic and industrial composition
                               — 37 —

of   employment that are significant, but limited to nonwhite
demographic groups and a couple of industries. Specifically,
an increase in both current and near-future coverage
decreases employment of nonwhite adult women and men, but
increases employment of the sum of nonwhite female teenagers
and young women.  (6) Federal minimum wage policy and,
specifically, the role of monetary policy in determining
the real value of the preset nominal minimum wage, do
not seem to account even in part for the relation
between monetary policy and aggregate employment. Monetary
policy also apparently affects the composition of employment,
but there is also no clear association of this relation
with minimum—wage policy. Monetary nonneutrality results
from other, undetermined factors.
                             — 38 —


                           REFERENCES

E.R. Berndt and N.E. Savin, "Conflict Among Criteria for
     Testing Hypotheses in the Multivariate Linear Regressions
     Models," Econometrica, 45, July 1977, 1263—1277.
J.F. Boschen and H.I. Grossman, "The Federal Minimum Wage,
     Employment, and Inflation," in Report of the Minimum Wage
     Study Commission, Vol. VI, (Washington, D.C., 1981).
E.M. Gramlich, "Impact of Minimum Wages on Other Wages,
     Employment and Family Incomes," Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, 2: 1976, 409-461.
J.H. Grant and D.S. Harnermesh, "Labor Market Competition
     Among Youths, White Women and Others," Review of Economics
     and Statistics, 63, August 1981, 354—360.
D.S. Hamermesh, "Minimum Wages and the Demand for Labor,"
     NBER Working Paper No. 656, April 1981.
J.F. Ragan, Jr., "Minimum Wages and the Youth Labor Market,"
     The Review of Economics and Statistics, LIX, May 1977,
     129—136.
F. Welsh, Minimum Wages: Issues and Evidence, American
     Enterprise Institute, (Washington, D.C., 1978)
C.F. Wyrner, Resimul Manual, IMP   unpublished   mimeo., 1978.
