NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPLIANCE WITH THE OVERTIME PAY PROVISIONS
OF THE FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT

Ronald G. Ehrenberg

Paul L. Schumann

Working Paper No. 815

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
December 1981

Professor of Economics and Labor Economics, Cornell University, and
Assistant Professor of Industrial Relations, University of
Minnesota. Our research was conducted under a contract with the
Minimum Wage Study Commission; however, the views expressed here are
solely our own. A draft of this paper was written while Ehrenberg
was a visiting professor at Tel—Aviv University. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper # Sl5
December 1981

COMPLIANCE WITH THE OVERTIME PAY
PROVISIONS OF THE FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT

Abstract

Our paper presents a methodology that can be used to estimate the
extent of noncompliance with the overtime pay provisions of the Fair Labor

Standards Act (FLSA). The methodology is applied to data from the May
1978 Current Population Survey and the 1977 Michigan Quality of Employment

Survey. These data suggest that the fraction of covered workers working
overtime who fail to receive a premium of at least time and a half, as

called for by the legislation, is in the range of 25 percent. They also
suggest that the extent of noncompliance is greater in those industries in
which size class exemptions to the legislation exist (retail trade and

selected service industries). Finally, probit analyses of the determinants

of noncompliance suggest that decisions about whether to comply with the
overtime provisions of the FLSA are at least partially based on the associated
benefits and costs.

Ronald G. Ehrenberg
Paul L. Schumann
New York State School of
Industrial and Labor Relations
P.O. Box 1000
Cornell University

Ithaca, NY 14853
(607) 256—3026

I.

Introduction

Proposals have been periodically introduced into Congress to raise the

overtime pay premium required by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) from
time and a half to double time in the hope that by making overtime hours

more expensive, employers would be induced to reduce their usage of overtime

and to increase their employment levels. That is, increasing the overtime
premium is thought by some to be a way to stimulate employment growth and to
reduce unemployment.

1

If the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA are not fully complied
with, the potential employment gain associated with any increase in the

overtime premium will be reduced. Furthermore, since an increase in the
overtime premium would increase the amount employers save by not complying
with the legislation, such an increase might lead to a decrease in the
compliance rate. This would further moderate the actual dec).ine in over—
time hours and the potential positive employment effects resulting from an
increase in the overtime premium.

A number of data sources provide some information on compliance with

overtime legislation. An early U.S. Department of Labor compliance survey
indicated that 30 percent of the establishments in which overtime was worked
were in violation of the overtime provisions of the FLSA and 5.9 percent of
the employees working overtime were not paid in accordance with the overtime

provisions (U.S. Department of Labor (1965)). More recently, Labor Department investigations in FY 1977 of complaints of violations under the FLSA
found a greater dollar volume of violations of the overtime pay provisions

than they did of the minimum wage provisions.2 Finally, data from the annual
May supplements to the Current Population Surveys indicate that over the 1973
to 1978 period, less than 43 percent of full—time wage and salary workers who
3
worked 41 or more hours a week at one job reported receiving premium pay.

2

Of course, many of the individuals who work long workweeks may work
in noncovered employment where payment of an overtime premium is not

required; only 58 percent of all wage and salary workers were covered by

the overtime provisions of the FLSA in l978. Since one may reasonably
conjecture that noncovered workers are more likely to work overtime, as
their marginal costs of overtime hours are lower than those of otherwise
identical covered workers, the data from the CPS cited above should be considered only suggestive and probably overstate the extent of noncompliance.

Our objective in the next section is to more carefully analyze the May 1978
CPS and also the 1977 Michigan Quality of Employment Survey data to obtain
estimates of the extent of noncompliance with the overtime pay provisions,

focusing on workers who can be identified with certainty as being covered
by and subject to the overtime provisions of the FLSA.

Knowledge of the correlates of noncompliance may well be as important

to policymakers as knowledge of the rate of noncompliance. While information on the latter may lead them to push for an increase in the resources
devoted to enforcing compliance and/or for increases in the penalties for
noncompliance, knowledge of the former is useful in deciding how the limited
resources that the government has to assure compliance should be allocated.

With this in mind, in Section III we describe our attempts to build and
estimate a model of the determinants of noncompliance with the overtime pay
provisions of the FLSA and discuss the conclusions that can be drawn from
these efforts.5

Our analyses in Sections II and III deal only with individuals who we
can identify as being subject to the overtime pay provisions with certainty.

3

However, for individuals employed in retail, trade and selected service indus-

tries, coverage under the FLSA is partially based upon whether the employer's
annual sales exceed a critical value and, at least in the CPS data, such infor—
ination is unavailable. One might speculate that noncompliance will be higher
among employees subject to the overtime provisions in these industries than
it will be elsewhere as both employees' knowledge of their rights to receive
overtime premiums of time and a half and employers' knowledge of their obligations to pay such premiums may be lower in these industries, especially in

establishments whose sales just exceed the critical value. To test this con—
jecture one must develop a method to estimate the extent of noncompliance in
industries in which such size class exemptions exist, when data on the size
of establishment in which each individual is employed is unavailable;

this is done in Section IV.6 Finally, we briefly summarize the conclusions
that can be drawn from our efforts.

II. New Estimates of Noncompliance
The May 1978 Current Population Survey contained data on 11,738 individuals who reported that they worked 41 or more hours during the survey

week for a single employer. It would be incorrect, however, to focus on
this entire sample when discussing compliance with the overtime pay provisions since there are numerous individuals who are not subject to the pro-

visions. These include, but are not restricted to, supervisory employees,
outside salespersons, employees in seasonal industries (including agriculture),
state and local government employees, employees in small retail trade and
service sector establishments, and some household workers.

Fortunately, it is possible to sort each individual who worked overtime
into one of three groups; those who we believe are "definitely" subject to the

4

overtime pay provisions, those who we believe are subject to the provisions
with a known probability, and those who are either not subject to the pro-

visions or for whom coverage probabilities can not be determined. The
assignment is based upon an algorithm which makes use of knowledge of the
various exemptions to the overtime provisions of the FLSA, whether each
individual was paid by the hour, and of the detailed three—digit census
industry and occupation categories in which each individual is employed.

In the case of individuals employed in retail trade and selected service
industries, where coverage under the overtime provisions was based upon
whether the establishment's sales exceeded $250,000 per year in 1978, each
individual was assigned a probability of coverage equal to the fraction of
employees in the three—digit industry who worked in establishments with

sales of greater than $250,000 in l977. The latter information came from
published volumes of the 1977 Census of Retail Trade and the 1977 Census of
Selected Service Industries, as well as from unpublished tabulations that
were specially prepared for us by the Census.

Details of the algorithm used to assign individuals to the three groups

are contained in an appendix that is available from us. The procedure
resulted in our classifying 3,231 individuals as being definitely subject to
the overtime pay provisions and 535 individuals as being subject to the

provisions with known probability. It is these two groups, which represent
32 percent of the individuals who reported working overtime, that we focus

our attention on in the paper. This section and the next consider the
"certain coverage" group, while Section IV considers the "known probability
of coverage" or "partial coverage" group.

5

Individuals in the CPS sample reported whether they received any premium
pay for overtime hours in excess of 40 per week, not what their overtime pay

premium was. While it is possible to construct an estimate of the overtime
pay premium for a subset of individuals in the sample, this estimate is sub-

ject to considerable error. Because of this, we define noncompliance in
the CPS data as failure to receive

premium pay for hours of work greater

than 40 hours per week. Since receipt of a premium of less than time and a
half represents noncompliance also, such a definition clearly understates the
extent of noncompliance.0

In Table 1 we focus on the individuals who we believe are definitely
subject to the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA and, weighing each observation by its sample weight, compute an estimate of noncompliance;

this is found in column (1). Defining noncompliance as failure to receive
any premium pay for overtime, we find (row 1) that 9.6 percent of the indi-

viduals in the sample fell in this category. This number is higher than the
estimates of noncompliance obtained in the 1965 BLS compliance survey.

A second source of data on noncompliance is the 1977 Michigan Quality of

Employment Suryçy (f). The

is

a sample of over 1500 employed adults and

the premium received for overtime work was explicitly reported for those in the

sample who worked overtime. Unfortunately, most adults in the survey failed
to work overtime and, after applying our algorithm to isolate those individuals
who were subject to the legislation with certainty (including the restriction
that they were paid on an hourly basis), we wound up with a sample of only 69

individuals. Of these individuals, however, almost 16 percent failed to receive
a premium of time and a half (column 3).

Although this estimate is quite precise, one should not place too much
faith in its specific value because the sample may not be representative due

6

to its small size. Nevertheless, it does suggest that the actual noncompliance rate in the "complete coverage" sector is probably fairly close to

the lower bound estimate of 9.6 that we obtained with the CPS data. We
should reemphasize that the former figure refers to the fraction of those

individuals working overtime, who failed to receive any premium; it does
not include those individuals who received overtime pay premiums of less

than time and a half. To the extent that there are any individuals in
this latter group, the actual noncompliance rate will be above 9.6 percent.9

III. The Determinants of Noncompliance

What are the factors that influence the probability that an individual
who is working overtime and subject to the overtime pay provisions of the
FLSA will be observed not being paid a premium of at least time and a half,

as the FLSA calls for? An economic model of noncompliance should start from
the proposition that an efficient solution requires that noncompliance will
be observed only when the sum of the net benefits (benefits minus costs) to
an employer and his employees from noncompliance exceeds zero)° That is,

the gains and losses from noncompliance faced by both parties in the employ—
inent relationship must be evaluated.

From the perspective of the employer, the benefits from noncompliance
are the savings that accrue from his failing to pay workers working overtime

a premium of at least time—and—a—half. The cost to the employer of noncompliance include the costs of any increased employee turnover that may result

from failure to pay legally required premium payments. These costs are
likely to be higher for skilled workers than they are for unskilled workers
and for workers that the employer expects (wants) to have long job tenure
with the firm, than they are for workers with short expected job tenure.

7

The costs of noncompliance also include any costs that would result
if an employer is caught violating the overtime pay provisions, these costs

are determined both by the probability of being caught if a violation occurs

and the expected penalty once a violation is identified. The resources
available to the Employment Standards Administration to enforce the provisions
of the FLSA are minimal and only rarely does the agency institute investigations

on its own.11 More typically, investigations result from alleged violations being reported by employees who feel that they have not been paid

in accordance with the provisions of the Act. This suggests that the
costs of noncompliance that an employer perceives he faces will increase

as his perception that an employee will report a violation increases.12 It
also increases with his perception that such a report will be investigated.
Finally, the costs an employer perceives are associated with noncompliance depend upon the expected penalty once a violation is judged to occur.
Since the penalty for first—time violators who do not falsify their records
involves only back payment of the premium pay that is owed to workers

(without interest) and the typical settlement involves repayment of substantially less than 100 percent of the funds that are owed, the incentives for
firms to comply with the legislation are not very high.13

It should not

be surprising then, that we obtained a lower bound estimate of noncompliance
of roughly 10 percent in the "completely covered sector". Indeed, the fact
that the noncompliance rate is not substantially higher suggests that while
calculations of the benefits and costs from noncompliance influence employers'

decisions, they are not the sole determinants. Other factors, such as the
desire not to violate government legislation, clearly are important.

8

From the perspective of employees, the costs of noncompliance include
the loss of premium pay they would suffer if the employer failed to pay them
an overtime premium of at least time—and—a—half, as called for by the legis-

lation. The benefits include the possibility that a lower "price" for overtime hours would induce an employer to expand his usage of overtime hours.

If an employer's demand for overtime hours is elastic with respect to the
overtime wage rate, an employee's total labor earnings would be higher if

the employer fails to comply with the legislation. In this case noncompliance would yield net benefits to the employee if the increased earnings

are sufficient to compensate him for his reduction in leisure hours. Of
course, employees also have preferences with respect to the avoidance of

violations of government legislation that must be taken into account in
the analysis.

To make the discussion a bit more formal, suppose that the net economic

benefits that an employer perceives from noncompliance (BE) and the net
economic benefits that employees perceive from noncompliance (Bw) can both
be expressed as linear functions of a vector of explanatory variables (Z).

Let c represent the net effect of the sum of employer and employee preferences or tastes for complying with government legislation. Then we can

write

(1)

=

E + c)Z. + E:.

S11 if S1>O
= 0

otherwise

9

*

Here S.1

—

is an unobservable continuous variable that represents the sum

of the net economic and noneconomic benefits that individual i, who is
observed working overtime, and

his or her employer would receive from not

complying with the legislation. The

and

represent vectors of

regression coefficients that indicate the marginal effects of the explana—
tory variables on the net benefits that the employer and the employee,

respectively, receive from noncompliance. Since some variables will affect
either the employer's net benefits or the employee's net benefits, but not

both, some of the coefficients in the vectors aE

and

will be zero.

Put another way, the variables that affect BE and Bw may well differ.
*

Although Si is unobservable, we can arbitrarily scale its cut—off
value so that when the sum of the net benefits from noncompliance is greater

than zero (S > 0), we observe an individual who is working overtime not
receiving a premium that is in compliance with the legislation (S. =
Conversely, if the

index

1).

is less than or equal to zero (S < 0), the

individual will be observed receiving a premium in compliance with the

legislation (S. =

0).

If we further assume that the c. can be treated

as a normally distributed random variable that is uncorrelated with the Z,
equation (1) represents a probit model of the determinants of noncompliance

with the overtime premium that can be estimated by standard methods.
Our data on noncompliance is for individuals and it is natural to ask

what variables might enter into Z and influence the probability that a
worker working overtime, who is subject to the overtime provisions of the

FLSA, does not receive premium pay in compliance with the legislation. A
group of variables that are likely candidates are available in either the
CPS or

samples or can be constructed from other sources and we discuss

each in turn.

10

The noncompliance rate is expected to first decline, and then to increase

with age. Teenagers have high expected turnover rates; this makes it unlikely
that employers will heavily invest in their training and thus that any increase
in their turnover rates induced by noncompliance would be costly to the

firm. As new entrants, teenagers are also less likely to be aware of the
overtime provisions of the FLSA and this, along with their high turnover
rates and short tenures makes it unlikely that they would report any viola-

tion and ask for a compliance investigation. As such, the noncompliance rate
will likely be high for teens.
Now, as individuals age and develop "permanentt' attachment to firms,

they accumulate both considerable "firm—specific" knowledge and knowledge of

the FLSA's provisions. Noncompliance with the overtime provisions for these
individuals will be costly for the firm; it would be costly to replace them
if they quit and the probability that a FLSA violation will be reported by

them is high. However, after some point in time workers become "locked in",
their earnings with their current employer exceeds their earnings potential

elsewhere due to the firm—specific knowledge they have accumulated. This
reduces the probability that they will quit in response to noncompliance,

which reduces the costs of noncompliance that employers face. These arguments suggest that the noncompliance rate should first decline and then
increase with age.

Turning next to the role of an employee's sex, there are two conflicting

forces at work. On the one hand, females have historically had higher turnover rates and lower expected tenure than males, and thus received less firm—

specific training. This implies that any noncompliance—induced quits by
them would be less costly to firms than quits by males; as a result noncompliance rates for females might be expected to be higher than those for males.

11

On the other hand, in a world of growing litigation, employers may be concerned that failure to pay females the legally required premiums would lead
to the possibility of sex discrimination suits; women may be more likely to
report noncompliance for this reason (see footnote 12) and this should reduce

the noncompliance rate for females. The net effect of these two forces is
indeterminate.

Discrimination against nonwhites or hispanics may manifest itself in

higher noncompliance probabilities for individuals from these groups. The
fact that some hispanics are not fluent in English and thus may not be fully
aware of the legislation reenforces this effect, as does the possibility that
some may be undocumented workers who would be unlikely to complain to
authorities about violations of the FLSA.

Of course, fear of litigation,

or government compliance activities that are targetted at nonwhites, might
reduce the noncompliance rates for that group.

Highly skilled individuals are likely both to be costly for firms to

replace if they quit and also to be fully aware of their legal rights. As
such, higher education levels should be associated with lower noncompliance

rates, other things equal. Individuals earning high wage rates, other things
equal, are likely to also have the same characteristics. However, here the
firm also has an incentive not to comply, other things equal, since as an
individual's wage rate increases the benefits (premium savings) from noncom-

pliance also increase. On balance, one might expect that the former effect
dominates and that compliance will increase as employees' wage rates
14

increase.

Noncompliance is also expected to be lower in unionized environments

than in nonunion environments. One important role that unions play is to

12

monitor employeest working conditions to assure that both collectively bargained and legally required conditions of employment are satisfied. Not
only do unions call violations of legally required conditions to the attention of employers, they also are less reluctant than individual employees——
since they fear retribution less——to call these violations to the attention
of enforcement agencies.

The CPS and QES data both contain information on the industry in which

each individual is employed. Other things equal, one should expect that
noncompliance rates will be lower in highly concentrated industries for two

reasons. First firms in concentrated industries, that face relatively
inelastic product demand curves, can increase their product prices when
faced with having to pay an overtime premium, without fear of losing all of

their sales; this reduces the benefits to noncompliance. In contrast, a
firm in a highly competitive industry has little control over product price
and, faced with the legal requirement to pay an overtime premium, may
achieve greater benefits from noncompliance.
Second, from the Hicks—Marshall laws of derived demand, we know that
because the price elasticities of demand faced by firms in competitive
industries are higher than those faced by other firms, ceteris paribus,
the wage elasticities of labor demand faced by firms in competitive indus-

tries will be higher than those faced by firms in other industries. Noncompliance would thus likely lead to a greater expansion in the usage of

overtime hours in these industries than elsewhere. Because of this, the
net benefits to employees from noncompliance would be higher in competitive
industries; this should further increase the probability of observing noncompliance in competitive industries.

13

Finally, we also expect that noncompliance would be lower in areas
in which greater resources are devoted by the

government to assuring com-

pliance with the FLSA, since the probability of violations being caught.

should be higher in such areas)5 The Employment Standards Administration
(ESA) provided us with data on the total number of FLSA compliance actions

undertaken and the total FLSA compliance budget for each of the 90 local

ESA area offices in 1978. From these data we were able to aggregate up to
state totals and merge into each CPS individual's record, data on these two
measures of compliance activity, each deflated by the number of private and
federal nonsupervisory workers in the state, to approximate compliance
activity per worker subject to the legislation.16

How well are these hypotheses borne out by the data? Table 2 presents
estimates of probit models of the determinants of noncompliance for the
samples of workers who are subject to the overtime pay provisions of the

FLSA with certainty in both the 1978 May CPS and 1977 QES. Noncompliance
is defined in the former survey to be failure to receive any premium for
overtime hours worked in excess of 40 per week, while in the latter survey
it is defined to be failure to receive a premium of at least time and a
half.

One should remember that the sample size in the latter case is

extremely small (69) and thus it is unlikely that one will observe statistic-

ally significant relationships in that data. Nevertheless, since empirical
regularities are less subject to challenge when they are replicated in different data bases, we present both sets of estimates.

The dependent variable in each case is the probit transformation of a
dichotomous variable that takes on the value of one if the individual failed

14

to receive a premium in compliance with the legislation (as defined above)

and zero otherwise.'7 The explanatory variables in the case of the CPS
data include those described above, as well as several other control

variables. In both data sets, a set of (0,1) variables are included to
capture the effect of the major (1—digit) industry group in which the

individual is employed. Only a subset of the other explanatory variables
were available in the QES. In particular, since state of residence was
not reported in this survey, resources devoted to compliance activities
in the state could not be included in the analyses.

Quite strikingly, a number of our hypotheses are borne out. Furthermore, none of the coefficients that are statistically significant are

opposite in sign to what we would expect. For example, both data bases
indicate quite clearly that noncompliance rates are significantly lower in

firms in which unions are present than they are in nonunion firms. Similarly,
the probability of noncompliance is significantly lower in heavily concentrated industries, such as manufacturing and public utilities, than it is in
less concentrated industries such as mining, construction, wholesale trade,

and finance, insurance and real estate. Finally, in accord with our expectations, the probability of noncompliance is significantly negatively related
to an individual's earnings level in the CPS data.

Other results are supportive of our model, although less clear cut. An
increase in the level of government resources devoted to compliance activities
in a state does appear to reduce the probability of noncompliance, however,

this variable is statistically insignificant. The probability of noncompliance
is significantly higher for nonwhites than whites in the QES data, suggesting
that discrimination is present and that this effect dominantes over any

effect of government enforcement activity. Noncompliance is also seen to
increase with age. Results not reported here suggest this relationship

15

occurs primarily for older workers; other things equal, the probability of
noncompliance appears to be some 4 to 6 percent higher for workers older

than age 55 than for all other workers. As we hypothesized earlier, to the
extent that mobility of older workers is limited, older workers may be less

likely to institute complaints about nonreceipt of premium pay. Contrary
to our prior expectations, however, alternative specifications provided no
evidence that noncompliance rates were also higher for teenagers.18
Taken together, these results provide support for the view that
sonic employers and their employees, at least implicitly, do make con-

scious decisions about whether to comply with the overtime provisions of the
FLSA; decisions that involve a weighting of the benefits and the costs that

both parties incur by such an action. While this might suggest to some that
an increase in the overtime premium, which increased the benefits employers
receive from not complying with the legislation would lead to an increased
noncompliance rate, we should remind the reader that such an increase also

increases employees' economic incentives to report noncompliance. The
increased threat of such actions on their part may induce employers to

reduce noncompliance. Thus, one can not predict in advance what the effect
of an increase in the overtime premium on noncompliance would be from our
results.

IV. Noncompliance in the "Partial Coverage" Sector
The analyses in the previous two sections were conducted on a subsample
of individuals who we believe with certainty, were subject to the overtime

pay provisions of the FLSA. We turn now to the subsample of individuals

16

whom can only be assigned a known probability of being subject to the pro-

visions. In this case, estimates of noncompliance can not be obtained by
looking at the proportion of individuals working overtime in the group who
fail to receive a premium of time and a half (or any premium if our conserva—

tive definition of noncompliance is being used). Rather, a more indirect
method must be used.

Let C. denote the proportion of workers subject to the overtime pro-

visions of the FLSA in industry i. We assume that this is equal to the
proportion of individuals in each of the retail trade and service industries
who are employed in establishments with annual sales of at least $250,000 in

1977. Let

equal the probability that a worker subject to the overtime

provisions who works overtime in industry i does not receive a premium in

compliance with the legislation andP. the comparable probability for workers

not subject to the legislation. P is in fact the noncompliance rate, the
variable which we seek to estimate. It is straightforward to see the probability that an individual working overtime in industry i is not getting paid
a premium in compliance with the legislation

(2)

This

PiA =

P

C.
iCi

+ P. (1 —
in

C.)
i

= P.

in

is given by'9

+ (P. — P. )C.
in i
iC

is nothing more than a weighted average of the "noncompliance rates"

of the workers who are subject to and not subject to the legislation, with
the weights being the proportion of workers subject to and not subject to

the legislation. Of course, for workers not subject to the legislation,
the term noncompliance does not denote any violation of law; it simply
reflects failure to receive the premium called for by the law in the covered
sector.

17

Now suppose, for a moment, that P. and P. were constant across mdi—
iC

in

viduals and industries. That is, the probability that a worker working
overtime who was subject to (not subject to) the overtime pay provisions of
the FLSA failed to receive a premium in accordance with the legislation, did

not vary with either characteristics of the individual or the industry. In
this case, equation (3) can be written

p.iA

(3)

= P

n

+(P —

where P and P are the

to,

C

P )C.

n 1

constant noncompliance rates of workers subject

and not subject to, the legislation respectively.

In this situation, it should be clear that if one estimates, for the
sample of individuals working overtime, the simple linear probability
function model

d..a
0 +aC.
ii
ii

(4)

where d.. takes on the value of one if individual j

in

industry i is not

13

paid a premium in accordance with the legislation, and the value of zero
if

he

is paid a premium, that one can estimate the noncompliance rate for

workers subject to the legislation.

Specifically,

PCaO+al

(5)

where

20

and

are the estimated values of a0 and a1.

Of course, it is not likely that P1 and P1 are constant across mdi—
viduals and/or industries. The simplest modification is to assume that the

18

probability of "noncompliance" varies in both sectors with the vector of

variables Z that we discussed in the previous section. Suppose that the

probabilities that individual j, who is employed in industry i, does
not receive a premium in compliance with the overtime provisions are given,
in the two sectors, by

(6)

P..
= OC
ijC

(7)

P..
=
ijn

+ 1C j
z.

and
P

On

+

Plnj
Z. ,

respectively.

21

Substitution of (6) and (7) into (2) then yields, after manipulation
that the probability that an individual with characteristics Z. in industry i
who is working overtime fails to receive a premium in compliance with the

legislation I'A is given by

(8)

P .

ijA

=P

On

+ P Z. + (P
in j

OC

— P

On)C.
i

+ (PlC — P

)z.C.
ln j 1

Hence, if one estimates the linear probability function model

(9)

=e

d .
ij

0

+ e Z. +

lj

e

C. + e Z.C.
2i
3ji

the average noncompliance rate for workers subject to the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA in these industries can be obtained from

(10)

=

O + e2)

+

(ê1 + e3)

19

where Z

is

the mean value of Z for individuals in the sample who are subject
22

to the legislation.

Table 3 presents our estimates of the proportion of employees subject
to the overtime provisions of the FLSA (C.) in May 1978 for 36 Census three—
digit retail trade and service industries.

23

The proportion varied con-

siderably across industries, ranging from 1.00 for department stores to only

.04 for barber shops. There were 535 individuals in the May 1978 CPS sample
who worked at least 41 hours during the survey week, reported that they were
paid by the hour, were not exempt from the overtime provisions for other

reasons, and were employed in one of these industries. These individuals
form our "partial coverage sample".

Estimates of equations (4) and ( 9

)

are

found in Table 4 and the implied

estimates of noncompliance with the overtime pay provisions one obtains from
these results, using equations (5) and (10), are found in Table 5.

case, noncompliance is defined as failure to receive

In each

overtime pay premium;

the estimates therefore likely understate the true noncompliance rate.
The estimates in Table 5 strongly suggest that noncompliance is higher
for workers subject to the overtime provisions in the "partially covered"
sector than it is for workers in the "complete coverage" sector, as we earlier

hypothesized. For example, if we use the simplest model which assumes that
the probability of noncompliance does not vary with individual or industry
characteristics, we estimate that 20.2 percent of individuals working overtime who are subject to the overtime pay provisions in the partially covered

sector failed to receive any premium pay for overtime. When we generalize
the model to allow noncompliance to vary with characteristics of the individual,
the noncompliance rate, evaluated at the mean values of the characteristics,

20

rises to 24.5 percent. These estimates are substantially higher than the 9.6
percent estimate for noncompliance that we observed in the complete coverage
CPS sample.

We can also compute estimates of the proportion of individuals in the
sample who are not subject to the overtime pay provisions and who did not

receive any overtime pay premium for overtime hours. These estimated
"noncompliance rates" have no normative significance, as these workers are

not legally required to receive a premium. Nonetheless, it is interesting
to note that they are considerably larger than the noncompliance rates for

workers in these industries who are subject to the legislation. Indeed, our
estimates of "noncompliance" for these non—subject workers is 64.2 percent
when the probability of receiving a premium is assumed not to vary with individuals' characteristics and 48.5 percent when it is assumed to vary.

One might be tempted to conclude from these estimates, that a reasonable
estimate of the effect of the FLSA on the probability that workers in these
industries who are subject to the overtime provisions are paid a premium is
the difference between the proportions receiving premium pay in both sectors.
Our estimates would imply then that the FLSA has increased the probability
that a worker receives premium pay for overtime by between 24 (48.5—24.5)
and 44 (64.2—20.2) percentage points.

Such a conclusion would be incorrect, however, for at least two reasons.
First, the presence of a covered sector may well affect the probability
that establishments in the noncovered sector pay an overtime premium.24
Thus, estimates of the difference between "noncompliance" rates in the covered
and noncovered sectors tells us little about the effect of the legislation on
the probability that workers subject to the legislation are paid a premium.

21

Second, independent of the

above problem, there is no reason to presume that

the probability that noncovered (small) establishments pay a premium is an
accurate estimate of the probability that covered (larger) establishments

would pay an overtime premium, in the absence of the legislation. Our estimates simply can not be used to infer anything about the quantitative effect
of the FLSA on the proportion of workers receiving premium pay for overtime
in this sector.

Finally, one can recover estimates of the marginal effects of the
various explanatory variables on the noncompliance rate for workers subject
to the overtime pay provisions in this sample from

(11)

=

(e1 + e3)

These estimates are presented in Table 6 for a number of the explanatory

variables; their expected signs are summarized in the first column. Although
most of these effects prove not to be statistically significantly different
from zero, perhaps because of the smaller sample sizes in the "partially
covered" sample, it is gratifying to observe that the pattern of effects is
quite similar to that which we observed in the "complete coverage" CPS sample.
In particular the noncompliance rate in this sector is higher for males than
females and for nonwhites than whites, is lower for union members than nonunion members, and declines with an individual's earnings and education level
and with the level of resources that the government devotes to compliance

activity. Each of these relationships was also observed in the "complete
coverage sample".

22

V.

Concluding Remarks

The evidence presented in this paper strongly suggests that noncompliance
with the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA is a nontrivial problem.

Our

analyses of the May 1978 CPS data indicated that at least 9.6 percent of
individuals who worked more than 41 hours in the survey week and who we
believe were subject to the FLSA's overtime provisions with certainty failed
to receive

premium pay for overtime hours. Moreover, from our analyses

of the "partial coverage" CPS sample, we inferred that over 20 percent of
the people

working overtime Who were

subject to the overtime pay provisions

in those industries in which size class exemptions existed, failed to

receive any premium. Finally, our analyses of the 1977 Michigan QES data
indicated that almost 16 percent of the individuals who worked overtime
and who we believe with certainty were covered by the overtime provisions

failed to receive a premium of time and a half. Together these analyses
strongly suggest that 10 percent would be a highly conservative estimate
of the noncompliance rate with the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA.
Such a noncompliance rate would substantially moderate the positive employ—
inent effects generated by any future increase in the overtime premium.

Our analyses also provide some support for the view that
decisions about whether to comply with the overtime pay provisions of the
FLSA are at least partially based on the benefits and costs that

are associated with noncompliance. To the extent that increasing the over—
time premium would increase the benefits employers perceive from noncompliance,

this might lead to an increase in noncompliance. If this occurs, the employ—
inent effects of an increase in the

premium would be further moderated. Of

23

course, an increase in the overtime premium would also increase employees'

economic incentives to report noncompliance to enforcement authorities. The
increased threat of such actions on their part might induce employers to

reduce noncompliance. Thus, our results unfortunately do not permit us to
predict what the effect of an increase in the overtime premium on noncompliance
would be.

24

References

Orley Ashenfelter and Robert S. Smith, "Compliance with the Minimum Wage
Law," Journal of Political Economy, April 1979.

George Borjas, "Discrimination in HEW: Is the Doctor Sick or the Patients
Healthy?", Journal of Law and Economics, April 1978.

Ronald C. Ehrenberg and Paul L. Schumann, Longer Hours or More Jobs? (New
York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Ithaca, NY, 1982).
James Heckman, "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error," Econometrica,
January 1979.

George Stamas, "Long Hours and Premium Pay, May 1978," Monthly Labor Review,
May 1979.

U.S. Department of Labor, Wages and Public Contracts Divisions, Compliance
Survey 1965 (Washington, D.C., 1965).
U.S. Department of Labor, Employment Standards Administration, Minimum Wage
and Maximum Hours Standards Under the Fair Labor Standards Act, 1978
(Washington, D.C., 1978).

25

Footnotes

1. See Ronald C. Ehrenberg and Paul L. Schumann (1982) for an overview of the debate on the wisdom of instituting such a policy and a summary
of the relevant empirical evidence.

2. U.S. Department of Labor (1978).
3. George Stamas (1979).
4. U.S. Department of Labor (1978).
5. Our efforts in this section and the one that follows considerably
generalize the work of Orley Ashenfelter and Robert S. Smith (1979).

6. Ashenfelter and Smith confined their attention to the sector in
which coverage could be determined with certainty.

7. The establishment sales size test rose to $275,000 on July 1, 1978
and has increased still further since then. However, since the CPS data is
for May 1978, the $250,000 figure is the correct one to use.

8. Two problems should be noted with this definition. First, it ignores
the possibility that the existence of the overtime pay premium may have caused
some employers, who otherwise would have worked their workforces overtime,

to avoid the use of overtime. Such employers would be complying with the
legislation, but individuals employed in these firms would not be included

in our sample. Although we return to this point in the next section, when
we attempt to estimate whether government resources devoted to increasing
compliance reduce the probability that an individual will work overtime, it
should be understood that noncompliance is defined in this section to be
conditional on individuals working overtime.

26

Second, there may be some measurement error in the reporting of hours

of work. Some individuals who reported that they worked more than 40 hours
per week and failed to receive an overtime premium may actually have worked
40 hours or less; inclusion of these individuals in our sample would cause

us to overstate the noncompliance rate. In contrast, some individuals who
reported that they worked 40 hours or less and failed to receive a premium
may actually have worked more than 40 hours; exclusion of these individuals
from our sample would cause us to understate the extent of noncompliance.

While one would hope that these two sources of bias just offset each other,
we have no strong reason to believe that this will (or will not) be the case.

9. One additional set of results warrant being briefly reported here.
Analyses reported in the next section suggest that the noncompliance rate

was higher in the federal sector than in the private sector. Some people
may find it inconceivable that federal government agencies would fail to

comply uniformly with federal legislation. While we do not necessarily
agree with this view, it is instructive to note that when the analyses are
redone excluding federal workers (column 2), the results change only mar-

ginally. For evidence of federal government agencies' noncompliance in
another area, see George Borjas (1978).
10.

We are grateful to a referee for stressing the importance of this

point to us. For example, it might be the case that the benefits from noncompliance exceed the costs as far as the firm is concerned, but the costs
to workers of not receiving premium pay far exceeds the net benefits to the

firm. In this, noncompliance might not arise (even though it is in the
firm's best interest not to comply) because employees could potentially
offer to pay the firm to comply with the legislation (perhaps by taking a

27

straight—time wage cut or agreeing to smaller wage increases) a sum equal

to the firm's net benefits from noncompliance. Such an arrangement would
eliminate the firm's gain from noncompliance and would leave the workers
better off than they would have been if the firm had failed to comply with

the legislation. Of course, workers can first attempt to reduce the firm's
net benefit from noncompliance in other ways (see footnote 12) before
resorting to such implicit monetary payments.

11. See Ashenfelter and Smith (1979) for background data on these
points.

12. Employees, of course, must make their on calculations of the
benefits and costs to them of reporting noncompliance. While the obvious
benefits include the possibility of receiving premium pay for future overtime and back pay to compensate them for their failure to receive overtime
premium pay in the past, the costs include the possibility that the
employer will use less overtime in the future and/or that he might attempt
to retaliate against the "informers" (if he can identify them) by denying
them wage increases or promotion opportunities or by laying them off or
firing them for cause.

13. For example, in fiscal year 1977, Labor Department investigations
discovered $88 million of overtime pay premium violations but only $33

million of this total was repaid to workers. See U.S. Department of Labor
(1978), p. 21.
14.

Put

another way, in structured internal labor markets in which

high wage employees have implicit or explicit long—term contracts, noncom-

pliance, if known, might lead to a reduced supply of new applicants. This
would bid UI) the straight time wage the firm would have to offer, offsetting
any benefits from noncompliance.

28

15.

The previous

hypothesized effects, save for race, assume that

government resources devoted to compliance activity are randomly distributed.
However, if the government was trying to maximize the effectiveness of its
compliance activities, it would assign them in such a way as to maximize
the

expected

number of violations it would uncover (see Ashenfelter and

Smith (1979) for an elaboration of this point). So for example, it would
investigate primarily low—wage nonunion firms in competitive industries,
where violations are likely to occur, rather than high wage union firms in
concentrated industries in which violations are

less

likely to occur.

Clearly, such a rational assignment of government resources would
reduce our chances of observing noncompliance being

correlated with the

other postulated "determinants't; Ashenfelter and Smith did find some
evidence that compliance resources were being assigned nonrandomly. Hence,
the empirical estimates we obtain should be understood to represent the

product of the interactions between employer and employee actions and
government assignment of enforcement resources.

Of course, given the low

level of government enforcement activity, we would be surprised to see it
substantially alter the pattern of noncompliance (as opposed to the level).

16. The state level was the finest geographic breakdown that could be
identified in the CPS data. Since some local offices served more than
one state, it was often necessary to aggregate data across several states.
As a result, the number of individual states, or state aggregates, for
which these totals could be computed is actually 32.
that it was impossible to separate out the resources

wage and overtime pay violation activities.

We should also note
devoted to minimum

29

17. Our model is of the determinants of noncompliance. Clearly then,
in the case of the CPS data, the dependent variable is measured with error.

Whenever it takes on the value of one (no premium), the legislation is not

complied with. However, when it takes on the value of zero this may represent receipt of a premium of time and a half of more (compliance) or receipt

of a premium of less than time and a half (noncompliance). Such measurement
error may bias the estimates in Table 2, however it is unclear in which
direction the bias will go.

18. In all of the above, compliance is defined conditional on the
individual's working overtime. However, the existence of the overtime
premium and efforts to enforce compliance with the premium, may reduce the

probability that individuals actually work overtime. If this occurs, the
estimates in Table 2 may be subject to sample selection bias; we may confound the effect of an explanatory variable on the probability of noncompliance with its effect on the probability of working overtime (see James
Heckman (1979)).

Using data on individuals in the CPS who both did and did not work overtime, we attempted to correct for this problem by estimating a model in
which the probability of working overtime and the probability of not receiv-

ing a premium were simultaneously determined. Unfortunately, such an
approach yielded very few significant coefficients, probably because it is
a difficult model to accurately specify.

19. Data limitations force us to. assume in this calculation that the
proportion of employees working overtime in an industry who are subject to
the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA equals the reported proportion of

employees in an industry who are subject to the provisions (C1). This

30

assumption may be inappropriate because the usage of overtime hours may
vary systematically with establishment size (and hence coverage), although

it appears impossible to specify the direction of this relationship. On
the one hand, the usage of overtime may be higher in small establishments

that are not subject to the legislation, because their marginal costs of

overtime hours are lower. On the other hand, the size class exemptions to
the FLSA were instituted because small establishments were successfully
able to argue they did not regularly schedule overtime hours and that their
usage of overtime occurred only in emergencies; if this argument is true
the proportionate usage overtime would increase with establishment size.

The implications of all this is that we may have measured the proportion
of employees in an industry working overtime who are subject to the over—
time provisions with some error, however, it is impossible to determine
if we systematically have overstated or understated this proportion.

20. While there are well—known statistical problems associated with
the linear probability model, estimates obtained from it will be unbiased.

We use it here both for expository purposes and because the more appropriate probit or logit models would not permit us to make the necessary
linear aggregation across workers subject to and not subject to the
legislation.

21. For expository convenience, in what follows we treat Z and its
coefficient vector as single numbers rather than vectors. However, in our
empirical work, they are treated as vectors.

22. Actually one knows only the mean value of Z for all individuals
in the sample and these are used in the calculations.

31

23. These numbers should more precisely be interpreted as the

pro-

portion of employees who are not exempt for other reasons (e.g., who are
not supervisory or outside sales persons) who are subject to the overtime
provisions.

24. One might argue that as the proportion of individuals covered by
the legislation increases, the noncompliance rate in this sector will fall,
since both employees and employers will be more likely to be aware of their

being subject to the legislation. In addition, if labor markets are at
all competitive, one might hypothesize that an increase in the proportion
of workers subject to the legislation would increase the probability that
employers not subject to the legislation would have to pay overtime pre-

miums to attract workers. While it would be desirable to test these

hypotheses, if one allows both P and P to vary with C, the resulting
estimating equation would be under—identified and one would not be able to

obtain an estimate of either P or P .
C

which only

n

We

did estimate some equations in

was allowed to vary with C. While these equations yielded

estimates of P that were higher than those in Table 5, one can show that
if the probability that premium pay for overtime is received in the
noncovered sector increases with C, then such estimates of PC will be biased
upwards.

32

Table 1
Estimates of Noncompliance With the Overtime Provisions of
the FLSA: Complete Coverage Sample
(Sample Size)

May 1978 p5a
Noncompliance
Defined as
(1)

(2)

Private &
Federal
Sample

Failure to Receive y
Premium Pay for Overtime
(Hourly Wage Sample)

Private
Only

Private
Only

(2)
.

(3)

(1)
•

Failure to Receive a
Premium of at Least 1.5
Straight—Time Wage

1977 Michigan QF

•

9.6% (3231)
.

—

8.9% (3046)

——

.
——

Source; Authors' calculations from

a — Nay 1978 Current Population Surve Public Use data tapes;
b — 1977 Michigan Quality of Employment Survey data tapes.

15.9% (69)

33

Table 2
Probit Analysis of Noncompliance: Complete Coverage
Sample, May 1978 CPS and 1977 QES Data

(absolute value asymptotic t—statistic)
May 1978 CPS

(4)

(2)

(5_)

Zi

.006(2.2)

.006(2.2)

.006(2.2)

.005(1.9)

.064(1.4)

Z2

.065(0.7)

.066(0.7)

.111(1.2)

.111(1.2)

1.276(1.1)

Z3

.022(0.3)

—.039(0.3)

L.022(0.3)

-.023(0.3)

1.542(1.7)

Z4

.147(1.3)

.146(1.3)

.094(0.8)

.092(0.8)

1.901(2.1)

Z5

.157(0.5)

.173(0.6)

.246(0.8)

.265(0.9)

Z6

.007(0.0)

.010(0.1)

.059(0.4)

.063(0.4)

Z7

-.006(0.4)

-.006(0.4)

-.007(0.4)

-.007(0.4)

28

—.018(0.2)

—.165(0.2)

.005(0.1)

.008(0.1)

29

-.057(0.7)

-.057(0.7)

-.065(0.8)

-.063(0.8)

210a

—.016(4.3)

—.016(4.3)

—.015(3.9)

—.015(3.9)

Zil

—.207(1.5)

—.207(1.5)

—.205(1.4)

0.203(1.4)

Z12

-.449(5.8)

—.452(5.8)

0.364(4.5)

—.36(4.5)

Z13

.402(3.0)

.401(3.0)

214

.121(0.7)

.122(0.7)

.030(0.2)

.031(0.2)

—9.028(0.0)

Z15

.336(2.6)

.336(2.6)

.263(1.9)

.263(1.9)

—.737(0.7)

Z16

—.378(3.2)

—.378(3.2)

—.458(3.6)

—.457(3.6)

—1.593(1.4)

217

—.551(4.2)

—.550(4.2)

—.622(4.5)

—.622(4.5)

—1.545(1.3)

Z18

—.110(0.7)

—.109(0.7)

—.294(1.5)

—.293(1.5)

—1.544(1.3)

Z19

-.106(0.7)

-.106(0.7)

-.168(1.0)

-.16S(1.O)

-10.062(0.0)

220

—.056(0.2)

—.056(0.2)

—.037(0.4)

—.087(0.4)

1.132(0.6)

221

—74.863(0.8)

.010(0.7)

.

222

—.181(0.8)

—92.134(0.9)

—.201(0.8)
.

L —1028.0
N/A

—1.191(1.6)

—6.983(0.0)

223

L*

.001(0.1)

—923.9
.097 3231

.042(0.3)

—1023.0

—921.2

—921.2

—30.27

—923.9

—840.8

—840.8

—17.66

.097 3231

.090 3046

.0900346

.159 69

34

Table
L

=

L*

=

log
log

2 (continued)

of likelihood for binomial model
of likelihood function for full model at convergence

N

proportion of sample in noncompliance

n

sample size

a

coefficient has been multiplied by 10 in CPS equations

where:
(l)(2) =

restricted to employees who report being paid by the hour, mdi—
viduals said to be in noncompliance if they receive no premium
pay for overtime

(3)(4) = same as (1) and (2) but restricted to private employees
=

(5)

restricted

to employees who report being paid by the hour, mdi—
viduals said to be in noncompliance if they receive a premium of
less than time and a half

and:
Zi
Z2

age
=

l=rnale;

0=fernale

Z3

1—married, spouse present; 0=other

Z4

1=black; 0=other

Z5

lother nonwhite; 0=other

Z6

=

1=hispanic;

0=other

Z7

years of schooling completed

Z8

1=reside in central city of SMSA; 0=otherwise

Z9

=

Zl0

=

1=reside in SMSA outside of central city; 0=other
usual weekly earnings if reported; 0=otherwise in CPS equations.
Straight time hourly earnings in the QES equations.

Zil

lusual weekly earnings not reported; 0=otherwise

Z12

1=union member covered by union contract; 0=otherwise

Z13

1=government employee; 0=otherwise.

Z14

l=mining; 0=othcrwise

Z15

1=construction; Orotherwise

Z16

=

l=durable

manufacturing; 0=otherwise

Z17

lnondurable. manufacturing; Ootherwise

ZiS

l=transportation and public utilities; 0=otherwise

Z19

l=wholesale trade; 0=otherwise

Z20

1-finance, insurance, and real estate; 0=othcrwise

Z21

total number of FLSA compliance actions in the state in 1978/total
number of private and federal nonsupervisory employees in the
state in 1978

Z22

total FLSA compliance budget in the state in 1973/total number of
private and federal nonsupervisory employees in the state in 1978

Z23

establishment size

35

Table 3
Estimated

Proportion of Employees Covered by the
Provisions of the FLSA, ay 1978:
Retail Trade and SelcLted Service Industrics

0verimc

Census
Code

Coverage
Rate

607

.886

Lumber and building material retailing

608

.701

Hardware and farm equipment stores

609

1.000

617

.872

Limited price variety stores

627

.870

Miscellaneous general merchandise stores

628

.922

Grocery

629

.474

Dairy products stores

637

.324

Retail bakeries

638

.587

Food stores, n.e.c.

639

.981

Motor vehicle dealers

647

.764

Tire, battery, and accessory dealers

648

.784

Gasoline service stations

649

.826

Miscellaneous vehicle dealers

657.

.731

Apparel and accessories stores, exc. shoe stores

658

.540

Shoe stores

667

.750

Furniture and home furnishings stores

668

.692

Household appliances, TV, and radio stores

669

.666

Eating and drinking places

677

.815

Drug stores

678

.717

Liquor stores

679

.887

Farm and garden supply stores

688

.882

Fuel and ice dealers

689

.285

Retail florists

697

.527
.719
.607
.607
.511
.881

Miscellaneous retail stores

749

757
758
759

777

Industry Description

Depirtment and mail order establishments

stores

Automobile

repair
related scry.iccs

services, cxc.

Automobile repair and

Electrical repair shops
Miscellneous repair services
Hotels and motels

36

Table 3 (continued)
Census
Code

Coverage
Rrite

Industry

Descriotion ____________________________

787

.084

Beauty shops

788

.040

Barber shops

789

.059

Shoe repair shops

797

.565

Dressriaking shops

798

.686

1iisce1lineous personal services

808

.631

Bowling alleys, billiard and pooi parlors

809

.717

Miscellaneous entertain:cnt and iecreation services

Source:

Authors' calculations from unpublished tabulations prepared by the
U.S. Bureau of the Census from data from the 1977 Census of Retail
Trade and 1977 Census of Selected Service Industries.

37

Table 4

OLS Noncompliance Regressions: Partial Coverage
Sample, May 1978 CPS
(absolute value t—statistics)
-

Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

.642 (7.5)

.643 (7.5)

—.614 (0.9)

—.619 (0.9)

Zl

.017 (2.6)

.018 (2.7)

Z2

.014 (0.1)

.013 (0.1)

Z3

—.344 (1.9)

—.357 (2.0)

Z4 & Z5

—.031 (0.1)

—.020 (0.1)

Z6

—.437 (1.1)

—.438 (1.1)

Z7

.082 (1.8)

.081 (1.7)

z1ob

—.012 (1.2)

—.013 (1.2)

Zil

—.225 (0.6)

—.247 (0.7)

Z12

—.336 (1.2)

—.333(1.2)

1.295 (1.4)

1.388 (1.5)

C*Z1

—.021 (2.4)

0.022 (2.5)

C*Z2

.015 (0.1)

.016 (0.1)

C*Z3

.305

(1.3)

.325 (1.4)

C*(Z4 & 25)

.607 (0.1)

.053 (0.1)

C*Z6

.549 (1.1)

.567 (1.1)

C*Z7

—.090 (1.5)

—.089 (1.5)

.002 (0.1)

.001 (0.1)

C*Z11

—.018 (0.0)

—.002 (0.0)

C*Z12

.272 (0.8)

.249 (0.7)

CONST

C

—.440 (3.9)

—.447 (3.5)

c*ziob

C*Z21

7.546 (0.1)

.028

n

.028

—82.028 (1.3)

.136

.139

535 for all equations.

aSee Table 2 for variable definitions. All variables are defined as
before save C which is the estimated proportion of employees in the
industry subject to the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA (see
Table 3).
bCoefficient multiplied by 10
Noncompliance was defined in this table as failure to receive any
premium pay for hours in excess of 40 per week.

38

Table 5
of NonconpUance With the Overtime ProvsioflS
of the ELSA: Partial Coverage Sample, May 1978

Estimates

P

P

Covered Sector

Noncovered_Sector

C

Iode1

(1) NoncomplianCe Constant
Within Each Sector

n

20.2%

64.2%

24.5%

68.5%

(2) NoncomplianCe Varies
Within Each Sector With

Characteristics of the
Individual

Source: Authors' calculations based, on the May 1978 Current Population
Public Use data. Based upon the regression results found
Table 4, columns (1) and (3).

in

39

Table 6

Implied Partial Derivativesa
OLS Noncompliance Results, Partially Covered Sample
(standard errors)
Expected
Impact
—

then +
?

+

Variable
Zi

age

Z2

sex (lmale)

.029 (0.4)

Z4 &.Z5

race

.033 (0.3)

Z6

Hispanic (l=yes)

Z7

education

—.008 (0.4)

i0a

earnings

—.012 (2.3)

Z12

union

—.084 (0.8)

Z22

compliance activity

—.004 (1.3)

(l=nonwhite)

aDid from the estimates in column (4) of Table 4.

.129 (0.7)

—82.028 (1.3)

