                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ESTIMATING WAGE-FRINGE TRADE-OFFS:
                      SOME DATA PROBLEMS



                         Robert Smith

                      Ronald G. Ehrenherg


                     Working Paper No. 827




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          December 1981




Associate Professor of Labor Economics, Cornell University, and
Professor of Economics and Labor Economics, Cornell University, and
Research Associate at the NEER, respectively. An earlier version
of this study was done for the President's Commission on Pension
Policy, but the views presented herein are solely those of the
authors. We wish to thank Dan Sherman for his invaluable
assistance on this project, and Charles Brown and Jack Triplett for
their comments on earlier drafts, The research reported here is
part of the NBER'S research program in Labor Studies.
                                               NBER Working Paper #527
                                                    December 1951




                        Estimating Wage—Fringe Tradeoffs:
                               Some Data Problems



                                    ABSTRACT



     Our paper attempt to identify the types of data needed to estimate

tradeoffs between wages and fringe benefits (such as pensions); it also

explores the usefulness for this estimation of one particular employer—

based data set collected by Hay Associates. We stress three things:

first, that employer—based data sets are required. Second, because pensions

and many other fringe benefits are actuarial functions of wages or salaries,

these technical relationships must he accounted for in estimation. Third,

to take account of unobservable heterogeneity of employees across employers,

one must use econometric methods that control for these unobservable variables.

The paper concludes with a discussion of our attempts to estimate the

tradeoff between wages and fringe benefits using a unique database for

200 establishments that contains information on wages and actuarial valuations

of employer costs of fringe benefits at three different job levels.



                                       Robert Smith
                                       Ronald Ehrenberg
                                       New York State School of Industrial
                                        and Labor Relations
                                       Cornell University
                                       P.O. Box 1000
                                       Ithaca,   T'W 14853

                                        (607) 256—3926
                                                        Smith — Ehrenberg




    Fringe benefits are a growing component of total compensation,

and their growth presents a number of challenges to economists on both

the scientific and policymaking level. For example, when the government

passes legislation requiring that pensions be made more generous or more

widely available, it is natural to ask just who will pay the costs.

Economic theory, as we will show, is quite clear on. this point. It

suggests that when pensions increase wages will decrease, other things

equal——thus implying that it is workers themselves who will pay the

costs of pension reform legislation. The view that wages and pensions

are negatively related (if other things are held constant) is not widely

held among non—economists, however. Casual observation, in fact, yields

quite the opposite view. The highest—wage workers receive the best pensions,

and high—wage firms are the very ones with the most generous pensions.

Even sophisticated studies that attempt to control for the "other things"

influencing total compensation sometimes estimate that wages and pensions

are positively related (Blinder, et. al. 1979).

     To take another example, federal/private sector wage comparability

studies have historically ignored fringe benefits. If increases in earnings

and increases in fringe benefits are roughly proportional within each sector,

then changes in earnings may serve as an adequate index (given the cost of

acquiring fringe benefit data) for changes in   total   compensation. }1cwe'.er,

if as economists suspect, earnings and fringe benefits are e1 related

within each sector, other things equal, then comparability studies that
                                                                           2



ignore fringes could be seriously deficient.

     Finally, many labor market studies that should be measuring and

analyzing total compensation focus instead on wages or earnings owing to the

general paucity of fringe benefit data.     If marginal changes in wages and

fringe benefits are proportionally related, other things equal, these studies
                                                                       be
may not contain fatal biases; however, if such changes can be shown to
                                                         could arise in such
inversely related, then problems of unknown magnitude

important areas as judging sectors with labor surpluses and shortages, assess-

ing the existence and size of compensating wage differentials, measuring the

returns to human capital investments, and measuring the "unexplained

residual" for minorities and women.

     Common to the above examples is the problem of estimating the trade—off
                                      While estimating this trade—off might
between wages and fringe benefits,

appear on the surface to be a straight—forward matter of obtaining data on

fringe benefits, we will show in this paper that it is not. Instead, there
                                                                      used.
are potentially serious biases that arise when standard data sets are

Thus, if we are to successfully shed light on the important issues of wage—
                                          data requirements must be met.
 fringe trade—of fs, some rather unique
                                                    of the data—related diff i—
      This paper represents an inquiry into some
                                               trade—of fs, and it explores the
 culties inherent in estimating wage—fringe

 usefulness of a particular source of data in meeting these difficulties.

      In the following section (section A) we briefly present the theory

 underlying economists' notions about the trade—of fs between wages and fringe

 benefits. Section B discusses the unique data required to test this theory,
                                          such data. In section D tests for
 and section C describes a test using
                                                                           3



wage—fringe trade—of fs using conventional data are described and analyzed

for the purpose of assessing the extent of any   biases   that arise when such

data are used. The paper concludes with a section on data recommendations.


               A. The Theory of the Wage—Fringe Relationship


     Economic theory of the relationship between wages and fringe benefits

in competitive markets starts with the notion that it is total compensation

that matters to employers. They are trying to maximize profits, and in so

doing will endeavor to assemble a labor force of sufficient quality and

size to enable them to produce output that they can sell at competitive

prices. To attract the desired quantity and quality of labor requires that

they offer a compensation bundle the total value of which is at least as good

as other employers are offering. However, if they offer total compensation

that is too high, they will find their costs are such they cannot compete in

the product market. The result of these forces is that they will offer total

compensation that is no more or less than is offered by other employers to

workers in the same labor market. In short, for every type of worker or

skill grade, there will be a "going rate" of total compensation that firms

must pay.

     Employees, on the supply side of the market, will of course want to

obtain offers that are as large as possible. They will find, however, that

firms are unwilling to offer compensation packages that are more in total

value than the going rate. Their problem, then, is to choose the package

whose composition best Suits their tastes.

     The employer and employee sides of the market, discussed above, are

summarized graphically in Figure 1 using pensions as an example of a fringe
                                                                         4


benefit.    This graph looks at the relationship between pensions and wages,

and it   implicitly   assumes all other job characteristics and elements of

compensation are already determined. We have argued that employers must

pay the "going rate" in terms of total compensation, and that at this

compensation level they will be competitive in both the labor and product

markets. The employer side of the labor market can thus be represented by

an "isoprofit curve"——a curve along which any combination of wages and

pensions yields equal profits to the firm. The isoprofit curve shown,

XX, is the zero—profit (competitive) curve, and it implies that the firm

must pay $X in total compensation to be competitive in the labor market.

If we ignore, for the moment, the effects of pensions on absenteeism,

turnover and work effort, the firm's total costs will be the same whether

the firm spends $X on wages or $X on pensions; hence, the isoprof it "curve"

shown is a straight line with a slope of unity (in absolute value). If all

firms    in the labor market depicted by Figure 1   have isoproft curves with a

unitary slope (disregarding sign), the "offer curve" facing employees in

that market will be a straight line (XX) with the same unitary slope.

     While the assumption underlying Figure.l is one of a linear offer curve

with a slope of unity, the locus of offers could trace out either a straight

line or a curve that has a slope the absolute value of which is greater (or

less) than unity, depending upon whether the presence of pensions reduces

(or enhances) worker productivity. Specifically, suppose pension plans that

do not offer immediate vesting reduce employee turnover and increase employee

work effort (Lazear 1979, 1981). Some firms might thus find that the marginal

dollar spent on increasing pension benefits would entail a net cost of less

than a dollar; this phenomenon would tend to flatten the isoprof it curves
                                                                           5


 drawn in wage—pension space. On the other hand, if pension benefits (or

 other fringe benefits) are essentially independent of hours currently worked

 per year, firms with relatively generous pension plans and correspondingly

 lower wages may find that they experience greater absenteeism than they other-

 wise would (Allen 1931). Thus, one could also argue that isoprofit curves

 can have a slope greater than unity in absolute value.

      If the cost—reducing effects of pensions always dominate the cost—

 increasing effects, but the marginal effect of an additional dollar of pen-

 sion benefits on costs diminishes with the level of pension benefits, then

 the isoprofit curve, and hence market offer curve will have a concave shape

 as shown in Figure 2 (the curve yy). In contrast, if firms with isoprof it

 curves whose slope is always greater than unity in absolute value coexist in

 the market with those whose isoprofit curves have a less—than—unitary slope,

 the locus of offers to employees could fall along a convex curve —— QRST1

 as shown in Figure 3

     The above arguments concerning the offer curve, which are derived

from an analysis of the employer side of the market, suggest that the

problem facing employees is one of choosing the compensation package that

maximIzes utility. That is, the observed compensation packages in a

given labor market will trace out the offer curve that exists at any

point in time, and the package chosen by any employee will reflect his or

her utility function. The exact shapes of employee indifference curves in

wage—pension space are not critical to our analysis, although linear or

concave indifference curves would in genera1 lead to corner solutions

(in which case a variety of wage/pension "mixes" would not be observed

in a ivcn market). We have thus drawn the indifference curves in
                                                                         6


Figures 1, 2 and 3 as convex. Are there other reasons to suppose these

indifference curves are convex?

       In the life cycle context, workers could be viewed as maximizing a

lifetime stream of utility; thus, different wage—pension combinations

could simply be viewed as different asset portfolios. However, given

one's tastes, the marginal rate of substitution between wage goods and

pensions   is likely to be diminishing. As wages are increased and pensions
are   reduced, more of one's total compensation becomes taxable (at progres-

sively increasing rates) at the relatively high tax rates that prevail

during one's working years. These relatively high and increasing rates tend

to progressively increase the amount of pretax wages employees would require

to compensate them f or successive reductions in pension benefits, Conversely,

as wages are reduced and pension benefits are increased, less of one's total

compensation becomes accessible for current expenditure——a fact suggesting

that workers will be willing   to   accept ever—smaller wage reductions in

return for progressive increases in pension benefits.' Thus convex

indifference curves in wage—pension space seem likely to exist.

      Figures 1, 2 and 3 and the associated theory behind them suggest three

things about the relationship between wages and pensions. First, they

suggest that employees pay for their own pensions through a lowered wage.

That is, there should bea negative wage-pension relationship once other

things that affect compensation have been controlled for (as they have by

assumption in both figures). Second, theory also suggests that the above

negative trade—off might be close to (or fluctuate around) unity. Third,

the observed trade—off could be linear, convex, or concave.
                                                                             7




     Similar reasoning about how labor markets work leads us, more generally,

to expect that the trade—off between wages and        fringe benefit, cetcris

paribus, will be negative. Moreover, when such benefits are expressed in

terms of employer cost, the trade—off we can observe should be close to

unitary. Thus companies with a more generous fringe benefit package will

tend to pay lower wages, other things equal.

     The theoretical considerations noted here suggest the outlines of

an empirical study wherein the determinants of wages could be estimated by

an equation such as


     (1) W a + a P + a F + a X + e,
             0   1     f    x


where W is the wage or salary paid to workers, P is the present value of
                                                      2
yearly per—worker pension accruals ( normal cost ),       F is the employer cost

of other fringe benefits per worker, X is a vector of all other factors that

influence wages or salaries, and e is a random error term. The coefficients

a1 are to be estimated, and it is predicted that a1 and af will be negative

and close to unitary in absolute value.3
                                                                           8



                            B. Data Requirements


    While equation (1) appears to offer a rather simple empirical test, to
                                                                 household
estimate it requires data that do not normally exist in standard
                                                                require-
or firm surveys. In particular, equation (1) imposes three data
                                               the variables P and F require the
ments that are difficult to meet. First,
                                           of fringe benefits. That is, we
availability of data on employers' costs
                                      "normal pension cost" and the cost of
need to have access to estimates of
                                                                           that
other fringe beriefits—---Which in many cases requires actuarial estimates

                                      and other factors affecting the proba-
take into account employee turnover
                                                                     benefit.
bility that they will be eligible for, or choose to receive, a given
                                                    data sets——and even there only
These data can only be found in p,yer—based

rarely.
                                        explicitly stated as a function of
     Second, many fringe benefits are
                                                           their actuarial
wages, so that detailed information on the determinants of
                                      in an unbiased way. W and P in equation
value are required to estimate (1)
                                 related for more than the behavioral reason
 (1), for example, are closely
                                                                   because
 suggested by theory. They are related in a very technica1 sense,
                               calculated as some fraction of wages. We are
 pension benefits are normally
                                                 not the technical one, but the
 interested in the behavioral relationship,
                                               one) may obscure the former (which
 latter relationship (which is a
                                    We must therefore find a way to filter out
 we hypothesize to be negative).

 the technical from the behavioral relationship.
                                           consistS of specifying that P (normal
      One very simple filtering process
                                                                 character
 cost) is a linear function of W and a vector (g) of all pension
                                        COLA   adjustments,   etc.):
  istics (vesting, replacement rates,
                                                                          9



      (2) Pb0 +b1 W+b +u.

One could then proceed to estimate equations (1) and (2) using a two—stage

least squares estimator. What   this   essentially involves is regressing P

on all independent variables in (1) and (2) except W. Using these

regression estimates, an instrument for P (call it F) is calculated and

entered as an independent variable in equation (1), replacing P.4 The

variable P is an estimate of normal cost that is "purged" of the effects

of wages. Using P in (1) thus would allow us to observe the behavioral

relationship.

      Variables that belong in vector Z are thus necessary to an unbiased

estimate of equation (1). Like actuarial estimates of the cost of fringe

benefits, these variables are not commonly found in data sets; however,

when they can be had, they are found only in               data sets.

      The third need is for measures of the variables     in vector X—-the
bother things" that influence wages. Economists normally use       data on

education,   age, race, sex, marital status,   and so   forth to control for
these   things, but such variables are not usually found in              data

sets. Thus, we must either find ways to match employer and household

data sets or take pains to address some 'rather severe problems inherent

in   employer   data.

      In particular, it is likely that a firm——through its use of hiring

standards and a particular compensation package——will assemble a fairly

homogeneous work force. However, its work force will tend to systematic

ally vary from the work force in other firms in characteristics that are

very difficult to measure: motivation, dependability, competence, and
                                                                        10



aggressiveness. In using employer—based data, the problem created by

firms' employment of homogeneous workers who differ in unmeasureable ways

from those employed in other firms is the classic one of "omitted variables
                                                      will in general be able
bias." Firms that offer higher total compensation
                                              dependability, etc. High—ability
to select employees with higher motivation,
                                                       benefits, so that unless
workers thus receive higher wages and higher fringe

data on ability are available, the fringe benefit variables in equation (1)

will pick up the effects of ability. A positive bias on the coefficients
                                                       possible when one is
of the fringe benefit variables is thus distinctly

using a data set in which worker quality is unobservable and potentially

varies across firms.

     Previous studies we have done on the wage—pension trade—off in the

public sector do not appear to have suffered much from the above problem

of omitted variables bias (Ehrenberg and Smith, 1981). The local government

 employers in these data sets were hiring workers-—police, firefighters and

 nonuniformed employees——Who all worked in the same "industry" and had very

 similar duties across cities; thus, it is unlikely that employee quality

 varied substantially across cities. However, when one moves to tests for

 wage—fringe trade—offs in the private sector, homogeneity of worker quality

 across employers is much less likely.   The managers of a company producing

 sophisticated technical equipment are likely to have different character-

 istics than those in a trucking firm, and those in highly competitive indus—

 tries are likely to differ from those in a public utility. One purpose of
                                                   of, and a solution to, this
  this paper is to inquire into the significance

 problem of unmeasured heterogeneity of workers across firms.
                                                                        11


                  C. Estimating Wage—Fringe Trade—Of fs


     We were able to obtain an employer—based data set that generally

met the requirements outlined in the previous section. These data were

provided to us by flay Associates, a large compensation consulting firm.

Hay conducts its own survey of cash and noncash compensation within client

firms and was able to provide us with a sample of roughly 200 usable

observations. The sample has several rather unique characteristics.


Controls For Other Influences on Wa

     First, salary and fringe benefit data were prbvided to us for three

different white collar job grades within each company. Hay evaluates

every job within a client company using three principal criteria: required

"know—how," accountability, and the degree of problem—solving involved.

It assigns point values to each job characteristic, totals them, and uses

these "Hay Point" evaluations as points of reference when comparing com-

pensation within and across firms.

     We were interested in obtaining the compensation associated with

given Hay Point levels as one means of controlling for the "other things"

that influence wages, Thus, we asked Hay to provide us with data at three

different Bay Point levels in each of the firms: 100 Hay Points (entry

level white collar job for someone with a Eachelor's degree), 200 Hay Points

(supervision of a small staff section), ax.. 400 Hay Points (lower middle

management position or a department head in a small organization). It

normally takes 3—6 years to go from a 100 to a 200 Hay Point job, and

7—15 years to go from a 100 to a 400—point position within an organization.
                                                                                           12



                                              to obtaining data on different job grades
    Another crucial advantage
                                              emploY a procedure that,
within each companY is that it permits one to
                                          effects of unmeasured worker
in effect, controls
                    for the firm—specific
                                            salaries at the 100—HaY
characterist1 For example, suppose that
                                               of equation (1):
Point level are given by the following variant

                                                    + a X + a M + e,
 (3) oo a0 +           a1 P100 + af F100
                                                                                and X contains
                                unmeasured worker characterisitcs
where N stands for the
                                                                           Suppose also that a
                                         that influence wages.
 other measureable variables
                                                   at (say) 400 Hay Points:
 similar equation describes wages

                                                     + aX + a N +
 (4) w400           a + a1 P400 + af F400

                                                equations (3) and (4) are that the wage—
         The assumptions
                                                                              but
                                and af) are the same at each Hay Point level,
  fringe trade—of fs (a1
                                      (a and a0             differ. We also assume that the
  that the intercept terms               0
                                                                      differ, but that the X
  coefficients Ofl the variables in the x vector
                                                              example) are the same at each Hay
                             and industrY, f or
  variables (firm size
                                                                              worker
                                firm. Finally we assume that the unobservable
  Point level within a
                                                                                    effects
                                     constant within a firm and that their marginal
  acteriStjcS (N) are
                                                  they add a constant
   (a) are the same in each equation (in effect,
                                                                    firm).
                      compensation at each job level within a given
   absolute amount to
                                 and (4), we arrive at an equation that
          Subtracting equation (3)
                                                                       Point levels within each firm:
                                     in salaries across Hay
   explains the eflCe


     '    W
              400
                    —W100   '
                                 o
                                     a\+a
                                      o'  1
                                            (P          '
                                                            400
                                                                  -P 100

                        —            +   (a
                                               —   a)       X + e."
          +af (F400
                                                                             13


 One can note from (5) that the unobservable effects of worker quality

 drop out of the equation (we are explaining within—firm wage profiles now).

 Thus, having access to compensation data at different job grades within

 firms should allow us to work around at least some of the problems of

 omitted variables bias.


jyer Cost Data on Fringe Benefits

     The second unique feature of our data set is that it contains

actuarial estimates of employers' costs of all privately—provided fringe

benefits——pensions, paid vacations and holidays, medical—dental plans,

death and disability benefits, and capital accumulation plans (prof it—

sharing or stock options). The means of each element in total compensation

(excluding government—mandated items) are displayed for each Hay Point level

in Table 1. In the case of pensions, death and disability benefits, and

capital accumulation plans, values shown indicate the present value of the

estimated increase in firm   liabilities   accruing during a year.


Data on Pension Characteristics

     A third feature of our data set is that it Contains information on

several important pension characteristics: the effects of Social Security

benefits on the pension benefits promised by the firm, eligibility andvesting

provisions, replacement rates, cost—of—living adjustments to benefits, death

benefits, and retirement age. The means of several of these pension

characteristics are summarized in Table 2. These data permit us to estimate

wage equations using the   instrumental   variables procedure outlined in section

B——the purpose of which is to purge the wage equation of the technical

dependence of pension costs on wages.
                                                                        14


                                                         accumulation
    Unfortunately, the actuarial calculations of capital
                                                            and we were not
                               values were highly complex
and death/disability benefit
                                                      them of their technical
provided with sufficient data to meaningfullY purge
                                                                 a one—for—
dependence on wages. Our solution to this problem was to
                                                  values of these three
one trade—off between them and wages and move the
                                                    side of equation (5)-—
fringe benefits from the F vectors to the left—hand
                                                       and         respectivelY.
adding them to salaries          and W400) to form


The 11atinS EquatiOfl
                                         estimated had the form
     The wage equations we ultimatelY
                                                                  e",
      (6) L W a + a1 (iSP) + a3F + a4(S) + a5 (T) + adD +

                                                             and capital
where tW is the change in salaries plus death, disabilitY
                                                            another within a
accumulation fringe benefits from one Hay Point level to
                                     value from one Hay Point level to another
firm; tP is the change in pension

 (an instrumental variable,
                             P, was substituted forAP as noted above); LF

                                 leave from one Hay Point level tO another (the
 is the change in days of paid
                                dropped out of the vector F because it was
 value of medical—dental plans
                            levels within a firm); and the observed firm
 constant across Hay Point
                                                              variable taking
 characteristics variables are firm size (S), a dichotomous
                                                                and 0 if it
 the value of 1 if the firm has a mandatory retirement policy
                                                        (D). The mandatory
  does not (T), and vector of industry dummy variables
                             included because firms with mandatory retirement
  retirement variable, T, is
                                                      that do not (Lazear 1979).
  may well have steeper earnings profiles than those
                                                                  and 50% were
                           in this sample was 12,360 employeeS,
  The average company size
                                 No firm in the sample required pension con-
  in manufacturing industries.

  tributions of its employees.
                                                                             15




       Equation (6) was estimated using the two—stage least squares procedure

outlined in Section B. To simultaneously estimate the "normal cost" function

approximated by equation (2) in the context of explaining salary differen-

tials across job grades within firms, we had to reformulate the equation as
           5
follows:


(7)
           Pb+b1W+b2Z+u.
The   variables   in Z include the replacement rate (assuming workers retire at

age 65 with 30 years of service), whether or not employees are immediately

members of the pension plan, whether or not the plan fully vests after 10

years of service, whether or not benefits are adjusted to reflect cost—of—

living increases, whether or not        disability   retirement provisions are pre-

sent, the degree to which retirement benefits are offset by social security

benefits, and whether      or not an   assumption of future salary increases was

made in the actuarial calculation of normal pension cost.

      Three versions of (6) were estimated: differences between 200 and

300 Hay    Points,   differences between 400 and 200 Hay Points, and differences

between 400 and 100 Hay Points. The results are presented in Table 3.

(Results of the first—stage estimation are presented in the appendix.)

      The results of most interest for our current purposes, of course, are

the estimated coefficients on the pension and paid—leave variables. Of the

six estimated coefficients, only three have the expected negative sign——and

of those three, none is significantly different from zero at conventional

levels. Thus, the results of this test give no support for our theory of

the wage—fringe relationship.
                                                                                  16



                                                              results must be
       o possible explanations for these disappointing
                                           noted earlier, that our procedure
considered. First, it is possible, as
                                                               crude, so that the
for finding an instrument for 1P in equation (6) is too

relationshiP between P and P is not very close. This seems unlikely,
                                                                the variables
however, because as can be seen from Table A.1 in the appendix,
                                                       55—60% of the variance
in the first stage of our estimating procedure explain

in tSP.
                                                                            add
     Second, our assumption that unmeasured employee characteristics
                                                  each Hay Point level may
a constant dollar amount to total compensation at
                           alternative assumption is that these unobserved
be incorrect. A tractable
                                                              at each Hay
characteristi affect total compensation
               6                                total compensation at any hay Point
Point level.       Suppose, for example, that

 level can be expressed as
                               (a + a X + M + u)
                                °   X
 (8)       W(l+p+f)AC
                                         of pensions and other fringe benefits
 where p and f are employers' costs
                                                            which marginal
 expressed as a fraction of wages, and 4 is the fraction by
                                     characteristics increase total compensation.
 changes in unmeasured employee

 Taking logs and using the fact that 1n(1 + r) :
                                                        r   when r is small, equation


  (8) can be approximated by


            in W         + aX + 4M + a1p + aff + u,
  (9)               a0

                                        be negative and equal to unity in absolute
  where a1 and af are predicted to

  value.
                                                characteristics, 4H, can be eliminated
          The effects of unmeasured employee
                                                              within a firm to obtain
  by differencing equation (9) across hay Point levels
                                                                               17



(10)       (lnW)    a + a1(p)   + af   (sf)   +   aX   +,
where     indicates the change in the relevant variables across flay Point

levels. Because tp will in general depend on changes in salaries across

Hay Point levels, equation (10) was estimated using the instrumental

variables approach analogous to that explained earlier.7 The results

of major intetest are shown in Table 4.

       As with the results presented in Table 3, those in Table 4 offer no

support for the theory outlined in section A. We will return to a brief

discussion of these negative findings in section E. However, before doing

so, it will be instructive to consider the biases that could exist if

alternative procedures or data were used.



              D. The Potential Biases Using Standard Data Sets


        Sections B and C emphasized two potential biases in estimating wage—

fringe trade—offs using conventional data sets. First, unless account is

taken of the technical dependence of many fringe benef its on wages, the

behavioral trade—off will be obscured. We dealt with this potential bias

by using an instrumental variables approach. Second, it is possible that

workers in roughly the same jobs will differ widely in certain unmeasurcable

characteristics across firms; that is, workers within firms may be fairly

homogeneous, while across firms they may not be. The procedure we adopted

in section C to deal with this problem was to purge the estimating equations

of firm specidc "fixed—effects" of these unmeasured characteristics by

analyzing within—firm salary changes. In this section we analyze these

two potential biases by investigating what happens when the above problems

cinnot be circumvented owing to lack of data.
                                                                                         18




    Ordinary Least Squares y mes of Eguation (6)
                                         employers' "normal cost" of pensions, but
        Suppose that we had data on
                                              the characteristics of the pension plan.
    that we did not have information on
                                                                  variables
    This lack of data would preclude our use of the instrumeiltal
                                     and we might be forced to use an ordinary
    approach described in section C,
                                                 at would be the consequences of
    least squares estimating procedure.

    this defect in our data set?
                                         estimates of the coefficients of major
         The ordinary least squares
                                                                   5. These estimates
    interest in equations (6) and (10) are given in Table
                                                 positive bias that emerges when one
    demonstrate very clearly the strong
                                      technical dependence of pensions on wages.
    is unable to control for the
                                                   variables, which were close to
    Estimated coefficients on the pension
                                                    Tables 3 and 4, are all
     zero and smaller than their standard errors in
                                    data sets that do not permit the researcher
     strongly positive here. Thus,
                                                      relationship between wages
                        technical from the behavioral
     to disentangle the
H    and pension costs will yield
                                  biased estimates of the trade—off.



     Estimates Ignoring Firm-Specif Fixed Effect
                                            data on employers' fringe benefit
          Suppose now that we had access to
                                             but that we had only one observation
     costs   and pension plan characteristics,
                                                   out the "fixed effects" of
     per firm. Lacking the data required to filter
                                                                                    to
                   worker quality within a firm, one would have to attempt
      unmeasured
                                                                           of
                 trade—offS across firms at a fixed skill level. Estimates
      estimate
                                            at   each of the three Hay Point levels,
      equations like (3),   (4)   and (9)

                                  variables   approach described earlier, but of course
      using our instrumental
                                                              research. The
      omitting the variable N, were made in the course of our

      results of major interest are reported in Table 6.
                                                                           19.




      In equations using the levels of salaries and fringe benefits, one

 can see (by comparing Tables 3 and 6) that ignoring the fixed effects of

unmeasured worker characteristics does not alter the size or quality of

 the estimated wage—pension trade—off. However, ignoring these effects

imparts a very definite positive bias to the trade—off between wages and

paid holidays. Further, the fact that the estimated coefficient grows

more positive as one moves up the Hay Point scale tends to suggest the

effects of unmeasured characteristics may also tend to grow absolutely

larger as workers are promoted. Generally similar observations can be

made by comparing the results of our logarithmic specification in Table 4

with the corresponding results in Table 6. Thus, there is clear evidence

that omitted variables bias associated with unobserved worker characteristics

is a problem that must he addressed when generating a data set for the

purpose of estimating wage—fringe trade—of fs.


                        E. Data Recommendations


     This paper has attempted to identify the data needed to estimate

trade—offs between wages and fringe benefits, and it has sought to explore

the usefulness of one particular data se.tin this context. We have stressed

that meaningful estimates of these trade—of fs require data possessing three

somewhat unique characteristics. First, estimates of the            of any

trade—offs require employer cost data——which, for many fringe benefits,

entails actuarial estiraation. Thus, researchers must have access to employer—

based data of a detailed nature.

     Second, because pensions and many other fringe benefits are actuarial

functions of wages or salaries, this technical relationship must be accounted
                                                                         20




                          behavioral relationshiP of interest.    The data
for when estimating the
                                             variables also affecting the
required to do this properly are those other
                          benefits. In the case of pensions, data on
actuarial value of fringe
                                                            of death or
                            COLA adjustments, the existence
replacement rates, vesting,
                                                         demonstrated that
disabilitY benefits, and the like are required. We have
                                                   estimates.
ignoring this issue can result in seriously biased
                                                                     research-
     Finally, heterogeneity of employees across employers presents
                                                      problems of omitted
ers using employer—based data with potentially severe
                                                                 will tend to
                             within—firm worker characteristics
variables bias. Unmeasured
                          in the same direction, thus imparting a positive
affect wages and fringes
                       coefficients on fringe benefits. We attempted to
bias to the estimated
                                                                  firm a'd
                            obtaining multiple observations per
circumvent this problem by
                                     changes. While these procedures elimi-
analyzing within—firm compensation
                             al estimates of a strong positive trade—off
 nated the counter_the0rt
                        holidays, they did not allow us to find the predicted
 between wages and paid
                              fringe benefits. In point of fact, we found
 trade—off between wages and
                                                          of theory.
 no evidence in our data set to support the predictions
                               findings cannot be done with certainty at this
      Explaining our negative
                                                                              of
                                                   at least not predictive
  point. It may be that the theory iswrqflg, or
                                                     for the public sector,
  "real world" behavior. Given our earlier findings
                                                         until the weight of
  we are reluctant tO embrace this explanation—-at least
                                   It may also be that our theory is correct
  replicative findings mounts up.
                                                      benefit trade—off in
  but that it is difficult to isolate the wage_fringe
                                             characteristicS (e.g., working
  the private sector; other nonpecuniarY job
                                         Another explanation, which is emphasized
  conditions) may vary systematicallY.
                                                           follow, is that in the
                              Brown in his comments that
  in more detail by Charles
                                                       employees and firms, the
                          implicit contracts between
  presence of long—term
                                                                          21



relevant trade—off may be between the present values of life—time wages and

pension benefits, not between wages and pension benefits at any particular job

level. In a world in which such long—term contracts are important, one can not

test the theory by focusing on specific job level trade—offs, as we have

attempted to do.

     A fourth possible explanation is that the particular data set we had

measured skill level and fringe benefits with so much error that estimates of

existing negative trade—offs were biased toward zero, This possibility receives

support from some of the errors we encountered in using the data and from the

wide, overlapping ranges of salary levels at each of the three Hay Point levels

(see the note to Table 1). It may be that the Hay system of job rating is so

arbitrary that across—firm comparisons are rendered essentially meaningless——

and that the actuarial estimates of fringe benefit costs are so crude as to be

unreliable. However, the Hay Point system of job evaluation is perhaps the

foremost rating system of its kind in the world, the company is large and employs

a battery of actuaries and other specialists, and the data we used were derived

from a routine survey used and paid for by its clientele. It is hard to recon-

cile the hypothesis of sloppy or meaningless comparisons with the reputation and

continued prosperity of the Hay company. If their work is of poor quality,

would not they be punished by the market?

    While we. cannot answer the preceding question, there remains a fifth

possible explanation. Perhaps the lack of data on employee characteristics

caused the poor results. It could be that, despite our best efforts, we

were really not able to completely avoid the positive biases asscciated

with the problem of unmeasured worker characteristics. If this explanation

is correct, it would suggest that some means must be found to include

employee characteristics into employer—based data sets. It suggests in
                                                                           22




                                               data researchers must use contain
other words, that unless the   employerbased
                                            training, etc. of employees,
information on the education, experience,

unbiased estimates of wage—fringe trade—offs may,
                                                    not be possible. e
                                                                 length
recommend, the, that to the three data requirements discussed at
                                                             data sets should
in this paper, a fourth be added. Namely, cmployerbased
                                                               directly, or
either include measures of average employee characteristics
                                 identification so that they can   be ctOSS
they should contain sufficient

referenced   to employee—based data sets.
                                                                Smith — Ehrenberg




                                           Table 1


                              Means of Hay Compensation
                                     Data Per Year


                                              HAY POINT LEVEL



Salary                  $13,434                       $20,646     $34,862


Pension Value                  816                      1,450       2,870


Value of Vacations        1,334                         2,057       3,490
 and Holidays


Death Benefit Value            234                        346         595


Disability Benefit             447                        694       1,221
 Value


Capital Accumulation           385                        600       1,034
 Value


Medical—Dental Plan       1,114                         1,114       1,114
 Value (Same for
 all H.P. levels).




Note: The range (standard deviation) of the salary data are as follows:

         100 H.P.: 8,200 — 26,100 (2,407)
         200 H.P.:   13,700   —   31,000 (2,972)
         400 H.P.:   24,700   —   50,700    (4,749)
                                    Table 2


                            Summary Statistics

                        on Selected Pension Plan

                             Characteris tics




                                                   72%
Percent of plans with full vesting
 after 10 years


Percent integrated with Social                     87%
 Security


Percent with formal or informal                    45%
 COLA


Mean replacement rate for 30—rear                  56%
 employee with a salary base of
 $25,000


Mean replacement rate for 30—year                  47%
 employee with a salary base of
 $50 )000


                                                   32%
Percent with disability retirement
                                         Uiatcs ef quation 6)
                                 ctermInants of the Change   in   Salary
                Plus Selected Fringe    Benefits Across Hay Point Levels Within Fit-ms
                                 (Method: l'oStage Least Squat-es)

                                       Cofic1flts(StandardEt-rors;)ofTrcfldefltvirj,lcc
                                                           4OO-2oo H.P.             00 -       100 H.P.

 Change in Paid       Holidays    -22O32(176.16)
             (Days)
                                                              8O88(149g5)           109.69(186.81)

 Change    in Pension Vlüe
           (Dollars)
                                       44(,.642)                     4u)                   ltc(66)
 Presence of Mandatory
     Retirement
                                    4O7(9Th)                                         87.46(58665)
 Pins Size (Numbor of
    Employees)                                                                            O2O09)*
 Industry—Wide Effects
 (Financial,   lnsur.nee,
Real Estate Omitted):              79.47(O964)
  Durable Hf g                                                0(546,3)              64332(?57g)
Won—Durable ME g.
                                                                                  (8O63)**
Transportation,
Communicitjons and
                                  8O2.4(49)                   42t)                l8(lOi50o)
Public Utility

Service

Firms With Missing Data
                                 -227.O6(4,46)               2O(8lb)              4l143j)
   On Firm Size                                                                   1&O(79L4)
Constant                         7546.97(447.B7)        144.(4.o9)'
                                     13                        .12                       .14
lunber of Observations
                                                                                         19

**ifldiC3tCS significance at the .O lvel nd it the .O
 all variables except firs size and the indutry        dutis      eve1 with otte—tU tests en
                              Table 4


                       Estimated Wage—Fringe

                      Trade—Off s, Equation (10)



                          Estimated   Coefficient (standard error) on

gion                      Pensions (a1)            Paid Holidays(af)


                            .359(.687)               —.362(1.555)
400 H.P. * 100 H.P.

                            .136(1.049)              1.615(2.553)
200 H.P. — 100 ILP.

                            .373(.682)               —.175(.958)
400 H.P. — 200 H.P.
                                    Tabic S


                   Estimates   of the   Wage-Fringe Trade-Off
                        Using Ordinary Least Squares
                     to Estimate Equations (6) and (10)


                                         Etiinated Coe ff Ic tent   (standarderro r) on
                                          Pension   (a1)
                                                                Paid Holidays (af)

Equation (6): 400 fl.P.-400 H.P.          1.513   (.323)             60.809 (174.922)

               200 fl.P.—100 H.P.         2.391 (.379)          318.369 (153.482)
               400 I1.P.-2OO H.P.         1.609 (.324)               40.730 (141.333)


Equation (10): 400 H.P.—100 H.P.          1.247 (.501)               -.585 (1.538)

              200 H.P.-100 H.P.           2.268 (714)                —.185 (2.415)

              400 fl.P.—200 H.P.           .926 (.451)               —.259 C   .951)
                                         Table 6


                      Estimates of the Wage—Fringe Trade—Off
                             Ignoring   the "Fixed EffeCtS"
                             of Unmeasured Worker Quality


                                           Estiriated Coefficient (standard error)on
                                             Pensions   (a )    Paid Holidays (a )
pendent    Variable                          ___________

Salary   Level at 100 H.P.                   —.006 (.686)        140.291 ( 75.550)

                  200 H.P.                    —.059 (.512)       330.955 (102.806)

                  400 H.P.                    —.126 (.480)       529.145 (146.000)


Log of Salary at 100 H.P.                      .506 (.590)         2.445 (1.386)

                   200 H.P.                   —.187 (.509)         2.284 (1.227)

                   40011.?,                   —.635 (.451)         2.403 (1.034)
Yearly
 Wage




         Employee A




                      Employee B




                                               Yearly Increment in
                                               Present Value of
                                               Promised Pension
                                               Benefit




                           Figure 1

                The Trade—Off Between Wages

               and Promised Pension Benefits
Yearly
 Wage




                Employee A
   y




                                     Employee B




                                                         Yearly Increment
                                                         in Present Value
                                                         of Promised Pension
                                                         Benefits



                               Figure 2

                 A Concave Offer Occur Curve Resulting

         From Diminishing Marginal Effects of Pensions on Costs
Yearly
 Wage

             Employee A




                         Employee B



         T




                                          Yearly Increment
                                          in Present Value
                                          of Promised
                                          Pension Benefits

                               Figure 3

                          A Convex Offer Curve
             XX' (pensions do not ch3nge productivity)
             TT' (pensions increase productivity)
             QQ'   (pensions reduce productivity)
                                                                 Smith — Ehrenbexg




                                      Footnotes


1. tThile in theory people could borrow against their future pension

    promises, capital markets are not likely to be so perfect that they

    can do so without facing interest rates that rise with the       size of
    the desired loan.


2. "Normal cost" is the actuarial value (in the present) of the increase

    in pension   liabilities incurred during the current year——or the yearly
    contribution to the pension fund needed to keep it fully—funded.

3, Equation (1), of course, restricts the wage—fringe trade—offs to be
    constant (linear). Alternative specifications of this "basic" equation
   would allow the trade—offs to be        nonlinear as suggested by our discussions
    of   Figures 2 and 3. While for the sake of convenience our analysis of the

    data and estimation problems will center on equation (1), we will briefly

    discuss our results using other functional forms.


4. Equation (2) can be viewed as a linear approximation to the complex

   way in which pension benefits are actually computed. There is no reason,

   of course, to think that a linear approximation is sacred, and future

   researchers might use more complex forms (e.g. higher order polynomials)

   to increase    the   precision   of the instrument for P that is obtained.   We

   should note,   however, that this linear approximation has been used with

   some success in prior research (Smith 1981).
5. Equation (7) is derived by assuming the following equations hold for

    (say) the 400 and 100 Hay Point levels:

    (7a) P400     b + b1 W400 + b Z + u"

    (7b)



    Subtracting   (7b) from (7a) results in equation (7), where

                                                      and   uu—u.
6. We are indebted to Charles Brown for this suggestion.

7. For reasons discussed earlier, fringe benefits except "paid days off"
    were added to the salary variable.
                                                                 Smith    Ehrcnbcrg




                                   References



Allen, Steven C. 1981. CompensatiOn, Safety, and Absenteeism: Evidence

     from the Paper Industry. Industrial and Labor Relations_Review

     34: 207—18.


                                           and Wise, Donald E. 1979. Market Wages
Blinder, Alan S., Gordon, Roger H.,

     Reservation Wages, and Retirement Decisions.
                                                          Paper read at the NBER

                                               December 1979, at Stanford University.
     Workshop on Social Security, 28—29

     Mimeographed.


Ehrenberg, Ronald C., and Smith, Robert S., 1981, A Framework for Evaluating
                                                        In Mieszkowski, Peter and
     State and Local Government Pension Retorni.

     Peterson, George, eds., Public Sector
                                                   aborMarets. COUPE Papers on

                                4. Washington,    D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.
     Public Economics, no,

                                                 Profiles, Productivity, and Flours
Lazear, Edward P. 1981. Agency, Earnings

     Restrictions. American Economic Review 71: 606—20.


 Lazear, Edward P. 1979. Why      Is   There Nandatory Retirement? Journal_

      Political Economy   87:   1261—84.


                                            Differentials for Pensions and
 Smith) Robert S. 1981. Compensating

      Underfunding in the Public Sector. Review of EcoomLç5         and Stat!.
      63:   463—68.
                                                                                 Smith —   Ehrcnberg


                                              Appendix

                                             Table A.l

                                 Estimated Coefficients Produced
                                        by Regressing P on
                                     All Exogenous Variables in
                                       Equations (6) nd (7)



                                                         Estiratcd Coefficients (Standard Err6rs)
    Variable                                             400—100 H.P.    200—100 H.P        400-200_fl.P.
    Paid Holidays                                        26.65(28.06.)   27.07(23.42)       26.39(22.98)

    Firm Site + 1000                                       .02(1.33)       .41(.47)           .38(.98)

    Firm Size Missing (0,1)                          210.89(122.12) 87.37(42.77) 123.41(89.66)

    Durable Mfg. (0,1)                              —25.84(122.62) —22.57(43.77)            —3.04(90.41)

    Non Durable Mfg. (0,1)                           147.69(128.57) 46.45(45.80) 101.46(94.74)

    Trans., Public Utility (0,1)                    —39.38(161.87) 75.29(56.90) —114.61(118.69)

    Service Industry (0,1)                          221.33(173.21) 91.94(61.27) 129.58(127.27)

    Mandatory Retirement (0,1)                       82.83(85.94)        33.62(30.27)       49.19(63.05)

    Pension Replacement Rate                               ,21(.03)        .07(.01)           .13(.02)

    Immediate Membership in Plan (0,1)              157.32(90.80)        63.59(31.99)       93.73(66.59)

    Full Vesting at 10 Years (0,1)                  —85.73(101.23) —22.60(35.74) —63.19(74.27)

    COLA Provided to Benefits (0,1)                 467.12(92.12) 118.35(32.37) 348.79(67.45)

    Disability Retirement Allowed (0,1)              67.18(93.36)        13.64(33.31)       53.41(63.56)

    Social Security 0fset, Flat Z                          .56(.53)        .09(.19)           .48(.39)

•   Social Security Offset, Yearly Level             14.61(17.02)          .67(5.98)        13.93(12.48)

    Social Security Offset Capped by Max.                3.86(4.59)        .88(1.61)         2.98(3.37)

    Social Security Offset by Step Rate.   (0,1)    187.97(144.84) 23.24(51.48) l6...58(106.14)

    Actuarial Assumption of Rising Salaries (0,1) 12.38(94.63)           24.82(33.32) —12.56(69.67)

    Intercept                                       218.19(163.65) 59.10(57.67) 159.06(119.89)

    It2                                                   .60              .54                .58
