                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DIVIDEND TAXES, CORPORATE INVESTMENT, AND "Q"



                         James M. Poterba

                        Lawrence H. Summers



                      Working Paper No. 829




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          December 1981




The authors wish to thank John Flernming, Zvi Griliches, and Nervy-n
King for helpful discussions, and John Ryding of the Bank of
England for providing data. Poterba received support from the
Marshall Aid Commemoration Commission. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #829
                                                        December 1981



                    Dividend   Taxes, Corporate Investment, and "0"



                                        ABSTRACT



     Taxes on corporate distributions have traditionally been regarded
as a "double tax" on corporate income. This view implies that while the
total effective tax rate on corporate source income affects real economic
decisions, the distribution of this tax burden between the shareholders
and the corporation is irrelevant. Recent research has suggested an alter-
native to this traditional view. One explanation of why firms in the U.S.
pay dividends in spite of the heavy tax liabilities associated with this
form of distribution is that the stock market capitalizes the tax payments
associated with corporate distributions. This capitalization leaves in-
vestors indifferent at the margin between corporations paying our dividends
and retaining earnings. This alternative view holds that while changes in
the dividend tax rate will affect shareholder wealth, they will have no
impact on corporate investment decisions.
     This paper   develops econometric tests which distinguish between these
two views of dividend taxation. By extending Tobin's "q" theory of invest-
ment to incorporate taxes at both the corporate and personal leves, the
implications of each view for corporate investment decisions can be derived.
The competing views may be tested by comparing the performance of investment
equations estimates under each theory's predictions. British time series
data are particularly appropriate for testing hypotheses about dividend
taxes because of the substantial postwar variation in effective tax rates
on corporate distributions. The econometric results suggest that dividend
taxes have important effects on investment decisions.


James M. Poterba                           Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics                    National Bureau of Economic Research
Nuffield College                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Oxford OXl 1NF                             Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
England
                                           (617) 868—3909
      The influence of taxation on corporate investment decisions has been the

subject of numerous economic investigations. For the most part, these studies

have focused only on the effect of taxes levied at the corporate level,

examining the impact of changes in the corporate tax rate and depreciation

rules. The effects of reform in the taxation of corporate distributions have

received far less attention. This omission is significant since in Britain

during the last three decades the effective tax rate on corporate distribu-

tions has ranged between zero and thirty percent.

     Taxes on corporate distributions have traditionally been regarded as a

tldouble   tax" on corporate income. This view implies that   while the total

effective   tax   rate on corporate source income affects real economic decisions,

the distribution of this tax burden between the shareholders and the corpora-

tion is irrelevant. Recent research has suggested an alternative to this

traditional view. One explanation of why firms in the U.S. pay dividends

in spite of the heavy tax liabilities associated with this form of distribu-

tion is that the stock market capitalizes the tax payments associated with

corporate distributions. This capitalization leaves investors.indifferent

at the margin between corporations paying out dividends and retaining

earnings. This alternative view holds that while changes in the dividend

tax rate will affect shareholder wealth, they will have no impact on cor-

porate investment decisions.

     This paper develops econometric tests which distinguish between these

two views of dividend taxation. By extending Tobin's "q" theory of invest-

ment to incorporate taxes at both the corporate and personal levels, the

implications of each view for corporate investment decisions are derived.

The competing views are tested by comparing the performance of investment
                                   —2—

equations estimated under each theory's predictions. British time series

data are particularly appropriate for testing hypotheses about dividend

taxes because of the substantial postwar variation in effective tax rates.

on corporate distributions. The ecOnometric results suggest that divid.nd

taxes have important effects on investment decisions.

       The paper is divided into five sections. The first describes the com-

peting views of dividend taxes in more detail. The implications of each

view for stock market valuation and the investment decisions of the firm

are explored. The second section presents a version of the "q"   investment
theory based on the decisions of value—maximizing firms with stochastic
adjustment costs. Alternative investment equations   based on the two views

of dividend taxes are derived. The third section details the construction

of the time series data which underlie our tests. It contributes an im-

proved estimate of a tax—adjusted "q" variable for the entire postwar

period   in Britain. Econometric results, and their implications for the
role   of dividend taxation in affecting investment decisions, are discussed

in the fourth section. A concluding section summarizes the findings and

proposes several directions for future research.
                                       —3--



    I. Dividend Taxes and Corporate Distributions: Two Views


         Analysis of the tax incentives for corporate distributions requires a

    consistent framework for treating changes in both tax rates and tax systems.

    We follow King (1977) in defining T as the rate of tax on undistributed

    corporate profits, m as the marginal personal tax rate on dividend income,

    and 8 as the shareholder's dividend receipts if the firm distributes one

    pound of retained earnings.1 Therefore, if the firm distributes one pound

    the shareholder receives (l—m)O pounds in after tax dividends. The effect-

    ive rate of capita.l gains taxation is denoted by z.   It depends on both the

    tax rate applicable to realized capital gains and the length of time between

accrual and realization of gains.

        A corporation affects its shareholders' tax liabilities by choosing

whether to retain or to distribute corporate profits. The traditional view

implies that investors should not be indifferent to the firm's financial

policy. Since a pound retained yields (1—z). to the investor and a pound

distributed yields (l—m)O, only in the exceptional case when (l—z)        (l—m)O will

investors receive the same after tax return from retentions and distribu-

tions.2 For Britain, (l—z) > (l.-m)8 for the period 1947—58 and 1966—72.

Between 1959 and 1965, the two tax burdens were approximately equal. Since

1972, investors should have preferred dividends to capital gains since

under the current imputation system (1—z) < (l—m)O. Despite these tax

changes, British firms have continued simultaneously retaining earnings




1 King's (1977) definition of S corresponds to our S. Under the classical
  system of company taxation, 0 = 1. Under the imputation system currently
  used in Britain, 0 = (1 —      sY
                                 where s is the imputation rate.
2    'his   assumes that a pound of retentions increases the firm's value by a
     pound.   This is consistent with the "traditional" view but counter to the
     spirit of the "new" view discussed below.
                                        —4—

and paying some of their profits as dividends (see Bank of England (1981)).

The payout ratio has not moved in the dramatic way which the simple tax

rule calculations would suggest.

        The firms' apparent failure to optimize their financial policies with

respect to tax liabilities raises a difficult problem for investment theory.

A profit—maximizing firm should invest until the marginal return from addi-

tional investment equals the cost of capital. When the effective cost of

funds from different sources is unequal, the cost of capital becomes an

elusive concept. A firm's investment policy will depend upon its marginal

source of investment funds. The firm cannot be simultaneously indifferent

between investing a pound and reducing dividends, and between investing

a pound and issuing new equity. This is because the two financial actions

have different tax costs associated with them.

        Different assumptions about the firm's marginal source of investment

finance have different implications for the investment consequences of

dividend taxes. The first approach, corresponding to the "traditional

view", argues that for some poorly understood reason firms act as if they

are required to distribute a substantial fraction of their real profits

in dividends. Subject to this constraint, the firm chooses an optimal in-

vestment plan and, when necessary, finances investment expenditures by

issuing new equity. In an all—equity economy, the firm's cost of capital is


                               ) +   Y(')
(1.1)            c =                                                    '1''   < 0
                       [(1 - m)Oy + (1 -    z)(1   -   y)j(l   -   T)


where y is the dividend—payout ratio, and p is the post—tax rate of return
                                   —5—
 demanded by investors.3 The (y) function captures the cost to the firm

 of retaining earnings. It may be thought of as arising from considerations

 of market signalling, or investor liquidity. Since lower payout ratios

induce investors to demand higher returns, '    is   negative. The firm chooses

its payout ratio to minimize the effective cost of capital. This means that

      = 0, where y* is the optimal payout ratio. The firm's optimal invest—
 I

ment policy should consist of equating the pretax return on capital and the

cost of capital. Since c depends on the tax rates, changes in either the

personal dividend tax rate (m) or the relative tax prices of dividends and

retentions (8) will affect investment policy.

     This "traditional" model has several implications for the effects of

a change in the dividend tax rate. First, as dividend taxes increase the

dividend payout ratio should decline. The firm is equating the marginal

benefit from dividend payments, captured in the P function, with the marginal

cost of those payments. Since an increase in the dividend tax rate will

raise the marginal cost of these unmeasured benefits, the optimal payout

ratio should decline.5 A second implication of this model is that when the

dividend tax rate rises, equilibrium capital intensity will decline. Since

in equilibrium f'(k) = c we can solve for the change in the capital stock



 Extension of the cost of capital expression to include the case of partial
 debt finance is straightforward. If b is the ratio of the market value of
 outstanding debt to the replacement value of the capital stock, then c' =
 b(l—T)1 + (l—b)c, where c is taken from (1.1) and   is the nominal interest
 rate. Debt finance is treated in more detail in Section II.

 We consider "dividend tax" to mean the total (personal and corporate) tax
 liabilities associated with the distribution of one pound of retained
 earnings. This is (l—m)O.

 Feidstein (1970, 1972) and King (1971, 1972) tested the hypothesis that the
 payout ratio responded to changes in the effective dividend tax rate and
 concluded that taxes did seem to affect firms' choice of dividend policy.
 Their studies, however, did not focus primarily on the personal taxes
 imposed on dividends.
                                          —6—


from



(1 2)                    f"(k)
                                 d = 3-- +2y-- •   d3


where      = (1—m)O.    If the firm   has chosen y optimally, then                  =   0 and
                                                                             1 1*

the envelope theorem allows us to ignore the second term in (l.2) At the ini-

tial optimum, changes in the dividend payout ratio do not change the cost of

capitaL Therefore the effects of taxes on capital intensity which come

from changes in the payout ratio may be ignored. This means



                       ____ = ________ y(p
                                                        +
(1.3)              =                                                 —>       0
                              {y + (1 — y)(l — z)] (1        —


The effective dividend tax rate is tD        1 —    . This   means       <    0.
                                                                     D

        The capital stock's response to changes in the dividend tax was calcu—

lated assuming that changes in the tax rate did not affect the pretax return

required by investors. An alternative extreme assumption is that capital

is supplied inelastically. The only effect of a dividend tax increase is a

reduction in the equilibrium rate of return, p. If capital was supplied

with some positive elasticity, then an increase in the dividend tax rate

would decrease both capital intensity and the rate of return.

        Tlicre are two difficulties with this view of dividend taxes. First,

the theory provides no explanation for why firms pay dividends. Equivalently

stated there is no motivation for the 'Y(y) function. Edwards (1981) and

and Stiglitz (1980) have discussed some of the leading explanations,
                                       -- 7   —


    such as market signalling (Ross (1977) and Bhattacharya (1979)) and investor

clienteles (Feldstein and Green (1981)), and concluded that in almost every

case, there would exist a mechanism with a lower tax cost for
                                                                    transmitting
information or income from the firm to the shareholder.     The payment of
dividends remains a puzzle in the "traditional" view. Second, the theory

implies that the marginal source of funds for new investment is either

new equity issues or reduced share repurchases. Since the latter are illegal

under Section 66 of the 1948 Companies Act, and most firms do not issue

new shares, the theory's premise seems unlikely.


        The "new" view of dividend taxes, based on the notion of tax capitali-

zation, was developed as a response to the problem of explaining why firms

pay dividends.6 The new view may be understood in terms of the above dis-

cussion as a different assumption about the firm's financial margin. The

dividend payout ratio is no longer fixed; dividends each period are deter-

mined as residual after desired new investment has been financed out of

retentions. If q represents the market's valuation of a pound of earnings

inside the firm, then the return to distributing earnings as dividends is

(l—m)9 and that from retentions is q(l—z). Firms will continue to invest

until investors are indifferent between paying out earnings and retaining

them. This means that q must equal



(1.4)              q* =    =    0.

        Indeed in any model in which it is rational for firms to pay dividends,

this condition must hold. It implies that the marginal value to shareholders

of retentions equals that of dividends.

6
    The tax capitalization hypothesis which underlies the new view was suggested
    implicitly in the work of King (1977), and explicitly by Auerback (l979a,
    1979b) and Bradford (1981).
                                        —8—


          For the United States throughout the postwar era and Britain until 1973,

      <   1.   The new view was developed to explain firm behavior when q* is less

than one. Values of q* > 1, as have prevailed in Britain since 1973, raise

some theoretical difficulties. Since dividends are tax favored, new share

issues are the preferred form of finance. A change in the dividend tax there-

fore affects on investment in the way we outlined for the traditional q* = 1

view.

          The cost of equity capital in the "q*l" world is independent of

either the dividend payout ratio or the personal tax rate on dlv—

idends. Regardless of the firm's financial policy, the cost of capital is

c =   p/(l—z).     It is easy to verify that if the firm earns this return on its

investments, shareholders will receive their desired rate of return. Con-

sider first a firm which distributes all its earnings in the form of dividends.

If the firm earns p/(l—z), it effectively pays Op/(1—z) in net dividends, on

which the shareholders are liable to taxes of mOp/(l—z). Therefore the

after tax return is (l—m)Op/(l—z). But since the price of a share is q*,

the rate of return is (l_m)pOI(l_z)q* =      p.   So by earning p/(l—z) the all—

dividends firm manages to provide its investors with their required rate of

return. Now consider the case of a firm which retains all its earnings.

If it earns p/(l—z) and retains this amount, then the value of a share rises

by (p/(l_z))q*. Investors pay capital gains tax on the value of this

increase, so they receive pq* after tax. The rate of return on this invest-

ment is just pq*/q* = p, so once again the investors are earning their

required rate of return. The dividend payout ratio is irrelevant to the

firm's cost of capital, and consequently to its investment plan.

          Several other aspects of the q*l view deserve comment. First, provided

q*<l, firms never issue new shares. Firms are assumed to have sufficient
                                    —9—

 cash flow to pay for current investment and still pay some dividends.

 Second, a change in dividend taxes leads to a recapitalization of the value

 of corporate capital: this will reduce the value of stock market equity,

 but will not affect the rate of return earned on shares. If the

desired wealth to income ratio is fixed, then an increase in the dividend

tax will actually increase equilibrium capital intensity by reducing the

market value of each physical unit of capital. Finally, permanent changes

in the dividend tax rate will have no effect on dividend policy. This is

because the firm's capital stock and investment, hence cash flow, are un-

affected by the dividend tax. Since dividend payments are the difference

between income and investment expenditure, they must also be unaffected by

the dividend tax.7

     There are two principal difficulties with the capitalization model of

corporate investment. First, when q*<l, it predicts that firms should always

prefer acquiring new capital by taking over another company to purchasing

an equivalent amount of new capital. This is because the purchase price of

a new capital good is unity, but capital goods held by corporations are

valued at only (l—m)O/(l—z). Without limitations on takeovers, or other

devices for passing money to corporate shareholders without incurring dividend

tax liability, no equilibrium with q < 1 is sustainable. The second problem

with the capitalization theory is that it predicts volatile dividend payments

which will fall sharply when new opportunities make investment particularly


 Suimners (1981) has observed that permanent changes in dividend tax rates
 will have no effect, but temporary changes may have real consequences.
 Timing of dividend payment is also considered by King (1974). Bradford (1981)
 has generalized the dividend tax neutrality result and shown that in a
 model with debt and equity finance, the debt—equity ratio is unaffected
 by changes in the dividend tax rate.
                                     — 10 —



desirable.    There seems to be little evidence that firms actually cut

dividends, and most research seems to support the notion of a rather

stable dividend payout ratio which managers set as a "target".8

       Before discussing the two theories' implications for investment be-

havior, an important caveat is in order. There need not be a single

marginal source of finance for the entire economy. Different firms may

find it optimal to be on different margins9 and even within a single firm,

different forms of finance may be used on different projects. Therefore,

in the aggregate investment expenditures are likely to be financed partly

from new issues and partly from dividend cuts. Our empirical work attempts

to estimate the marginal funding shares which can be attributed to each

source.

       These two views of dividend taxation have different implications for the

structure of investment relations based on Tobin's "q" theory. In a tax—

less world with homogeneous capital goods, Tobin (1969), following Keynes

(1936), explained that firms invest as long as each pound spent in acquir-

ing new capital goods raises the market value of the firm by at least a


8   Anderson (1980) has conducted time series tests on the Lintner (1956)
    "target payout ratio" hypothesis for Britain, and concluded that it ex-
    plains the observed behavior of firms since 1963. For a general discuss-
    ion of the difficulty of cutting dividends, see Brealey and Myers (1980,
    Chapter 16).

    Some firms may expect to experience negative profits in future years. If
    this is true, many of the tax calculations which we perform are irrel-
    evant: without taxable profits, the different rates of tax on different
    sources of finance (to the firm) do not matter. This is just one explan-
    ation of why different firms might be observed to behave differently.
                                      — 11 —




pound.    A number of empirical investigators10 have assumed that a good

approximation to the market value of an additional unit of capital is the

average market value of the existing capital stock. This amounts to

assuming that "average q", the ratio of the market value of the capital

stock to its replacement cost, is a good proxy for "marginal q".

       Within this framework, it is natural to assume that the rate of

investment is an increasing function of "q". Given adjustment costs and

lags in decision making within the firm, one should not expect that all

investment opportunities which will increase market value by more than

their cost will be undertaken immediately. In fact, in the presence of

adjustment costs, firms will always choose to spread investment projects

over time.1'

       In the traditional view of dividend taxes, the marginal pound which

is used to finance new investment comes from new equity issues, so the

firm will invest only if the ratio V/pK, where V is stock market value and

pK is the replacement value of the firm's existing capital stock, is greater

than unity. This means that the investment function takes the. form



(l.5a)                 I   g(— — 1)        g' > 0.
                                           g(0) = 0
Note that when the capital stock is in equilibrium, no investment is occurring

ql.
10
     Examples of U.S. investment studies based on the "q" model
     include von Furstenberg (1977), Ciccolo (1975), Engle and Foley (1975),
     and Summers (1981). Studies using British data include Jenkinson (1981)
     and Oulton (1978, 1979).

     This assumes, implicitly, that a convex adjustment cost function applies
     to investment activities. For a discussion of the plausibility of this
     assumption and some alternatives, see Rothschild (1971).
                                          — 12   —




In   the q*l model, however, the marginal financial resources are obtained by

reducing dividend payments and the firm will therefore invest up to the point

at which the market value of an additional unit of capital, (l—m)O/(l—z),

equals the price of capital goods. This gives rise to an investment equation

of the form



                                     (1 —
(l.5b)                  = g(—-              m)0)      g'< 0.
                             pK          (l—z)
                                                      g(O)O.
implying that the equilibrium value of q is                    The distinction between

(l.Sa) and (l.5b) provides the basis for our tests for the competing dividend

tax hypotheses.

       The various implications of the two views of taxes on corporate distri-

butions discussed in this section are summarized below in Table 1.


                                         Table 1

                    Alternative Views of Dividend Taxation


                      Cost ofi                          dl       dy       Equilibrium
                                                     d(l—m)O   d(l—m)O       "q"

Traditional View:          p +    )(y)                                        1
                     (l—m)Oy+(1-z)(l—y) (1— )

                              p
                                                                              1—z



      This heuristic discussion of the Tobin's q investment function ignores

numerous important aspects of the economic environment which affect invest-

ment decisions. Debt finance, depreciation, investment allowances, and an
                                   - 13   —




explicit   model of the movement to equilibrium have all been omitted. The

next section, provides a more rigorous justification for the q theory formu-

lation and derives a model which can be estimated using time series data.
                                          — 14 —




II.       The Investment Function

          In this section we develop a theory of the investment behavior of a

value—maximizing firm in an environment with stochastic adjustment costs.

The model is based on Summers' (1981) extension of Tobin's "q" investment

theory to incorporate personal taxes. This formulation is one of several

ways in which a q investment equation can be motivated on the basis of

optimizing behavior of firms. Derivations based on lags in delivery or

recognition imply relations very similar to those estimated here. The

validity of tests comparing models of dividend behavior does not depend upon

literal acceptance of the assumptions underlying the derivation presented

below. The model developed here does constitute a denial of Sargent's

(1976) claim that correlations between investment and q have no structural

significance. We begin by considering the investment decisions of a firm

which     behaves according to the capitalization hypothesis and constrast the

results with those obtained under the double tax view of dividend taxation.

          Under the assumptions of the capitalization hypothesis, firms choose

to issue no new equity and are barred from repurchasing existing shares so

that prices are proportional to the outstanding value of a firm's equity.

We assume that equity holders require a fixed real after tax return p to

induce them to hold the outstanding equity. The sum of the expected net of

tax capital gains and dividend return on equity must equal p,12 so that


(2.1)              pV(t) =   E(1   -
                                       m)eDg(t)
                                                  + (1 -   z)V(t))
where Dg(t) defines gross dividend payments by the firm and V(t) is the market

value of the firm's equity. Future dividends are uncertain because of tech—

12
     The   value of p   is the risk adjusted discount rate which investors apply
     to their expected equity returns. If expectations are exactly satisfied
     this is the return they will receive. Note that in a risk free environ-
     ment p   would   correspond to the after—tax return on alternative assets.
                                      — 15 —




  nological shocks to the production and adjustment cost functions. Factor

  price and tax uncertainty could be treated easily. The expectation in (2.1)

  is taken over the random variables which generate these uncertainties. To

  solve the differential equation (2 .1) for V(t), a transversality condition

  must be imposed on the path of V.    Excluding the possibility that the

  value of the firm becomes infinite in finite time by requiring

  him Et {V(s) e_1)_t)} 0               enables us to solve the differential

  equation (2.1) and find that:




(2.2)            V(t) = E       =
                                                     S P(r)dr})dS
                                       Dg(S) exp(-




Note that the expectation in (2.2) is over the entire future path of random

variables which affect dividends.

    The firm seeks to maximize (2.2) subject to constraints on its initial capital

stock and its investment program. We will assume that credit market constraints

do not permit the firm to finance more than a fraction b of its investment through

debt finance. This can be thought of as a measure of the firm's debt capacity.

In the model presented below, the firm will always choose to borrow as much as

possible, so b percent of all new investment finance comes from debt issues and

(1—b) from retained earnings.

    Any theory of investment, as opposed to a theory of the optimal capital stock,

must explain why the firm does not instantaneously adjust its capital stock. We
                                    — 16 —




assume that there are internal adjustment costs)3 The cost in terms of

managerial time and resources of installing new capital is assumed to rise

with the rate of capital accumulation.          We assume that the adjustment cost

function, (,E1) is convex, homogeneous in investment and capital, subject

to random shocks     and that (Ol) E 0. Under these conditions dividends

may be derived as after tax profits less investment expenses.


(2.3)     Dg = (1 — T){pF(K,L,E7)
                                     -   wL -   pibK}   —   {l   — u -b+(1-t)(,e1)}pI + tD


Where K and L refer to factor inputs, p is the overall price level, F(K,L,c2)

is the production function which is subject to random shocks c2, w the wage rate,

i the nominal interest rate, -r the effective corporate tax rate on undistributed

profits, u, rate of first year write—off s on investment, and D, the value of writing

down allowances on past investment. Adjustment costs are assumed to be expensed

and hence ineligible for investment incentive treatment.14 We have assumed that

firms have positive profits at all times and are able to deduct depreciation

allowances from corporate taxes. This may be an unreasonable assumption for tha

last decade, and we discuss modifications in Section IV.

     Equations (2.2) and (2.3) imply that


13
   The operative distinction here is between internal adjustment costs, which
are resource costs to the firm induced by the decision to invest, and external
adjustment costs which correspond to an increase in the price of investment
goods as all firms attempt to invest more quickly. See Mussa (1977) for some
discussion of these issues.

l4 alternative assumption corresponding to external adjustment costs would
increase the price of investment goods to p+ (-Y} and then allow the adjustment
costs to be eligible for investment grants and depreciation allowances. This
approach, used by Hayashi (1981), generates a slightly different formulation
of the equilibrium q relationship and the investment function. When we used
this approach and tested the competing theories of dividend taxes, the results
were the same as those obtained using the internal adjustment cost formu1ation
                                                 — 17    —




(2.4)     V(t) =
                     EE}{                 1
                                                    pF(K,L,c2)
                                                                    - wL - pibK (1 - T)    -

                      (1   -    u - b + (1 -
                                                 T}{i} )pI}eSds + B(t)
where B(t) is the present value of all remaining depreciation allowances which

can be collected on the capital stock in place at time t and u is the

present value taken to time s of depreciation allowances and investment in-

centives or Ll of investment at time s. This is discussed in greater detail

in Section III. Notice that in (2.4) the firm's value depends on expectations

of e1(s), c2(s)}, the realization of a bivariate continuous time

stochastic process.

        The firm seeks to maximize (2.4), its current market value, subject to

the capital accumulation constraint


(2.5)          K(t) =      1(t)    —   5K(t)


I is gross investment and S is the                true   depreciation rate on capital. The firm

ignores B(t) in its maximization, since it is independent of any future decisions.

The maximization problem can be solved using Pontryagin's maximum principle.

The   first   order condition for investment at time t                 is:

(2.6)         {l -    u    - b +   ({ , c}) l       -    t})p   =
                                                                       -     - (1   -
                                                                                        t)() 1(,c1)p
Equation (2.6) implicitly determines the firm's investment behavior, since it

defines a function linking investment to the real shadow price of capital,

  and the tax parameters. The condition for zero gross investment is


          A   = (1 — m)O (1 -           U - b)
(2.7)     p      (1-       z)
                                         — 18 —




This result has an easy intuitive interpretation. The shadow price of an
dditional unit of capital is equated to its marginal cost, in after tax

pounds. One implication of (2.7) is that there will be investment even if

the shadow price of capital goods is less than unity, because the tax system

reduces the effective price of new capital goods.

        Equation (2.7) is of no operational significance as a theory of invest-

ment unless an observable counterpart to the shadow price A can be developed.

Hayashi (1981) has shown in a less complicated model how the shadow price and

the market valuation of existing capital are related. Our result extends

his by considering the case of uncertain future dividend streams, and the

role of taxes levied at the personal level.


        The link between A and market value can be demonstrated as follows.

Note that V(t) —       B(t)   given in (2.4) is homogeneous in K(t); a doubling

of K(t), together with the optimal doubling of investment and labor in

every subsequent period, will double V(t)—B(t). This follows from the

assumption of constant returns to scale in the production function and

homogeneity of the adjustment cost function. It follows that (V'(t)—B(t))

=   ppK(t)   where V*(t) is the value of the stock market at time t when the

optimal investment plan is followed. The maximized value of the firm at

time t, minus the value of depreciation allowances on existing capital,

is proportional to the value of the initial capital stock. The maximum

principle implies that dV*(t)IdK(t) =        1(t);   this is just what is meant by

the assertion that 1(t) is the shadcw piCC of new investment, or "marginal

q." This     result,   along with the homogeneity condition, implies th2t


(2.8)            1(t) =   V(t)—B(t)
                              pK(t)
                                                     — 19 —



 This expression provides an observable counterpart for the shadow price

 of new investment, under the assumption that the firm maximizes value so

 that V(t) =    V*(t).      Substituting (2.8) into (2.6) yields an implicit relation

 for investment at time t.


 (2.9)                         +                 Q




where the tax adjusted value of Tobin's q, Q, is defined by


 (2.10)                                m)O(V - B) -
                       =   {(1l—z                   1 + u + b}
                                            pK                           —
                                         (1 — T)

         For simplicity, we assume that adjustment costs rise linearly with invest-

ment above some varying threshold.



(2.11)                     (   -       — e1)2K                i >   fl   +


                      0



implying that the          function, which describes adjustment costs per unit of

investment, over the relevant range where                       >   n+

(2.12)            () =         -(      —    n — ci)2(F

This   (   function   is homogeneous in I and K as required. We assume that firms

always operate in the positive adjustment cost range. These assumptions

were chosen to yield the simple relation between investment and Q.


(2.13)                     = n     +       Q +
                                     — 20 —




This   is the linear investment relationship which we estimate in section IV.

Econometric     issues, such as the independence of   and Q, are discussed at

that point.

       Before discussing the investment function under the alternative "q=l"

or "double—tax" hypotheses, several features of the investment function in

(2.13) deserve comment. First, the specification incorporates future ex-

pectations. Robert Lucas (1976) has argued that econometric investment

'equations which do not incorporate rational adaptation to policy changes

cannot be used to predict the effects of such changes. The approach deve-

loped here is not subject to this objection because the parameters which

are estimated, 6 and fl, are technological. Since policy actions are

assumed to have no effect on the adjustment cost function the investment

equation will be unaffected by changes in policy expectations. The q

model impounds expectations of future tax policy changes in the V/pK term.

While the market's valuation of existing capital will be affected by the

investor's expectations about the future, only the current values of the

tax parameters and the current value of the stock market enter the esti-

mated investment function. Second, other approaches to estimating the

investment impact of personal taxes require us to specify the firm's cost

of capital; the "q" formulation does not. Since the investors' discount

rate o enters the cost of capital and is unobservable, efforts to define

the cost of capital are prone to error. The "q" approach avoids this

difficull ty.

       The superiority of the "q" approach can be illustrated by comparing

our strategy for estimating the effects of investment incentives with

those based on the flexible accelerator approach pioneered by Hall and
                                      — 21 —




 Jorgenson (1967). Presumably, one important channel by which tax incentives

 influence investment is by reducing capital costs leading firms to raise their

 desired supply of output. In the q model, expectations of higher output and

 profits are immediately incorporated in the marketTs valuation of corporate

 capital. By comparison, this expected output effect is constrained to be

zero in the neoclassical investment formulation where investment is modelled

holding desired output constant. Moreover, expected future output is modelled

as a distributed lag forecast based on past output, so changes in the firm's

expectations about future output are not allowed to depend on tax policy.

     The model which was developed above assumed that the firm was choosing

between paying dividends and investing. This is the margin which underlies

the capitalization hypothesis. Now, we consider the model of the firm

which supports the double tax view of dividend taxation and investment.

The firm is assumed to pay out a fixed fraction, y, of its real profits

in every period. In the notation of (2.4), the firm is distributing


(2.14)            y(l -                  - wL -
            Dg            T)(pF{K,L,2}            pibK—pK).

The firm chooses an optimal investment plan, hence an optimal capital stock

through time, and finances investment with new share issues whenever neces-

sary. If S is the value of new shares issued, then the equality of sources

and uses of financial capital implies


(2.15) Dg + 1 -
                  u1—
                        h + (1 — T)
                                      (, s1)}     pI =   (1 — T) { pF(K,L, £2) —wL —   pib
                                                                              + S + TD
                                                   — 22 —



 When firms issue new shares S(t), investors are indifferent to marginal

 changes in their equity portfolio if

 (2.16)       pV(t) = E [(1 - m) OD(t) + (1 -                   c)((t)   -
                                                                             S(t))]
 Notice that the capital gain component which current shareholders value

 is not the total increase in the market value of the firm, but only that

 part which is not attributable to new share issues.

         By solving (2.16) for tI)evalue of the firm, we find that the

"traditional" firm will maximize

                                                                                       -l
                                          (1 - m)O{D (s)
(2.17)           v(t) = E             f
                                      t   (1 — z)   g
                                                            -   S(s)}e        -   z)        (s -
                                                                                                   t)d

subject to K =       I—     5K and (2.15).

Expression (2.17) just shows that as the firm issues more future equity,

the current shareholders' claim on the firm's total dividends is diluted.

The tr.iditional firm's first order condition for investment is

(2.18)       - = (1 - u      - b   + (1 - T)
                                                   EE( + l K

This 12 identical to (2.6) except for the                        rnO term which premulti1ied

in the old expression. This implies that the argument of the investment

function is now


(2.19)       =   (V_    B) — 1 + u + b
                          (1 -   T)
The assumptions about the adjustment cost function described above imply

that


(2.20)                  =n +              +
                    -            -            El
                                        — 23   —




Our tests of the two hypotheses about the financial margin at which firms

operate are based on comparisons between investment equations (2.13) and

(2.20).

     Because all firms may not be on the same margin, the aggregate

investment    function might be a weighted average of the "capitalization"
and the "double tax" investment functions. In order to allow for this
possibility,
we specified an investment equation with a weight of c on (2.20) and

(1—ct) on (2.13). If Z =    (.1—rn)   O/(l—z), then this weighted average invest-

ment equation takes the form


(2.21)
          —I   =   + 13
                          {,+     (l_a)Z}V_B
                                         pK
                                             +b+u—l
                                                                    i
          K
                                        (i-T)
The traditional view of the dividend tax is supported by estimates of a

near unity. If, however,        is close to zero, then tax capitalization

would appear to be the more appropriate model. We estimate (2.21) and

perform this test in the fourth section of the paper.
                                   — 24 —




III.    Data

       The principal data requirement for the estimation of the model developed

in the preceding section is the construction of time series for tax adjusted

Q, and the gross investment rate. This section describes the construction

of an annual time series for these variables —   British   Industrial and Commercial

companies covering the period 1950 — 1980.


A. Tax Adjusted Q

       The vafues of the replacement cost of the capital stock, pk, the market

value of equity v1 and the debt capital ratio b, are drawn from the Bank of

ngland (1980) for the post—1963 period. Earlier data, on an annual basis,

were sometimes available from CSO. In other cases we extrapolated backwards

as described in an appendix. Information on the marginal rates of individual

income tax or dividends and capital gains (m and z) and the tax disincentive

to dividend payment ®, was obtained from King (1977) and King, Neldrett and

Poterba (1981).

       The principal complexities came in the calculations of terms reflecting

the effects of depreciation allowances and investment inventives on old capital,

B, and new capital u. Estimates of u, using procedures similar to ours have

been presented by Meliss and Richardson for the post—1963 period. The only

previous attempt to calculate B was made by Oultori (1979) who assumed the

economy was in steady state through the period. Consistent estimates of B

and u can be derived for the entire post—war period from information on

tax depreciation rules.
                                                — 25 —


        British   tax law identifies three distinct types of investment: 1) buildings,

2) plant, machinery and most types of vehicles, and 3) automobiles. The last

two are treated in essentially identical fashion except for minor differences

in the rates of writing down allowances. For each type of investment, wecalcu—

lated the present value of depreciation allowances which the firm could expect

to accrue over the lifetime of the investment. For each year after the invest-

ment and until the capital goods were completely written down for tax purposes,
                                                                                15
we determined the present value of the remaining future depreciation allowances.

By aggregating the value of the remaining allowances over vintages of capital, we

computed the total value of the remaining depreciation allowances on the existing

capital stock.

        The treatment of investment incentives on buildings will be described first.

Building investment, denoted Ib(t), is eligible for a tax free investment grant

 (z) and taxable initial (z) allowances and investment allowances (z) in the

year of construction. In subsequent years, buildings are depreciated on a

straight line, historic cost schedule at the rate of writing down allowances

(z). The present value of the investment incentives on a one pound investment

is

                                   a        i     d          s=T                   d
                          Zg + T(Z + z + z )                       b          TZ
                           b      b   b   b                                        b
(3.1)                                                    +                             +1
                   ub=                                                   (l+r)S
                                  (1+r)                      s=l


                               + T(zb +
                      =   z                     + z)
                                                         +
                                                                       Tzb                       Tb
                                                                                            [(l+r) —1]
                                  (1 + r)                    r         (1 +


where Tb(l_z_z)/z. This expression follows Oulton (1979) in assuming that

firms pay taxes about one year in arrears. The discount rate used is r=(1—r)i


'5We have ignored the rather complex issues associated with the resale of
capital goods and the recapture provisions of the depreciation laws.
                                               — 26 —

                                                           consolS. We chose this
where i is the nominal interest rate on British government

rate becuase we are discounting a nominal stream of after—tax payments which is

essentially risk—free.

        The expression for Ub describes the present value of the subsidies which a

firm can expect to receive when it considers investing in a new building. A

related concept is the present value, at time t, of the remaining depreciation

allowances (the "value of the depreciation bond") on investment put in place at

time s<t. This consists of the present value of the writing down allowances for

the Tb(s)_(t_s) years remaining in the taxable life of the building. The value

of these remaining allowances, RlD(s,t), is just




                                          T      d
                                              b z (s)•T(t)
(3.2)            Rb(s,t)       Ib(s)*                   k+l
                                         k0 (1 + r)



                                    Ib(s)zb(s)T(t)              Tb(s,t)+l —
                           =                           {(l + r)                111
                                           T (s,t) + 1
                               r(l + r) b

                               (t   —   s).                   are computed under the assumptions
where Tb(s,t) = Tb(s) —                        Both Ub and

                                                                        which to deduct the
that 1) the firm will always have positive profits, against

investment allowances and 2) firms anticipate that the current corporate tax rate

will never change.

        The tax treatment of plant, machinery, cars and other vehicle differs from

that for buildings in that the writing down allowances are granted on a declining

balance basis. The value of the plant which may be depreciated is the initial

cost of the plant minus the investment grant and the initial allowance. In the

above notation with subscript "p" for plant and machinery,
                                             —27-
                                                                                                 k-i
           u =    P
                      + 1(
                           p
                               +
                                   p
                                       +
                                           p +
                                                 T(l —   z)(l
                                                          p
                                                                —   a -
                                                                    p
                                                                          zd)
                                                                          p
                                                                                      (1 - Zd)
                                                                                            P
(3•3)
             p
                        (1 + r)                           (1 + r)               k=l      (1 + r)k


and


                                                   l_Zd(S) k
(3.4)       R (s,t) =
             p
                        I p (s)*T(t)tC p(s,t)
                                                 kIl+t)

where C(st) [(lZ(S))(l_a(5) _zd(s))(l_Zd(s))]



 The expressions for cars, u and R(s,t), are exactly the same with z replacing

 z. Following the Bank of England (1980), we truncated the infinite series in (3.3)

 and (3.4) at a 33 year lifetime for plant and a 10 year lifetime for autos. Since

 1972 the tax law has permitted the full expensing of investment in plant and

machinery. This corresponds to zd=l.0, and all of the investment incentives are

 collected in the year when the plant is installed.

        The computed values of u, Ub, and U enabled us to compute the effective

 investment incentive which applied in each year since 1948. We did this by weight-

 ing the three investment credit series by the share of each type of gross invest-

ment)6 The resulting series, u, measures the reduction in the cost of new

 investment goods which firms received because of investment incentives on a typical

 pound of investment. The series peaked in 1977, when investment incentives

 allowed firms to recoup 52.8 percent of investment costs. The full time series is

 reported in Column I of Table One.

16
   While the tax treatment of auto differs from that for other types of vehicles,
the available data on investment is typically divided into buildings, plant! machin-
ery, and all vehicles. To obtain the present value of investment credits on
vehicles, we again followed the Bank of England (1980) and formed a weighted
average of u and u with weighys .24 and .76, respectively. These weights
approximately correpond to the share of autos in vehicle investment. Some sensi-
tivity tests showed that our results are very insensitive to this weighting.
                                              _28...


        Our computations onR(s,t) for the three types of investment expenditures allow

us to determine the remaining value of the depreciation bond for all capital

 installed after 1947. However, for the early post—war years, it is important to

know about investment before 1947. Unfortunately, information on the vintage

composition of the capital stock which was standing at the end of World War II is
                     17
tenuous at best.           We approximated the depreciation bond by assuming that the net

capital stock in 1948, K948, would depreciate at a constant exponential rate and

that companies would be permitted to deduct true economic depreciation on that

capital stock forever. The exponential decay rate was calculated to be .04 per

year using capital consumption and net capital stock data. Therefore, we computed



                                                                          s—1948 N
                                     s-l948 N          d(l_d)k -Td(l-d)         l948
(3.5)           Rr(S) = T(1-d)             1(1948
                                                    k=l(1+r)k
                                                                     d+r



        To determine the total value of the depreciation bond outstanding in any

 year, we sum the value of the remaining allowances on all the vintages of each

 type of capital good which are still eligible for credit.            If T is the date

 of installation of the oldest buildings which are still eligible for writing

 do allowances, then Bb(t)                      Rb(s,t). Repeating this exercise for the
                                       sT*b
 other categories of investment                 yields B(t) and B(t), which may then be

 added to B
           war (t)
                      to   produce

 17
    Two of the best studies of capital formation before and immediately after the
 war are Redfern (1955) and Dean (1964). Neither conveys much information on the
 vintage distribution of the capital stock remaining after the war.
                                          — 29 —




(3.6)           B(t) =   B(t)   + Bb(t) + B(t) + B(t).




The actual values of this series are displayed in Column Two of Table One, and

there is quite a substantial amount of variation in the data. This suggests that

a computation based on steady states (i.e., Oulton (1979)) might be substantially

misleading. For 1980, a year when the total market valuation of equity and

preference shares was 81.94 billion pounds, the value of remaining depreciation

claims was 7.04 billion, or 8.6 percent of the market's valuation. Alternatively,

this may be thought of as 2.7 percent of the replacement value of the net capital

stock.

        A practical problem in the constructicn of Q measures is the treatment of

inventories and work in progress. The definition of Q's denominator, the re-

placement value of the capital stock, is complicated by the presence of inven-

tories and work in progress. Two approaches to the treatment of inventories

were pursued. The first is to add together the replacement value of inventories

and the physical capital stock and consider this as a measure of the total

replacement value of the firm's physical assets. This approach, which we used,

requires computing                 The alternative approach is to treat inventories

as liquid assets and to subtract their value from the numerator of Q and
            —   B— INV
compute                     This method of adjustment was also tried, and it yielded

investment equation results very similar to those obtained with the first
                                            V-B
procedure. We report the series for               in Table One, Column 3. This
                                           pK+INV
series has ranged from .11 to 1.00 during the last 30 years.
                           Table One: Tax Adjusted "Q" Variables and Company Investment Data

                                        Present Value of
       Present Value of Investment     Outstanding Future      Valuation                      TDouble Tax"
                                                                            "Capitalization                       Gross
Year   Allowances, New Investment     Investment Allowances      Ratio       Hypothesis" Q    Hypothesis Q   Investment Rate

1948              0.455                       2.862                                                               6.73
1949              0.458                       2.862                 0.629        0.744          0.543             6.45
1950              0.479                       2.975                 0.407        0.243          0.069             6.55
1951              0.455                       2.973                 0.420        0.420          0.065             5.75
1952              0.415                       2.824                 0.359        0.099         —0.174             5.04
1953              0.442                       2.922                 0.295       —0.044         —0.266             5.19
1954              0.411                       2.568                 0.331        0.002         —0.213             5.53
1955              0.425                       2.535                 0.506        0.493          0.160             6.11
1956              0.403                       2.557                 0.465        0.432          0.039             6.48
1957              0.365                       2.551                 0.368        0.115         —0.203            6.80
1958               0.393                      2.824                 0.356       —0.110         —0.181            7.23
1959              0.444                       3.029                 0.370       —0.062         —0.063            7.19
1960              0.483                       3.224                 0.626        0.574           0.574           7.32
1961              0.492                       3.452                 0.717        0.854           0.853           7.48
1962              0.521                       3.921                 0.662        0.809          0.808            7.61
1963              0.585                       4.153                 0.559        0.780          0.779            8.08
1964              0.579                       4.408                 0.910        1.616          1.617             9.87
1965              0.453                       3.639                 0.738        0.802          0.802             9.73
1966              0.408                       3.419                 0.773        1.292          0.764            8.92
1967              0.434                       3.524                 0.429        0.599          0.306            8.45
1968              0.441                       3.776                 0.671        1.256          0.770            8.84
1969              0.423                       4.125                 1.002        2.143          1.352            9.10
1970              0.431                       4.339                 0.732        1.384           0.837           9.02
1971              0.368                       4.162                 0.503        0.613          0.286            8.12
1972              0.463                       4.928                 0.636        0.765           0.654           7.94
1973              0.496                       4.961                 0.483        0.481          0.481            8.24
1974              0.475                       4.400                 0.266        0.082          0.082            8.00
1975              0.510                       4.840                 0.110       —0.223         —0.223            7.44
1976              0.509                       5.069                 0.332        0.190          0.190            7.37
1977              0.528                       6.116                 0.265        0.055          0.055            7.59
1978              0.514                       6.126                 0.373        0.241          0.241            7.89
1979              0.516                       6.645                 0.431        0.336          0.336            7.32
1980               0.516                      7.041                 0.458        0.364           0.364           6.96


Sources:   See Data Appendix and description in text.



                                                           —        —
                                                               30
                                                 — 31   —




                                  r'
          Our   estimates   Q and Q    are   shown in Columns Four and Five of Table One.

Q    is   computed under the capitalization hypothesis and Q under the double

taxation view. The variance of Q under the capitalization hypothesis is 1.35

times that       of   Q.
C.    The Gross Investment Rate

          The dependent variable in our specifications is the ratio of gross

investment to the net capital stock. Data on gross investment by ICCs is

available for the period since 1963. Before that, we extrapolated using

data from the Annual Abstract of Statistics on investment by quoted companies

and all non—nationalized companies. The net capital stock was computed in

a similar fashion, using data from the Bank of England (1980) for the period

since 1960 and Blue Book estimates of the net company sector capital stock

and net investment for the pre—1960 period. Our series for the investment

rate is shown in Column Six of Table One. The gross investment rate averages

7.5 for our sample period and peaks at 9.87 percent in 1964.


IV.       Results

          This section describes our empirical tests of the double tax and capit-

alization models. The two theories of dividend taxation give rise to the

alternative empirical models of corporate investment behavior presented in

(2.13) and (2.20). These equations are reproduced below; (4.la) corresponds

to the capitalization view and (4.lb) is derived under the assumptions of

the traditional model.



                                   =         +
(4.la)                                             + £1


                                  =                +
(4.lb)
                                       O+
                                      — 32 —


The difference between Q and 5   is   that Q adjusts the market value of the firm's

equity to take account of future tax liabilities on the firm's dividends,

while Q ignores this adjustment.

     Before turning to the empirical results, it is necessary to discuss

several issues connected with the estimation. The exogeneity of Q in (4.la)

is a delicate issue. There is no reason to believe that Q and            are

uncorrelated. Shocks to the adjustment cost function may affect market valu-

ation V, and therefore Q. This endogeneity is not likely to be severe since

the vast majority of the variance in Q arises from other sources. The left

out variable error formula implies that the bias in the OLS estimate of 3

is given by:


                            —     covc.
                                   varQ
                                                               0
This implies that the bias is bounded by the variance ofc , which a. indicated
                                                               (5Q
below is negligible relative to the estimates of .          As a further precaution and

in order to treat errors in measurement V and K, many of the equations were

estimated using instrumental variables. The instruments were lagged values of

the tax rates which went into the construction of Q. There is no reason to

expect these variables to be correlated with technological shocks to the adjust-

ment cost function.
                                                                               A
     Preliminary   experimentation revealed that   lagged   values of Q and Q entered

(.) with a very significant coefficient. While the theory developed in the

preceding section implies that lagged Q should have no impact on investment

given contemporaneous Q, lagged Q is included in all the estimated equations.

Its presence is justified by delivery and decision lags and by the possibility

of difficulties in data alignment. Inclusion of additional lagged values of Q
                                    — 33 —



or   lagged values of the dependent variable did not improve the predictive power

of the equations after making autocorrelation corrections.

        The residuals in (4.1) displayed substantial autocorrelation. The

 equations were therefore re—estimated using a maximum likelihood procedure

 to correct the second order serial correlation in the residuals. Examination

of the correllogram of the estimated residuals suggested that this was suf—

ficient to achieve efficiency. The instrumental variable estimates were

corrected foT autocorrelation by applying the non—linear two stage least

squares procedure of Amemiya (1974) to the quasi—differenced form of (4).

       We present results for three sample periods in Table 2: (1) 1950—80,

which is the full period for which our data were available; (2) 1963—80, the

period for which Bank of England data were available and during which it

was not necessary to make extrapolations and interpolations; and (3)

1950—72. There are two reasons for terminating the sample in 1972; both

relate to the tax reform which took effect in 1973. First, 1972 is the

last year when q*<l and the pure capitalization hypothesis should apply.

Since 1973, q*>l and we have assumed that firms treat this as q*l. The

second reason for excluding the last eight years is that since 1973, many

firms have paid no corporate profits taxes. Therefore, it becomes necessary

to re—examine some of the calculations in Section II: in particular, firms

will face values of t=0 which implies u=0 and B=0.    If the firm pays no

taxes, depreciation allowances which can be written off against taxes are

of little value.'8



18   We have estimated equations for the whole sample in which we constrain
     Tu=B=0 for the whole post—1972 period. This turns out to reduce the explan-
     atory power of the equations and does not alter any of the basic results
     which are reported here.
                                            Table Two:        Investment Equations under the Competing Hypotheses

                                                                                                             —2
                                                                                                                                         S.S.R.
                    Estimation                            o                                        /
                                                                    S     xl0        ,,       S     xl0           )    p        p           —4
     Interval   &     Method     Tax Hypothesis               0         1                         2                        1        2   (x10     )   D.W.   R2

la                                   TCH                 6.56            1.08                       .69                                  2126         .37   .50
                                                         (.23)           (.38)                     (.38)
     1950—80          OLS
lb                                   DTh                 6.68            1.33                     1.00                                   1434         .46   .66
                                                         (.17)           (.38)                     (.37)

                                     TCII                6.92             .64                       .39               1.25     —.45      474         1.69   .88
                                                         (.41)           (.18)                     (.18)              (.18)    (.18)
     1950—80          AR2
2b                                   DTh                 6.94             .94                          .54            1.28     —.50       359        1.70   .91
                                                         (.31)           (.19                      (.19)              (.17)    (.17)

                                     TCH                 6.56            1.19                          .72                               2274         .41
                                                         (.24)           (.42)                     (.41)
     1950—80          IV
3b                                   DTH                 6.70            1.30                      1.13                                  1258         .53
                                                         (.17)           (.41)                     (.40)

                                     TCH                 6.58             .97                          .98            1.15     —,43       575        2.00
                                                         (.42)           (.25)                     (.29)              (.20)    (.20)
     1950—80          AR2—IV
4b                                   DTh                 6.80            1.16                      1.04               1.06     —.37       398        1.83
                                                         (.30)           (.24)                     (.27)              (.20)    (.20)

5a                                   TCH                 6.86             .66                          .37            1.27     —.46       386        1.68   .89
                                                         (.52)           (.21)                     (.21)              (.20)    (.20)
     1950—72          AR2
5b                                   DTH                 6;86            1.02                       .53               1.33     —.55       259        1.65   .93
                                                         (.36)           (.20)                     (.21)              (.20)    (.19)

6a                                   TCH                 7.38             .71                          .47             .78     —.59       228        1.98   .74
                                                         (.22)           (.17)                     (.17)              (.26)    (.25)
     1963—80          AR2
6b                                   DTh                 7.28            1.10                       .69                .63     —.51       190        1.83   .79
                                                         (.20)           (.22)                     (.20)              (.33)    (.31)

     TCH = Tax Capitalization Hypothesis
     DTH = Double Tax Hypothesis
                                                                          —     34        —
                                       — 35 —



      The results demonstrate the superiority of the Q specification based

on the "traditional view" of dividend taxation. It outperforms the equations

based on the capitalization hypothesis for all sample periods. The standard

error of estimate in the OLS equation is only 75 percent of that for the

alternative hypothesis. The "traditional view" specifications also provide

much better fits in the generalized least squares regressions, and the instru-

mental variable estimations.

     A more formal comparison of the two hypotheses is possible. We begin

by reporting the likelihood ratios for the pairs of equations in Table 2.

These ratios represent the posterior odds ratio implied by Bayes' theorem

starting with a diffuse prior or the two hypotheses. That is, if one started

out assigning equal prior likelihoods to the estimated equations for two

hypotheses, and then used these equations together with standard rules of

inference, they represent the posterior odds ratio we would assign to the two

hypotheses.'9 In all cases, the likelihood of the "double tax" hypothesis

far exceeds that of the capitalization hypothesis. The worst case for the

traditional view suggests that it is almost six times more likely than the

new view.

                 Regression Pair                Posterior Odds Ratio

                 50—80 sample, OLS                    64.60 to 1
                 50—80 sample, AR2                  367.49 to 1
                 63—80 sample, AR2                    5.63 to 1
                 50—72 sample, AR2                   80.57 to 1



19 The posterior odds ratio is defined as

                         mx L(0H )
                          o
                     A
                         max L(OH 2)
                          8

   For the special case when       is assumed normally distributed and the
                                     - 36   -




     An alternative and perhaps more informative way of comparing the two

hypotheses is through a specification test. Pesaran (1974) has shown that

the Cox specification test takes a particularly simple form in the case of two

non—vested linear models. The test requires that one of the hypotheses be

chosen as the null. The Cox test statistic, p, is then asymptotically dis-

tributed as N90.l) under the null. It is essentially a measure of the

superiority of the relative performance of the null. The criterion for re-

jecting the null yields a one—sided test. If p is a large negative number,

the null is rejected in favor of the alternative hypothesis.


                              Cox Statistics

    Null Hypothesis       Alternative Hypothesis   Error Specification20     p

    Capitalization (Q) Double Tax (Q)                     lID              —16.07

    Double Tax (Q)        Capitalization (Q)              lID                3.80

    Capitalization (Q) Double Tax (Q)                    AR(2)             —16.70

    Double Tax (Q)        Capitalization (Q)             AR(2)              11.68




   model is linear, this statistic reduces to

                                            T/2



                     2
   where a    (y—x) under H1 and a = (y—x) 2 under 112. The notion of
   using posterior odds ratios to compare alternative model specifications has
   a long history in statistics and econometrics. Zeliner (1979) discusses
   the   merits of this approach.
20 The test in the AR2 case was performed by quasidifferencing the data using
   the average of the p1 and p2 values implied by equations 2a and 2b and then
  using OLS. This is only legitimate because of the near equality of the
  values of p1 and p2 in the two equations.
                                         — 37 —



 While the results show that the double tax view is
                                                    never rejected in favor of

 capitalization, the capitalization model is rejected with a high degree of con—

 fidence in favor of double tax.21

           While our research focuses on the use of investment equations to test

 hypotheses about the financial behavior, the equations reported in Table 2

 may be analyzed as investment equations in their own right. They support

 earlier findings by Jenkinson (1981) and Oulton (1979) that the q theory model

 can be quite powerful in explaining the observed investment behavior of

 British industry. Our results suggest that an increase of 10 percent in the

 stock market would raise the investment rate C, about 15 percent. The

coefficients on Q in the reported investment equations are larger than those

 in earlier studies despite the division of our Q measure by (1—i)    .   This
is probably due to our use of annual as opposed to quarterly data series,
                                                                                    22
the extension of the sample period and the improved estimates of tax effects.

Our equations also fit somewhat better than earlier efforts.

        The equations also provide information about the dynamics of investment

behavior. The year—lagged value of Q always enters significantly and with

a coefficient that is about two thirds of the value of the current Q. Our

results indicate that about 60% of the total investment response to Q occurs

within a year of the change in the valuation ratio.

        Part of the explanation for our larger coefficient is that annual data

on Q is less contaminated by short—term fluctuations in market value than

quarterly Q, so our equations are more successful at capturing the underlying



21 We   also tested the competing hypotheses by including both Q and Q in the
     equation. In this case, Q and Q1 always entered with significant positive
     coefficients and Q, Q1 had negative coefficients which were sometimes
     significant. This simple test also suggests that Q is more appropriate
     than Q.
22   Both Jenkinson (1981)   and Oulton (1979) employ quarterly data compiled by
     the   Bank of England for the period 1963—80 in their studies of investment.
                                       — 38 —



long—term relationship between Q and investment. Most of the noise and
measurement should be concentrated at relatively high frequencies while

day to day changes in the market's value and in equity prices may be the

result of new information or speculation; the longer term movements in the

market probably reflect something about investors' underlying view of the

returns to capital investment. This argument also explains why the correction

for autocorrelation reduces the coefficients of Q. Quasi differencing the

data increases the weight placed        high frequencies.

     Engle and Foley (1975) have invoked this argument and then estimated an

investment function for the United States using the band spectral regression
             23
technique.        This approach involves decomposition of the observed data series

into frequency components and then filtering of data to eliminate high fre-

quency variations. In applying this approach to British investment data, we

alternately chose to eliminate those components of the variance in Q which

occurred at periodicities below three and five years. The results, reported

below, show that in fact the low frequency relationship between the investment

rate and the valuation ratio is stronger than the relationship which is observed

using the raw data on Q and investment. The effect of an increase in Q which

is caused by a permanent change in the corporate environment, for example a

new tax policy, is larger than one caused by a momentary increase in stock

market values. The superiority of the Q to Q equations also remains evident

at low frequencies.

     All of the tests of the two dividend tax hypotheses which we have

reported so far involve comparison of two alternative hypotheses. In Section

II, however, we argued that there was no single margin for the whole economy




23 Band spectrum regression is described in greater detail in Eagle (1974).
                                 — 39 —



                                Table   3


                   Band Spectrum Regression Results


Window                0                 l             R2      SSR
1 year, TCH          6.70           1.54              .47    23.845
                     (.23)          (.30)

1 year, DTH          6.80           2.01              .79    18.03
                     (.18)          (.30)

3 years, TCH         6.64          1.64               .50    22.451
                     (.29)          (.40)

3 years, DTH.        6.76          2.11            .62       16.89
                     (.22)          (.39)

5 years, TCH         6.56          1.78            .53       20.09
                     (.39)         (.54)

5 years, DTH        6.68           2.31            .67       14.15
                     (.29)         (.52)




Note: Calculations were performed using the Troll Program.
                                    — 40 —

and that in practice the aggregate investment equation would reflect a

weighted average of the two finance sources. Defining Z               (l—m)O/(l—z), we

claimed that the aggregate investment function could be written



(4.4)               =    + [(a +   (1   -
                                            a)Z) + u +   b -   1] +

where a represents the fraction of investment financed at the margin by new

equity issues, and (1—a) the share financed out of retentions. The double

taxation hypothesis implies a      1.0 while the capitalization view predicts

a =   0.

        The results of estimating equation (4.4) using non—linear least squares

are reported in Table 4. They tell a consistent story. The estimates of a

range from .76 to 2.16. In all but one case the hypothesis that a = 0 can

be rejected at the 5 percent level. The hypothesis is that a = 1 cannot

be rejected except for the 1963—80 period when a =       2.16.   These results

suggest that the capitalization hypothesis does not describe the behavior

of the firms who undertake any empirically significant fraction of investment.

        The results in this section universally support the traditional view of

dividend taxation. The tax factor in Q implied by the capitalization view

clearly detracts from the explanatory power of the investment equations.

These results contrast with Summers (1981) who found that tax adjustments

added to the explanatory power of Q investment equations for the U.S. The

difference may arise because the earlier study tested the contribution of

all the tax effects jointly rather than just the effect of the adjustment

for distributions. Alternatively, it may reflect differences between countries

in corporate behavior.
                                       Table Four: Nonliiear Investment Equation Estimates


                         Estimation
1ation     Interval        Method               0(xl02        1(x102)     2(xl02)    p1              SSR(xl03)   D . W.

  1.       1953—80         NLLS         1.19      6.83            1.20     1.09      —                 .1221       .49
                                        (.29)     (.20)           (.89)     (.39)

  2.       1953—80       NLLS,AR2       1.83      7.28            1.04       .48    1.36     —.57                1.81
                                                                                                        ,267
                                        (.47)     (.32)           (.19)     (.19)    (.17)   (.17)

   3.      1953—80        NL2SLS        1.10      6.74            1.28     1.16      —                 1240        .54
                                        (.27)     (.21)           (.42)     (.42)

  4.       1953—80       NL2SLS,AR2      .76      6.71            1.14     1.07     1.06     — .37     .440      1.88
                                        (.49)     (.37)           (.25)     (.29)    (.21)   (.20)

   5.      1953—72       NLLS,AR2       2.16      7.25            1.19       .39    1.61     — .83       135     1.60
                                        (.30)     (.33)           (.16)     (.18)    (.17)   (.17)

   6.      1963—80       NLLS,AR2       1.01      7.30            1.05       .68      .79    —.46        142     1 . 92
                                        (.51)     (.21)           (.28)     (.23)    (.26)   (.29)


Source: For data descriptions and specifications, see text.




                                                              -   41 -
                                   — 42 —




Conclusions
      The results in this paper provide strong support for the traditional

view that dividend taxes discourage corporate investment. The data decisively

refute the hypothesis that by raising the cost of paying out funds to share-

holders, dividend taxes encourage investment through retentions. Rather, it

appears that in making investment decisions, corporations act as if marginal

investment is financed through new share issues. This suggests that the capi-

talization hypothesis cannot account for dividend behavior in the UK.

      These findings have important implications for both tax analysis and

policy. They imply that even though only a negligible fraction of investment

is financed through new share issues, dividend taxes nonetheless have potent

effects on the cost of capital and investment. This implies that formulations

which employ weighted average costs of capital and assign a large weight to

retentions will badly understate the disincentive to investment caused by the

tax system. More generally, these results strongly confirm the importance of

considering taxes levied at both the corporate and personal levels in assessing

the tax system's impact on capital formation. This suggests the importance

of including variables reflecting personal taxes in standard investment sped—

f icat ions.

      This research could usefully be extended in several directions. If the

investment equations reported here were coupled with a model of stock market

valuating it would be possible to obtain estimates of the effect of tax reforms

on investment. A rational expectations approach to modelling market valuation

is developed in Summers (1981), which shows how it can be used to estimate the

effect of policy announcements and temporary policy changes as well as the

types of reform usually considered. It might also be valuable to examine
                                   — 43 —




empirically   the effects of various tax reforms on q. This would require

modelling investors anticipations about future tax rules. The sources and uses of

funds identity connects decisions regarding investment, leverage, and payout

policy. It would be valuable to examine the effects of changes in q, and in

tax policy on these variables in a model in which they were jointly determined.

     Most importantly, the negative findings in this paper regarding the

"capitalization" hypothesis underscore the importance of developing a satis-

factory theory of dividend behavior. The "traditional" view supported here

offers no convincing explanation for the payment of dividends. Until such an

explanation is found, it will be difficult to model persuasively the effects

of changes in tax pclicy regarding corporate distributions.
                                      — 44 —


                  TABLE A—i: Data Used in Constructing "Q"


       THETiP THETAHAT CGTAX TAXFACT MVE@*SHRI'DM MVPREF         NETCAP   BVSM


1948    0.450     1.581    0.000   1.150     6,402.078   3,208   7,734    2,991
1949    0,450     1.570    0,000   1.158     5,332.984   2,082   8,131    3,052
1950    0.463     1.550    0,000   1.201     5,726.118   2,193   8,696    3,062
1951    0,475     1.361    0.000   1.400     5,875.599   1,949    9,919 3610
1952    0.463     1.356    0.000   1.373     5,433.972   1,826   11,351   3,687
1953    0,450     1.333    0.000   1+364     6,159.736   1,908   11,798   3,767
1954    0.438     1.311    0.000   1.357     8,596.500   2,083   12,009   4010
1955    0,425     1.277    0,000   1,362     8,713.199   1,996   13,100   4,469
1956    0,425     1.190    0,000   1.461     7,818.160   1,770   14200    4,692
1957    0.425     1.183    0,000   1.470     8,326.986   1659 15700       5,155
1958    0.406     1.521    0,000   1.107     9,123.146   1,646   16,400   5,069
1959    0,388     1.633    0.000   1.001    15,020.248   1,711   16,700   5,204
1960    0.388     1.633    0.000   1.001    18,695.935   1703    18,000   5957
1961    0,388     1.633    0.000   1.001    18,796.875   1,657   19,500   6,173
1962    0.388     1.633    0,000   1.001    17,378.815   1,709   20,900   6,245
1963    0,368     1.633    0,000   1.001    27,942.780   1,801   21,596   6,521
1964    0.400     1,667    0.000   1.000    24,891.100   1,904   23,180   7,161
1965    0,412     1.527    0.184   0,909    27,423.260   1,644   25152    8,000
1966    0,412     1,000    0.171   1,410    17,088.870   1711 27167       8,706
1967    0,412     1,000    0.174   1.405    26,694.100   1,593   27,942   8,986
1968    0,412     1.000    0.167   1.417    41,662.320   1,266   29,595   9,469
1969    0.412     1.000    0.154   1.439    34,819.250   1,076   32,839 10,539
1970    0,400     1.000    0.151   1.415    28,203.790     738   37,255 11701
1971    0.388     1,000    0.149   1.391    38,346.830     965   42,631 12,607
1972    0,386      1+257   0,147   1.105    34,292.400     840   48,992 13,593
1973    0.413      1,460   0,145   0.998    24,455.000     556   59,536 159O0
1974    0.432      1,515   0,143   0.996    14,497.000     517   75,560 21,297
1975    0.437      1.538   0.141   0.992    43,606.080     451   92,892 25,123
1976    0.428      1.527   0.139   0.986    41,163.020     547 110110 28,259
1977    0,417      1.504   0,137   0,984    65,814.650     767 127865 34,167
1978    0.392      1.460   0.136   0,973    86,484.580     736 149,392 38,698
1979    0,364      1.429   0,135   0.952   108,343.320     781 177,665 46,245
1980    0.360      1.429   0,134   0.947    81,125.800     815 208,321 53,665




Data Definitions and Legend:

   THETAP = m, the marginal personal tax rate on dividends
   THETAHAT =     e, the effective amount of dividends received by share-
                  holders when the firm distributes one pound
   CGTAX =   z,   the effective tax rate on capital gains
   TAXFACT = (l—Z) , the inverse of the equilibrium value of q*.
             (l—m)0
   MVEQ*SHP,DOM =    market value of ordinary shares which correspond to
                     domestic earnings
   MVPREF = market value of preference shares
   NETCAP = pK, the net value of the capital stock at replacement cost
   BVSM = book value of stocks and work in progress
                                  — 45 -



                               Bibliography

Amemiya, T. (1974), "The Nonlinear Two—Stage Least Squares Estimator," Journal
     of Econometrics 2, pp. 105—110.

Anderson, G.J. (1981d), 'The Internal Financing Decisions of the Industrial and
     Commercial Sector: A Reappraisal of the Lintner Model of Dividend Disbur—
     sions,' University of British Columbia Discussion Paper 81—15.

Auerback, A., "Share Valuation and Corporate Equity Policy," Journal of
     Public Economics, 1979a, 11, 291—305.

_______________ "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 93 (August 1979), pp. 433—46.

Bank of England, Company Sector Data Base, mimeo, 1980, Economic Research
     Division.

                  "Dividend Payments: Some Recent Trends," Bank of England
     Quarterly Bulletin, 1981.

Bhattasharya, S., "Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and 'The
     Bird in the Hand' Fallacy," The Bell Journal of Economics 10 (Spring 1979),
     pp. 259—70.

Bradford, D.F., "The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate
     Distributions," Journal of Public Economics 15 (1981), 1—22.

Brealey, R. and S. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance (New York:
     McGraw Hill, 1981).

Cicollo, J.H., "Four Essays on Monetary Policy," Ph.D. thesis, Yale University,
     New Haven, Conn., 1975.

Cox, D.R. (1961), "Tests of Separate Families of Hypotheses," Proceedings of
     the Fourth Berkeley Symposium, I.

______________.(l962), "Some Further Results on Separate Families of Hypotheses,"
     Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, B, 38, pp. 45—53.

Dean, G., "The Stock of Fixed Capital in the United Kingdom in 1961," JRSS—B 1964,
     327—361.

Edwards, J.S.S., "Theory of Company Dividend Policy," Chapter Two   of   D. Phil.
     Thesis, Oxford University, 1981.

Engle, R.F., "Band Spectrum Regression," International Economic Review, XV
     (February 1974), 1—11.

Engle R. and D. Foley, "An Asset Price Model of Aggregate Investment," mt.
     Econ. Rev., October 1975, 16, 625—647.

Fair, R.C. (1970) "The Estimation of Simultaneous Equation Models with Lagged
     Endogenous Variables and First Order Serially Correlated Errors."
     Econometrica 38, pp. 507—516.
                                       — 46 —




Feldstein, M.S., "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behaviour," Review of Economic
     Studies, 37 (1970), 57—72.

______________    "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behaviour: Reply and
     Further Results," Review of Economic Studies, 1972.

Feldstein, M.S. and J. Green, "Why Do Companies Pay Dividends?" forthcoming
     in American Economic Review (1981).

Hall, R. and D. Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior," American
     Economic Review, 1967.

Hayashi, F., "The q Theory of Investment: A Neoclassical Interpretation,"
     forthcoming in Econometrica, 1980.

Jenkinson, N., "Investment, Profitability, and the Valuation Ratio," Bank of
     England Discussion Paper, 1981.

Keynes, J.M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money,
     Macmillan.

King, M.A., "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behaviour——A Comment," Review
     of Economic Studies, 38 (1971), 377—380.

                 •"Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behaviour——A Further
     Comment," Review of Economic Studies (1972).

                 •"Dividend Behavior and the Theory of the Firm," Economica,
     Feb. 1979, pp. 25—34.

_______________•     Public   Policy and the Corporation (London: Chapman and Hall,
     Ltd., 1977).

King, M.A., M. Naldrett and J. Poterba, "Country Chapter: UK" in M.A. King, ed.,
     International Tax Comparisons (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1982),
     for thcoming.

Lintner, J. (1956), "Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends,
     Retained Earnings and Taxes," American Economic Review, 46 (May), 97—113.

Lucas, R.E., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in Brunner and
     Meltzcr, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets (Amsterdam: North
     Holland, 1976).

Nelliss, C.L. and Richardson, P.W. (1976), "Value of Investment Incentives for
     Manufacturing Industry 1946 to 1974" in The Economics of Industrial
     Subsidies, A. Whiting, ed., HNSO London.

Mussa, M., "Market Value and the Investment Decision in An Adjustment
     Cost Model of Firm Behavior," Department of Economics, University of
     Rochester Discussion Paper 74—15, July 1974.
                                        47 —




Oulton, N., "Explaining Aggregate Investment in Britain: the Importance of
     Tobin's Q," Economics Letters, Vol. 1, 1978.

______________   (1979), "Aggregate Investment and Tobin's q: Evidence from
     Britain," University of Lancaster Discussion Paper 5.

Pesaran, H. (1974), "On the General Problem of Model Selection," Review of
     Economic Studies, 41, pp. 153—171.

Pesaran, M. and Deaton, A. (1978), "Testing Non—nested Non—linear Regression
     Models," Econometrica.

Redfern, P. "Net Investment in Fixed Assets in the United Kingdom, 1938—53",
     JRSS—B, 1955.

Ross, S., "The Determination of Financial Structures: The Incentive Signalling
     Approach," The Bell Journal of Economics 8 (Spring 1977), pp. 23—40.

Rothschild, M., "On the Cost of Adjustment," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     Vol. 85, November 1971.

Salinger, M. and Summers, L., "Tax Reform and Corporate Investment: A
     Microeconometric Simulation Study," in Martin Feldstein, ed., Tax
     Simulation Analysis, forthcoming.

Stiglitz, J.E., "The Inefficiency of Stock Market Equilibrium," unpublished,
     1980.

Summers, L.IL, "Taxation and Corporate Investment: a q—Theory Approach,"
     Brookings Paper on Economic Activity (1:1981), 67—140.

Tobin, J., "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory," Journal
     of Money, Credit, and Banking 1 (1969), pp. 15—29.

vonFurstenberg, C., "The Q   Theory   of Investment," Brookings Paper on Economic
     Activity, 1977:2a.

Zeliner, A., "Posterior Odds Ratios for Regression Hypotheses: General Con-
     siderations and Some Specific Results," Invited Paper at the Econometric
     Society Meeting, December 28—30, 1979, Atlanta, Geogia.
