                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY, INTEREST RATES,
                    AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



                    Benjamin N. Friedman



                     Working Paper No. 3O




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         December 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper 83O
                                                     December 1981



         DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY, INTEREST RATES, AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY


                                    bstract



       The maturity structure of the U.S. government's outstanding debt

has undergone large changes over time, at least in part because of shifts

in the Treasury's debt management policy. During most of the post World

War II period, an emphasis on short-term issues rapidly reduced the debt's

average maturity. In the early 1960's and again since 1975, however, the

opposite policy just as rapidly lengthened (and is now lengthening) the

average maturity. Such changes in debt management policy in general affect

the structure of relative asset yields as well as nonfinancial economic

activity.

       The evidence presented in this paper indicates that debt management

actions of a magnitude comparable to the recent changes in U.S. debt manage-

ment policy have sizeable effects both in the financial markets and more

broadly. In particular, a shift from long-term to short—term government

debt —   that   is, a shift opposite to the Treasury's recent policy — lowers

yields on long—term assets, raises yields on short—term assets, and in the

short run stimulates output and spending. Moreover, the stimulus to spending

is disproportionately concentrated in fixed investment, so that debt management

actions shortening the maturity of the government debt not only increase

the economy's output but also shift the composition of output toward increased

capital formation.


                                                Benjamin M. Friedman
                                                Harvard University
                                                Littauer Center 127
                                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                (617) 495—4246
                                                                            Revised
                                                                            November, 1981




           DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY, INTEREST RATES, AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY


                                     Benjamin M. Friedlnan*
                                      Harvard University



         At the end of World War II, the U.S. Treasury's outstanding debt

was mostly long—term: $54 billion of bonds maturing in ten years or more,

$66 billion of notes and         bonds maturing in one to ten years, and only      $47

billion of bills and       other   securities due in less than one year, amounting to

an   overall   mean   maturity   of 116   months.   By contrast, in financing new

deficits   and refinancing maturing issues during the subsequent three and
half decades, the Treasury has usually relied on shorter—term borrowing,
thereby    substantially reducing the outstanding debts average term to maturity.

This   pattern of debt management         has no doubt resulted in part from the

statutory      limitations (occasionally relaxed) on issuing bonds bearing coupons
greater than      4   1/4%, but to   some   extent it itas also reflected discretionary
Treasury    policy.

          During several specific episodes, however, the Treasury's management

of   its debt has taken the opposite tack (see Table 1) .             one such episode

occurred    during the early 196Os, when an         emphasis   on longer—term issues
extended    the overall mean maturity from 53 months in January, 1960, to 69

months in June, 1965. Another is currently in progress. The mean maturity

of the Treasury's outstanding debt reached 28 months, its shortest post—war

level, in January, 1976. Since then reliance on regular medium-term note

issues and several new thirty—year bond has extended the mean maturity

to 47 months as of midyear 1981. Hence the result of the Treasurys debt

management policy since          1976 has been to lengthen the debt     just as rapidly
                                                       TABLE   1

                                                                                DEBT
                           MATURITY STRUCTURE OF PRIVATELY HELD U . S. TREASURY


                                             1   to   5        5   to   10   10   to    20   20 Years    Mean
                                  Within
                  Total           1 Year     Years              Years         Years          and Over   Maturity
Yearend

                                             20.5%                 19.1%      19.2%            13.1%      116 m
1945              $167.5          28.1%

                                              25.3                 12.7       28.9              0.0       100
1950               126.3          33.2
                                                                   25.7           7.5           3.0        71
1955               134.2          34.0        29.8
                                                                   10.4           7.5           6.4        58
1960               153.5          38.2        37.5

                                                                   18.8           3.9           8.4        63
1965               160.4          41.9        27.0

                                                                    7.5           3.9           4.8        41
1970               168.5          49.9        33.9

                                                                    6.5           3.3           2.3        29
1975               255.9          58.7        29.2

                                                                    8.4           5.5           5.0        45
1980               492.3          48.7        32.4




                                                                                    in months.
Notes:    Totals in billions of dollars, distribution in percentages, mean maturity
                                                                                 final maturity for 1960—1980.
          Callable securities classified by date of first call for 1945—1955, by
                                                                              of the Secretary of the
          Source: U.S. Department of the Treasury (Treasury Bulletin, Office
                        Treasury, Office of Government Financing).
                                         —2—




as the average policy   prevailing   during the prior thirty years shortened it.

       Do changes in Treasury debt management affect the economy? Although

many economists assumed so in the first half of the post—war period, a series

of empirical investigations beginning in the l960s provided either weak

evidence for such effects or none at all. More recently, however, research-

ers using structural mOdels of interest rate determination (that is,

explicit supply and demand models) have provided partial—equilibrium

evidence of sufficiently imperfect asset substitutabilities in private-sector

portfolios to suggest substantial effects associated with major debt manage-

ment actions. Still, the effects of such actions on economic activity in

a general equilibrium context remain unexplored.

       The object of this paper is to provide a quantitative assessment

of the economic effects of debt management policy. The principal research

tool employed here for this purpose is a hybrid model combining the familiar

MIT—Penn-SSRC (henceforth MPS) econometric model of the United States, a

structural model developed in Friedman [       9, 12] representing the determina-
tion of interest rates and financing volume in the U.S. corporate bond

market, and a structural model developed in Roley [27, 28] representing the

detenuination of interest rates in four separate maturity sub—markets of

the U.S. government securities market. The basis of the two interest rate

models is the requirement that, in each asset market, the amount of securities

demanded by investors must equal the amount supplied by borrowers — including

either private—sector borrowers or the government. Hence changes in the

pattern of government debt management can directly affect the market—

clearing structure of yields. The MPS model (minus its term—structure

equation, which is unnecessary in the presence of the structural interest

rate models), in turn develops the implications of these yield movements
                                        —3—




for   other aspects of financial as well as nonfinancial economic activity.

Moreover, because the combined model is fully simultaneous, the general

equilibrium solution that it determines allows for a rich set of feedbacks

in both directions between financial and nonfinancial aspects of economic

behavior.

         Section I reviews the underlying theory relating the structure of

asset yields generally, and the volumes of inside assets supplied and

demanded, to the supplies of outside assets. Section II describes the

combined MPS and structural interest rate model used for the empirical

analysis. Section III reports simulation experiments assessing the effects

of two different debt management actions — one a sustained change in the

pattern   of new financing, and   the other a larger change in the maturity

structure   effected within   one year. To anticipate, the results of these

experiments   indicate that such debt management actions, in plausible
magnitudes, would have significant effects not only     on   the   structure   of
asset   yields   and prices but also on both the amount and the composition of

nonfinancial economic activity. Section IV briefly summarizes the papers

principal conclusions.
                                        —4—




I.   Debt Management, Interest Rates, and Asset Prices

        When asset markets are in equilibrium, the market—clearing structure

of yields depends in a straightforward way on the quantities of outside

assets supplied.

        If investors' preferences exhibit constant relative risk aversion,

and if their assessments of the returns on the    available   assets are normally

(or joint normally) distributed, in the absence of transactions Costs their

optimal single-period portfolio allocation will be of the form


                                =          (B +                            (1)
                                    W

where AD is a vector of asset demands satisfying AD1 = W, W is total

portfolio wealth, re is a vector of means of the joint asset return distribu—

tion corresponding to AD, B and 'ii are respectively a matrix and a vector

of coefficients determined by the coefficient of relative risk aversion

and the variance—covariance matrix of the asset return distribution,2

and t denotes the t-th time period. Because AD is proportional to W and

linear in re    (1) is both the optimal allocation for a single investor

when W is that one investor's wealth and also the economy—wide optimal

allocation when W is aggregate wealth and all investors have identical

preferences and assessments. The economy—wide optimal allocation is still

of the form (1) even if investors exhibit heterogeneous preferences or

hold diverse assessments, and the aggregate B and T in this case are

combinations of the B and r appropriate for the underlying individuals,

weighted by their respective individual wealth totals.3

        The partial equilibrium of the asset markets is   equivalent   to the


market—clearing    condition
                                                    —5—




                                                                                           (2)

          S.
where A is a vector of given net asset supplies including nonzero values

for all existing outside assets and zero values for all inside assets.

Substitutict from (1) then yields the determination of expected asset

returns   according to4
                                     e    =                   -                            (3)
                                                  Bt1

For   given wealth, and given preferences and                 variance-covariance    assessments

(so   that B and it are fixed), variations in outside asset supplies clearly

affect the market-clearing structure of yields. The role of government

debt management policy in this context is, in the first instance, to

achieve just such effects.

          For example, consider the case of a model with no inside assets

and only four outside assets: money (M), short-term government debt (5),

long—term      government debt (L), and capital (K). The structure of the
asset markets in this case is just the linear form

                                 b            b         baR, b         re      M/W5

           S/W          if       b            b         b     b
                                                                  sk
                                                                       r
                                                                           5
                                                                               5/W
                             s       sm        ss       sR,                                (4)

           L/W          if       bR, b b bzk r                                 L/W

           Km                                                                  K/W
                                 b bk bkz bkk rk
where, for covenience, both supplies and demands are divided by total

wealth defined as W = M+S+L+K, and the time subscript is suppressed.5

 From the implications of the balance-sheet constraint (Em. =                   1; Eb.. = 0,

 all j), it is possible to simplify the system further by expressing it in

 terms of only three coefficients in each column vector. Moreover, if the
                                             —6—




Jacobian is symmetric,6 it is possible to eliminate an additional six

coefficients. Applying the balance-sheet and symmetry constraints so as

to retain explicitly the six off-diagonal Jacobian coefficients indicating

the four assets respective pairwise substitutabilities yields

                                                                                    e
l-Tr -it
    S
             -itk       -bins
                            -b -b
                              m ink
                                      b
                                       ins         m
                                                   b             b
                                                                 ink
                                                                              r
                                                                               m        M/w

        it                  b     -b-b-b
                                   ms sZ sk
                                                   b             b            r         s/W
          s
                    +
                             ms                     s9.,          sk           S
                                                                                              ()
                            bm        b _bmibs_bk                b,k          r,        L/W

                            b         bsk          bk       _bmk_bsk_b,k      rk        K/W



Debt management actions in this simple model consist of offsetting changes

in the supplies of short- and long-term bonds which, at least to a first

approximation,7 leave total wealth fixed —         in   other words, dS =    -dL.
             What effect will such actions have on the resulting structure of

asset yields? The form of the asset demand system in (5), which explicitly

incorporates the balance—sheet constraint, makes clear that only three of

the four equations are independent, so that the system can determine only

three of the four asset yields. With rm fixed, for example, any three

equations of the system can determine r, r and rk. Moreover, although

the absolute levels of these three yields will depend on the                coefficients

and on the fixed level of r, because of the system's linear form the

marginal effect of any dS = —dL on these three yields will depend only on

the Jacobian B —which, as (5) shows, can be expressed completely in terms

of the relevant asset substitutabilities. Solution of (5), for W, M, K and

r held fixed, yields these marginal effects as
                                               —7—




                         dr          b(bfll(+bk+bk) +     bbg,k
                         dS                          wA
                         dr            bins(bink+bsk+b
                                                     £k
                                                        )+bsjcik
                                                            b                  (6)

                         as                          wA
                         dxk         bmZsk
                                       b -b msk
                                             b
                         ds w•A  —



where W is again total wealth, and A is the determinant of the subsystem of

the Jacobean in (5) formed by eliminating the first column (since r is

fixed) and any one row chosen arbitrarily.

         Although   the derivatives in       (6) remain unsigned in the absence of

any restrictions at all on B, the assumption that the four assets are

gross substitutes8 —      that   is, that each of the six off-diagonal b..

coefficients shown explicitly in (5) is negative — renders the determinant

unambiguously positive and therefore yields the intuitively plausible

result

                                        dr
                                        —.1-     >
                                        as

                                        dr
                                                 <   C'




                                        —  < 0.
                                        ark >
                                        as


 Hence a simultaneous sale of short—term bonds and purchase of long—term

 bonds increases the yield on the former and reduces that on the latter,

 while still leaving ambiguous the effect on the asset with supply held

 constant. From (6) however, it is clear that a further intuitive assumption

 about the ordering of relative substitutabilities among asset pairs is
                                          —8—




sufficient to sign the effect on        also. If investors perceive an asset
                                   rk
hierarchy (in terms of safety, liquidity, etc.) extending in order from
money to short—term bonds to long—term bonds to capital, such that they
regard assets which are adjacent in this ordering as better substitutes
than more distant assets, then bms and b2..k will be large (in absolute

value) in comparison to b    and b , and the effect of a debt management

action on the required yield on capital will be


                                   dr
                                   __iE    <                                   (7')
                                   dS


         Although the simple analysis in (1) - (7)    sets   forth the   central
idea   behind the role of debt management policy in affecting asset yields,

two generalizations of this analysis are important for the effects of

debt management more broadly as investigated in Section iii below.

         First, although the general model in (1) — (3) in principle includes

inside assets, the model as written says nothing about the determination

of their respective quantities,    and    the special case considered in (4) -

 (7) excludes inside assets altogether. If all investors are identical, then

of course the outstanding amount of       each inside asset must be exactly zero
on a gross basis as well as the net basis captured in the supply vector AS
 One investor would not borrow from or lend to another if both shared identi-

 cal preferences, assessments and endowments. In a world in which preferences,

 assessments and endowments may differ, however — and in which legal and

 other institutional restrictions may importantly constrain the behavior of

 asset market participants — borrowing and       lending   among individuals and

 firms in fact constitute much of the financial markets' everyday activity.
                                            —9—




       An alternative form of (2) that explicitly recognizes this heterogeneity

is just


                                              =                                       (8)
                                  h


where h denotes the h-th investor (which may be an individual or an institu-

tion), and for the j-th asset the market-clearing condition is correspondingly


                                              =
                                 I                At.                                 (9)




The special characteristic of an outside asset is that          A >   0 (if the

asset exists) and A. > 0 for all h,         subject of course   to (9). By contrast,

the special characteristic of an inside asset is that A = 0 and                   <    0,

again subject to (9).

          While a fully aggregated asset market model can never identify the

gross quantity of an inside asset, a disaggregated model can do so if the

disaggregation is such as to distinguish positive from negative A.. By

far the most familiar such disaggregation in macroeconomic models is that

between the banking system and the nonbank public, which permits           identifica-
tion of inside money; but other inside assets may        be   worth identifying as

well. To the extent that gross quantities of inside assets matter in

addition to the associated yields, therefore — for example, if the quantity

of mortgage credit borrowed and      lent   affects homebuilding apart from the

mortgage rate, or if the level of household indebtedness affects consumer

 spending apart from the consumer credit rate, or if the volume and          pattern
 of corporate financing affects business investment apart from the rates on

 bonds and bank loans — an    advantage      of an appropriately disaggregated

 model is its ability to identify and determine these quantities, thereby
                                         —10—




facilitating the representation of their effects on economic activity.

      A second important shortcoming of the simplified analysis in (1) -

(7) is that it excludes induced asset price effects.9 Although it is

possible to imagine situations in which both the quantity and the price

of capital would remain fixed despite movements in the yield on capital,

a more plausible treatment would allow for a price response (say, in the

short run) or a quantity response (say, in the long run), or both. Under

the fixed-quantity variable—price conditions assinned by Tobifl [3 1,    for
example, the equivalent of (4) is



                           M/WD                       M/WS
                           s/W                        S/w
                                   =      Be    =                           (10)
                           L/W                        L/W

                       qlc/W                         qK/W


where K is now the fixed physical quantity of capital and q is its market

price in relation to replacement cost, which varies with the associated

yield according to


                             q = f(rk)     ,    f   < 0.                    (11)



       Because wealth now depends on the price of capital, which changes

whenever rk changes, the asset market equilibrium described by (10) is

richer than that in (4). A fall in rk as in (7') increases the supply of

capital. It therefore increases wealth and hence strictly increases the

sum of the demands   for   all assets including capital itself. If

investors are wealth diversifiers (that is, ii. > 0 for all 1), then, under

the assumptions that give rise to the effects of a debt management action

on r and rL as in (7)      and   rk as in (7'), the consequence of a flexible
                                              —11—




price of capital is a reduction in the absolute magnitude of each yield

effect without any change in sign. In a linearized version of (1), the

effect of dS = —dL on rk is



                dr
                  k —
                                              bmZsk
                                                b -bmsZk
                                                     b
                dS       i-Kf't1T(b    b +b b +b.bsk+bskb2,k
                                 $ s2., Zk sk ink s9

                              +r   9,
                                        (b b +b bms
                                         s9 sk 9k
                                                  +b9kbs2
                                                        +bskbZk


                              +(l-Tr)(b
                                   k
                                                   b +b b +b b +bs9,bmZ
                                       ins mP., ms sZ ms k


                              +bs2b2k+bskbniP.
                                            +b sk
                                                b s9
                                                  +bskb           )].
                                                                 9.k
                                                                                     (12)


This expression differs from the corresponding part of (6) only by the
second (long) term in the denominator, which, like the determinant, is

unambiguously   positive if   all assets are gross substitutes and            if investors
are wealth diversifiers. Hence           the effect on rk is again negative, though

 smaller in absolute value. By (11)            the   effect on q is simply

                                                     dr
                                    dS
                                          =    f     —- > o
                                                     dS
                                                                                     (13)



        Although   generalizing the model to allow for a flexible price of
 capital does not qualitatively change the effect             of debt management on the

 asset market partial equilibrium, like the generalization to identify gross

 quantities of inside asset stocks it may have important implications for

 associated effects beyond the asset markets. Models relating business

              to the ratio of market price to replacement cost,              either instead
 investment

 of or in addition to capital and other asset yields per Se, are well known.
 In addition, because ownership of equity claims to capital bulks large in
                                      —12—




household portfolios, and because the variation over time in equity prices

is much greater than that in other asset prices, the flexible price of

capital in fact accounts for most of the observed variation in household

wealth. To the extent that household wealth in turn affects consumption,

as is suggested by the life-cycle model, effects of debt management actions

on asset prices again may affect economic activity.

         Finally, it is important to recognize that, once debt management

affects economic activity, with likely feedback effects on the asset markets,

any simple partial equilibrium analysis is no longer adequate. Changes in

incomes and spending may affect asset demands and the resulting market—

clearing yields directly, as in the presence of a transactions demand for

money, or through changes i.n borrowing that typically accompany certain

types of expenditures, or through changes in wealth due to induced saving

or dissaving. A model of general equilibrium, incorporating these and

other   influences in bith directions between the financial and nonfinancial
markets, is necessary.
                                          —13—




II.    A Model of Interest Rates arid Economic Activity
         Most empirical   models of interest rate determination that are familiar

today preclude analysis of debt management effects because they rule out

such effects at the outset. After first determining some key short-term

interest rate from the interaction of monetary policy and the demand for

money, most current models then proceed to determine the yield on any            other
asset, like the interest rate on long-term bonds or the dividend—price yield

on equities, from a single reduced—form term—structure equation estimated

directly   with the yield in question as the dependent variable. Equations
of    this kind have become standard since the work of Modigliani and Sutch [22]

and    Modigliani   and Shiller [21].

          Because   such term—structure equations in principle represent partial
reduced    forms of some (usually unspecified) structure that may          resemble
(1) —    (3) above.10there is no     a priori reason why they cannot include one
or    more variables representing outside asset supplies. Indeed, in the mid

1960s several researchers attempted to isolate effects of the then recent

"Operation Twist"      surrogate   debt management policy in just   this   way. Although

a few analyses showed some evidence of effects on the yield structure due

to changing asset supplies, most did not and therefore concluded that

Operation Twist had been a failure —perhaps not surprisingly since, despite

the Federal Reserve Systems limited attempt to shorten the average maturity

of the privately held government debt via open market purchases, offsetting

Treasury financings led instead to a net lengthening (see again Table 1).h1

The finally estimated form of the "preferred habitat" model of Màdigliafli

and    Sutch,   for example, in fact included no "preferred habitat" terms.

       Subsequent work on interest rates within the single-equation directly

 estimated reduced—form framework has largely followed the same path. Through
                                           —14—




most of the post World War II      period,    either there was too little variation

(around trend) in the relative supplies of short— versus long—term outside

bonds, or investors regarded debts of different maturity as too closely sub-

stitutable, for the standard term—structure equation to detect any asset

supply effects. Analogous work based on more recent data has shown some

evidence for such effects, but to date the extent of variation present in

the data apparently still precludes drawing sharp conclusions from such

imprecise methods •12

          By contrast, structural models of interest rate determination constructed

explicitly in the form of (1) - (3) above          provide   a way of extracting more

information from the available data,         in   that the underlying market-clearing

structure constrains the way in which asset quantity variables enter the

analysis.     In   the most general terms, the structural model facilitates using

the theory    of   portfolio behavior to restrict the model's implied equations

for relative interest rates, while imposing on the researcher the discipline

of acknowledging explicitly that     any     factor hypothesized to affect relative

interest rates can do so only by affecting some investor's asset demands

(or some    borrower's   asset supplies).13 The asset demand equations in models

of the U.S. corporate and government bond markets, constructed in this way

by Friedman [9 , 12] and Roley [27, 28], respectively, indicate that investors

(and private—sector borrowers) regard assets of different maturity as less

than perfect substitutes. Moreover, partial equilibrium simulations of

these models indicate that, because of this imperfect substitutability,

changes in asset supplies have sizeable effects on the structure of asset

yields.

          For at least two reasons, however, it is useful to go beyond such

partial equilibrium analysis. First, debt—management effects within the asset
                                         —15—




markets only are of limited interest. What presumably matters for policy

purposes is the effects such actions have on nonfinancial economic activity.

Second, partial equilibrium analysis of the asset markets necessarily holds

fixed all aspects of nonfinancial activity, including those aspects that

debt—management actions may affect. Allowing for the associated set of

feedbacks requires instead an analysis of the resulting general equilibrium.

         The model employed here for this purpose consists of an altered MPS

 model (1978 version), from which the familiar single term-structure equation

 determining the corporate bond yield has been removed and into which a struc-

 tural   model of   interest rate determination in the corporate and government

 bond   markets   has been substituted. The corporate bond yield is by far the

 most important asset yield in the MPS model from the perspective of implications

 for nonfinancial economic behavior. In the first instance, the corporate bond

 yield exerts a major influence on business fixed investment in the model through

 its    role   in determining the user cost of capital. It also exerts an analogous

 influence on residential investment at only one step removed; in this case

 the relevant user cost depends on the mortgage yield, which in turn follows

 from the corporate bond yield via a simple term—structure—like relationship.

 In addition, the     corporate bond yield influences both   durable and nondurable

                           The motivation underlying the determination of expenditures
 consumer      spending.
 on consumer durables is again analogous to that for business and residential

 investment, although in this case the model actually uses a simplified function

 relating these expenditures directly to the corporate bond yield. The

 primary determinant of nondurable consumption is households' wealth, which
                                 equities;14 the model determines the market value
 consists in large part of
                                       —16-




of equities as the quotient of dividend payments, in turn determined by

a function in which the corporate bond yield is one direct argument among

several, and   the   dividend-price yield, which also follows from the corporate

bond yield via another simple term-structure-like relationship. Finally,

within the model's representation of the financial markets, the corporate
                                                                          other
bond yield is a direct argument of the functions determining numerous

yield and quantity variables that in turn also exercise diverse influences

on nonfinancial behavior.15

       The corporate bond market model consists of eight equations representing

the respective net purchases of corporate bonds by six categories of bond

investors (life insurance companies, other insurance companies, private

pension funds, state and local government retirement funds, mutual savings

banks and households) and net sales of corporate bonds by two categories

                                                                 and finance
of bond issuers (domestic nonfinancial business corporations

 companies).16 The model's ninth, and final, equation is a market—Clearing

 equilibrium condition analogous to (2), which requires the algebraic sum
                                                        bond investors and bond
 of the net purchases arid sales by all categories of

 issuers to sum to zero, and hence permits the model to determine the corporate

 bond yield as in (3)
                                                         corresponding to
        The government bond market model has four parts,

 sub—markets for four separate maturity classes of U.S. Treasury securities.

 These four maturity classes are defined in terms of four distinct ranges

 (within 1 year, 2-4 years, 6—8 years and over 12 years), with securities
                                                allocated to the respective
 in the three remaining indeterminate areas

 preceding and succeeding ranges according to a weighting scheme designed

 to avoid anomalous effects that would otherwise occur when large individual
                                                boundaries. The model for each
 debt issues cross arbitrary classification
                                          —17—




maturity sub—market Consists of a set of demand equations representing the

respective net purchases of Treasury securities in that maturity class by

either nine or ten categories of investors (the six listed above as corporate

bond investors plus commercial banks, savings and loan associations, state

and local government general funds, and, for the two shorter maturity ranges

only, domestic nonfinancial business corporations).18 The supply of securities

in each maturity sub—market is exogenous to the model, and in each case a

market—clearing equilibrium condition analogous to (2) determines the associated
                   19
yield as in (3).

       The specification of each investor group's respective demand for

either corporate bonds or any maturity class of government securities

combines the asset demand system (1) for given wealth, generalized

to allow for influences on desired portfolio allocations due to factors

other than expected yields (for example, expected price inflation), with an

optimal marginal adjustment model that represents in a tractable way the

effect of differential transactions costs which render the allocation of

new investable cash flows more sensitive to expected yields (and other

influences) than the re—allocation of existing holdings.20 The specification

of the two private borrower groups' respective supplies of corporate bonds

follows from an analogous treatment of the optimal choice of liabilities

to finance a given cumulated external deficit. For consistency with the

MPS model, all equations are estimated using quarterly data through 1976.

       With the addition of the structural models of the corporate and
government bond markets, the altered MPS model iniludes an      explicit   represen-
tation, as in   (1) —   (3)   above, of the markets for six assets: money (or   reserves,

depending on the representation of monetary policy), four maturity classes

of government securities, and corporate bonds.       This system of six asset
                                       —18—




market   equilibrium conditions is sufficient to determine the yields on five

assets,    given that of the sixth. With the yield on money (or reserves)

fixed at zero, therefore, the model determines the yields on the remaining

five assets that are interest—bearing in the conventional sense.21 The

yields on other assets that appear in the MPS model follow in the usual

way from the original model's term—structure—like equations linking each

to one of the five structurally determined yields. The Treasury bill rate,

for example, directly determines the commercial paper rate, while the corporate

bond rate directly determines the mortgage rate and the dividend-price yield.22

          In all other respects, the model underlying the simulations reported

in Section III is identical to the familiar MPS model. Because of the richer

treatment of the determination of relative interest rates, however, the

altered model (unlike the original) admits analysis of the effects of debt
management policy.
                                        —19—




III.   Empirical Assessment of the Effects of Debt Management Policies

        Table 2 summarizes the results of simulations of the combined MI'S-

corporate-government-bond—market model for two different debt management
actions: first, a sustained shift in Treasury financing to emphasize new
issues of short— instead of long—term securities and, second, a one—year

program   to shorten the maturity structure of the outstanding Treasury debt
by issuing short- and repurchasing long-term securities.23 (The simulated
effects of debt management actions in the model are sufficiently symmetrical
that there is no need to show results of analogous actions to lengthen the
debt.) The simulation period in both cases is the ten-quarter interval
spanning   1974:IV —   1977:1.24

          In   a partial equilibrium analysis of the asset markets like that

in Section I, specifying changes in policy-determined supplies of outside

assets (dS = —dL, for example) is straightforward. By contrast, in a general

equilibrium context both fiscal and monetary policy have direct implications

for the supply of government securities. For example, if a change in relative

asset yields due to a debt management action stimulates overall economic

 activity, it will also raise tax revenues and reduce transfers, and, in the

 absence of offsetting increases in government purchases, reduce the government

 deficit (or increase the surplus). s time passes, therefore, the total

 amount of government securities outstanding will be less than it would have

 been otherwise, and it is necessary to make some ahistorical assumption about

 the composition of Treasury financing. The simulations reported in Table 2

 are based on the assumption that real government purchases are fixed and that,

 in this situation, the induced reduction of debt in each maturity class is

 proportional to the share of that class in the total Treasury debt outstanding;

 that is, after the deliberate debt management policy action, the Treasury

 finances changes from the historical total outstanding debt so as not to
                                           TABLE 2


                     SIMULATED EFFECTS OF TWO DEBT MANAGEMENT    POLICIES


                                 $250 'iil1ion Shift from Long        $1 Billion Shift   from Long to
                                 to Short, All Ten Quarters           Short, First Four Quarters Only
                                                      (3)                     (4)            (5)
              (1)                   (2)
           Historical            Simulated       Difference             Simulated      Difference
              Mean                 Mean        from Historical            Mean       from Historical
Variable
              5.50                  5.68              0.18                   6.17            0.67

                                    7.29              0.07                   7.60            0.38
              7.22
  r35
                                    7.38             —0.21                   7.05           —0.55
              7.59
  r68
                                    6.66             —0.25                   6.35           —0.55
              6.90
  rTL
                                    8.49             —0.12                   8.41           —0.20
              8.61
  r           4.18                  4.13             —0.05                   4.06           —0.11
  rDP

                                 1246.3               4.6               1255.7              13.9
  x        1241.8
                                   37.4               0.3                    38.1            1.0
  IP         37.0
                                   80.2               0.6                   81.6             2.0
  IE         79.6
                                   45.0               1.1                   46.9             3.1
  IH         43.8
            798.9                 801.1               2.2                   805.5            6.6
  C

             75.2                  75.3               0.1                    75.4            0.2
  CUR
             34.7                  34.5              —0.2                    37.0           —0.7
  PNB
             57.5                  55.4              —2.1                    51.0           —6.5
  DF
            954.8                 973.6              18.8                   997.9           43.1
  S

            111.2                 113.2               1.9                   116.5            5.3
  PRO


                                                             (Table 2 continued on the following page)
           (TPLE 2    continued)



Variable   Symbols:      r         =   3-month Treasury bill yield
                                       3-5—year Treasury
                                                                         (%)

                                                         security yield (%)
                         r35
                         r68
                                   =   6—8-year Treasury security yield (%)
                                       10-year-and-over Treasury security yield
                          r
                                   =                                              (%)
                         rTL
                                   =   corporate bondyield        (%)
                                   =   dividend—price   yield     (%)
                          rDP
                         X         = real gross national product (1972 $ billion)
                          IP       = real investmentin plant (1972 $ billion)
                          IE       = real investment in equipment (1972 $ billion)
                          IH       = real residential investment (1972 $ billion)
                          C        = real consumer expenditures (1972 $ billion)
                          CUR      =   currency outside   banks  billion)
                                                                    ($

                          RNB      =   nonborrowed reserves ($ billion)
                          DF           federal government deficit ($ billion)
                          S        =   market value of common stock ($ billion)
                          PRO =        corporate   profits   ($   billion)
                                        —20—




change the maturity structure still further.25

       Similarly, if   monetary   policy fixes the growth rate of either bank

reserves or any given monetary aggregate, the total amount of government
securities held by all private investors will decline over time as the
central bank conducts the open market operations needed to accommodate the
public's   greater demand for currency associated with a greater level of economic

activity. If monetary policy fixes the growth rate of a monetary aggregate,

then yet further induced changes in the central bank's holdings will also

follow as it accommodates the banking system's changing demand for nonborrowed

reserves due to the public's shifting preferences for different kinds of

deposits bearing different reserve requirements, as well as to any changes

in banks' aggregate net free reserve position. Hence some ahistorical

assumption about the composition of the central bank's portfolio is also

necessary. The simulations reported in Table 2 are based on the assumption

that the Federal Reserve System fixes the growth rate of the money stock (Ml),

that it buys or sells the amount of Treasury bills required to render

consistent the values of the Treasury bill rate determined in the money

market and in the shortest maturity sub—market of the government securities

market model, and that, for the incremental induced changes in the size of

its portfolio, it buys or sells the other three maturity classes of

government securities together in proportion to their respective total

amounts outstanding (so that in this respect it acts analogously to the

Treasury's financing of incremental induced deficits or surpluses).26

       Apart from the assumed changes in debt management policy that are

their primary focus of attention, augmented by these additional technical

assumptions about the securities transactions associated with fiscal and

monetary policies, the simulations reported in Table 2 rely on historical

values of all exogenous variables. Moreover, each equation in the model is
                                           —21—




adjusted by adding back the historical single-equation residuals so that,

given the historical values for all exogenous variables (including supplies

of each maturity class of Treasury securities), the model would exactly

reproduce the historical values shown in column (1) of the table. The dif-

ferences between these historical values and the simulated values shown

in   the table s remaining columns       are therefore attributable entirely to

the   effect    of the specified debt management actions, rather than to any

underlying inability of the model to reproduce the observed historical

record.

          Columns (2) and (3) of Table 2 summarize the results of a simulation

of the model in which, in each quarter, the Treasury issues $250 million

more short— and $250 million less long—term securities (before adjustment

for induced changes in the federal deficit). The historical amounts of short-

and long—term Treasury securities outstanding as of March 31, 1977, were

$144.5 billion and $20.1 billion, respectively, so that a change of this

magnitude in debt management, even cumulated over ten quarters, is small

in comparison with the former but substantial in comparison with the latter.

Because of the Treasurys policy shift to lengthening the debt after 1975,

in conjunction with the huge federal deficit in the wake of the 1973—75

recession, the historical amount of long-term Treasury          securities outstanding
increased by $7.3 billion during        these   ten quarters. In the simulation the
                                   27
increase is only $4.5 billion.           Column (2) shows ten-quarter simulated

means for selected financial      and   nonfinancial variables, and column (3)

shows   the    respective differences between these simulated means and the

historical      means shown in column    (1)


          The   simultated effect of    this change in outside asset supplies on

the   Treasury yield curve, shown in the first four lines of the table,
                                        —22—




corresponds to presumptions based on the theory of portfolio behavior and

interest rate determination outlined in Section I. The Treasury bill rate

rises and the long-term bond rate falls, in comparison to the historical

values, and the relative movements in the rates on the two intermediate

maturity classes lie between the two extremes!8 Similarly, the effects

on private asset yields correspond to familiar notions of relative asset

substitutabilities. The average relative yield decline for corporate bonds

is only half that for long-term government bonds, while the relative decline

for the equity yield is smaller still.

         The next five lines of the table indicate the effects of this debt

management action on both the amount and the composition of real economic

activity. Real output is greater than the historical by nearly one-half

percent on average. Moreover, because of the sensitivity of investment to

cost—of—capital   factors, fixed capital formation accounts for a disproportionate
amount of the increase. The three categories of fixed investment, which
together   comprised only one—eighth of total spending, account for nearly

one—half of the simulated increase over the historical. Hence the results

support the suggestion that a shift away from the Treasury's recent debt

management policy would enhance the U.S. economy's rate of capital formation.29

         The bottom five lines of the table present values for additional

financial variables   that are useful   for understanding the structure of the

simulation.    The induced effects   on the Federal Reserve's portfolio are

small,   given the assumption that it   fixes   the Ml money stock, Small open
market   purchases are necessary to accommodate the public's increased demand

 for currency, but slightly larger open market sales are necessary to

 accommodate member banks' reduced demand for nonborrowed reserves due to

 smaller holdings of demand deposits and larger discount window borrowings.30
                                         —23—




By contrast, the induced effects on the total amount      of   Treasury securities

outstanding   are more subs tantiál. A large increase in tax revenues and a
small decline in transfer payments reduce the federal deficit and hence reduce
the required volume of Treasury financing.31 Finally, an apparent puzzle
in the simulation is that the increase in consumer spending is surprisingly
large   in comparison to the small fall in the dividend-price yield, given the

underlying    Mfl model's reliance on the life-cycle model of consumption. The
explanation, as shown in the table,       is that equity prices do rise substantially,

in large part because of an       increase in corporate profits (which in turn
raises    dividends).

          Figure 1 provides further information about these results by plotting

the historical (solid) and simulated (broken) paths, quarter by quarter for

all ten quarters, for six key variables. The increase in the Treasury bill

rate, in comparison to the historical, takes place gradually. By contrast,

the relative decline in the long—term Treasury bond rate occurs within two

quarters, while the relative decline in the corporate bond rate        also occurs
within    two quarters but then almost disappears after another six. The

relative increase in equity prices reaches its peak after six quarters.

The stimulative effect of these financial developments on real output is

near its peak by the sixth quarter, but in fact continues to build through

the ninth quarter and then declines only trivially in the tenth. The stimula-

tive effect on real capital formation follows a roughly similar path, with

a peak in the eighth quarter and a negligible decline thereafter.

          Columns   (4) and   (5) of the table summarize the results of a simulation

of   the model in which, in each of the first four quarters, the Treasury
 issues   $1 billion more short—term securities and repurchases enough long—

term securities to reduce the net flow supply of the latter by $1 billion
                                                     FIGURE   1

                 SI MU L AT E D       EFFECTS    OF TWO DEBT MANAGEMENT ACTIONS

Treasury Bill Yield                       Long -Term Treasury Bond Yield         Corporate Bond Yield
 8.00                                      8.00                                   9.50




                                                                                     '
                                                                                         'I
                          I- •\
                                  \

 4.00                                      500                                    7.50

Market Value of Common Stock               Real Output                           Real Fixed Investment
 1200                                      1350                                   190

                      —                                               .1

                                                                                                             /
                                                                                                         ,




 600                                        1150                                   140

          historical
          simulated action: $250 million shift from long to short, all ten quarters
          simulated action: $1 billion shift from long to short, first four quarters only
  Note:   The simu lotion period plotted is 1974: W - 1977:1.
                                     —24—




relative to the historical (before adjustment for changes in the federal
deficit), For the remaining six quarters of the simulation, debt issues
follow   the historical proportions. Such a one-year bill—bond swap program

would represent a major debt management operation, especially in the context

of the limited size of the long-term Treasury bond market. From $12.7

billion as of September 30, 1974, the   outstanding amount   of long-term

Treasury securities in the simulation falls to $10.3 billion a year later,

in contrast to the historical rise to $14.5 billion.32 Column (4) shows the

simulated ten—quarter means, and column (5) shows the respective differences

between these simulated means and the historical means in column (1).

         The average effects of this one—year swap on the structure of asset

yields are analogous to, but for each yield greater than, the average effects

of the sustained change in the maturity of new issues studied in the first

simulation. Within the Treasury yield curve, once again the bill rate

rises and the long—term rate falls in comparison to the corresponding

historical levels. The rate for the second maturity class again moves in

 the same direction as that for the first, and again by about half as much,

while this time the rate for the third maturity class moves exactly as much

 as that for the fourth. The relative declines in the corporate bond yield

 and the dividend—price yield are of about the same proportion, when compared

 to the relative decline in the long-term Treasury yield, as in the first

 simulation.

          The assodiated effects on real economic activity are also similar,

 though larger throughout. ieal output is greater by about one percent on

 average, with fixed capital formation again accounting for nearly one-half

 of   the increase. The Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities
 decline   more substantially in comparison to the first simulation, almost
                                       —25—




entirely as a result of the reduced demand for nonborrowed reserves associated

with greater discount window borrowings,33 and the decline in the total

amount of Treasury securities outstanding is also more substantial as a

result of the stimulation of additional tax revenues. The combination

of a steeper relative decline in the dividend—price yield and a greater

rise in corporate profits (and hence dividends) leads to a much larger

rise in equity prices than in the earlier simulation.

       Although comparison of the ten—quarter means shown in Table 2 suggests

that the economic effects of the one—year swap are just an enlarged mirror

of the effects of the sustained change in new issue design, the quarter—

by-quarter time paths plotted in Figure 1 (the dotted lines) make clear that

this is not so. The most immediate contrast is in the effects on the long—

term asset markets —   including   the long-term Treasury bond yield, the

corporate bond yield, and the price of equities. These effects in each

case build irregularly during the four quarters in which the debt manage-

ment action is in progress, but then decline rapidly thereafter and even

change sign during the latter part of the simulation.

       The increase in real output in comparison to the historical reaches

a peak, equal to nearly two percent of the corresponding historical output,

in the sixth quarter. Thereafter it too erodes rapidly, so that by the

tenth quarter the respective output paths for the two simulations converge.

The peak effect on fixed investment also occurs in the sixth quarter, after

which the increase erodes especially rapidly because of the effects of high

short—term interest rates on residential construction (which falls below the

historical by the end of the simulation period).

       The Treasury bill rate is the one variable for which the time path

resulting from the one—year swap most nearly resembles that from the sustained
                                       —26—




debt management change. The increase in the bill rate in comparison with

the historical continues to build almost until the end of the simulation

period, when the effect on real income has largely eroded.

       The contrasts between these two simulations indicate that, in addition

to the magnitude, the timing of a debt management action affects its impact

on the economy. This result is not surprising in light of the basic model

of portfolio adjustment underlying both the corporate and the government

bond market models. Because the adjustment model distinguishes between

             allocation of new cash flows and re-allocation of existing holdings

(and draws an analogous distinction between private borrowers' financing

of new external deficits and refinancing of existing liabilities), in the

short run financial flow variables matter in addition to stock variables.34

Hence the size of a debt management action in relation to other flows in the

financial system is a key determinant of its effects.

       More importantly, however, despite their contrasts the two sets of

results   both indicate that debt management actions have effects, on interest
rates as well as nonfinancial economic activity, which not only     are in

accordance   with familiar theory   but also are of a size deserving attention.
                                       —27—




IV.     Summary of Conclusions

       The maturity structure of the U.S.   government's   outstanding debt has

undergone large changes over time, at least in part because of shifts in the

Treasury's debt management policy. During most of the post World War II

period, an emphasis on short—term issues rapidly reduced the debt's average

maturity. In the early 1960s and again since 1975, however, the opposite

policy just as rapidly lengthened (and is now lengthening) the average maturity.

      Debt management actions do not leave other aspects of economic activity

unaffected. In the financial markets changes in the relative supplies of

outside assets in general alter the structure of expected yields on all assets

whether outside or inside, raising the relative yield on the asset with supply

increased and on assets closely substitutable for it, and lowering the rela-

tive yield on the asset with supply decreased and on its close substitutes.

In a general equilibrium context the resulting realignment of asset yields

and prices also affects nonfinancial economic activity.

      Simulation experiments indicate that debt management actions of a magni-

tude comparable to observed changes in U.S. debt management       policy have

sizeable   effects both in the financial markets and more broadly. In particular,
a shift from long- to short-term    government debt lowers yields on long-term

assets (and raises their prices), raises yields on short—term assets, and

in the short run stimulates output and spending. Moreover, the stimulus to

spending is disproportionately concentrated in fixed       investment, so   that

debt management actions shortening the maturity of the government debt not
only   increase the economy's Output but also shift the composition of output

toward increased capital formation.
                                               Footnotes

*
    I am grateful to Arturo Estrella, Orlin Grabbe, David Johnson and Richard
    Mattione for research assistance; to them as well as James Duesenberry,
    John Lintner, Franco Modigliani, James Pesando, Vance Roley, James Tobin
    and Edwin Yeo for helpful discussions and comments on an earlier draft;
    and to the National Science Foundation (grant DAR79-l0519) and the Alfred
    P. Sloan Foundation for research support. I am especially grateful to
    Vance Roley for generous advice on the adaptation of his model for use
    in this paper.

1. The distribution data in Table 1 slightly understate the shift to
    shorter maturities because of the switch from a first—call classifica-
    tion for 1945-55 to a final-maturity classification for 1960-80.
        (The first—call breakdown for 1960, corresponding to that shown in the
       table, is 43.0%, 39.7%, 9.6%, 2.4%, 5.2%). The mean maturity computa-
       tion   is   based on final maturity and is consistent throughout.
                                                                                               1
2.     The specific form of (1), if all assets are risky, is B =                  —

                                                                                      p
                                                                                          [Q
       - (1    —l —l —l
              ] 1) Q 1 1 ]
                               —l
                                    I   and   ii   = (1 ]—l1)—l Q—l1,   where p is the
       coefficient of relative risk aversion and S is the variance—covariance
       matrix. Here B is singular, so that the asset demand system will be
       capable of determining all relative yields and all but one absolute
       yield. Alternatively, in the presence of a risk-free (certain return)
       asset the full Q matrix is singular, so that it is necessary to
       partition the set of demands; the resulting asset demand system, in
       which AID, re and Q refer to the risky assets only, is then just
       AD = w      .e            1 —l
                 (Br ) where B =      , and he optimal portfolio demand for
       the risk-free asset is simply (w - A 1). See Friedman and Roley [161
       for a proof that constant relative risk aversion and joint normal
       asset return assessments imply asset demand functions that are
       homogeneous in wealth and linear in expected returns, and Roley [25]
       for a thorough treatment of the distinction between the cases with
       and without a risk—free asset.    (The combination of constant relative
       risk aversion and normal distributions is only an approximation, in
       that the underlying utility function is undefined for negative wealth
       values.)

    3. See Linther [20] and Friedman [13] for explicit treatments of the case
        of heterogeneous investors.

    4. Because the full B matrix is singular (see again footnote 2), the
        expression in (3) actually has dimension reduced by one and therefore
        represents the determination of relative yields against an arbitrary
        fixed benchmark in the case of all risky assets or against the certain
        yield in the presence of a risk-free asset. Pn isomorphic interpreta-
        tion of (3) is that relative asset returns depend on shares in the
        market portfolio relative to shares in the minimum—variance portfolio.
 5. Including an    additional term to represent the dependence of the demand
      for money  (and hence at least one other asset) on income, in accordance
      with standard transactions—inventory models, would not alter the analysis
      here; see Friedman [lii.

 6.
      See Roley [25] on the implications of a syxmnetric Jacobian.

 7. The condition dS    -dL holds exactly in a timeless abstraction in which,
     with no prior history of assets outstanding, the government distributes
     one kind of bond or the other, or both. In a more realistic context
     however, wealth does change because of valuation changes on the out-
     standing long—term bonds. For example, to anticipate the analysis
     that follows, suppose that the government issues short—term bonds and
     uses exactly the entire proceeds to buy back some of its outstanding
     long—term bonds. If that action reduces the yield on the long-term
     bonds still outstanding, the associated rise in these bonds' price will
     raise total wealth. The reasoning is analogous to that argued below
     for the case of valuation of capital. See Roley [26] for a theoretical
     discussion emphasizing changes in bond prices resulting from debt manage-
      ment actions.

 8. See Blanchard and Plantes [2 ] for a statement of necessary and sufficient
     conditions for gross substitutability. The covariance matrices reported
     in Bodie [ 3 ] suggest that, for broad asset categories like those under
     consideration here, at least the necessary conditions are met in practice.

 9. See again foothote 7.

10. As Feldstein and Chamberlain [7] have pointed out, however, the presence
     of the unlagged short-term interest rate as a supposedly independent
     variable precludes most such equations from being valid reduced forms.
     In this context see also Sargent's [29] criticism of the interest rate
     equation suggested by Feldstein and Eckstein [8 1, as well as the
     empirical evidence in Sargent [30].

11. The most comprehensive attempt to find evidence of such effects was
     that of Modigliani and Sutch [231..    example of results exhibiting
     such effects is in Okun [24], but Okun concluded that the effects were
      small.

12. The term—structure equation estimated in Friedman [10], using Fair's [6
     method and quarterly data for 1960:1 - 1976:11, was
               r     =   0.000546 + 0.902 r                + 0.265 r
               9.t       ,,   ,.,                  Z,t—l             st
                                         (19.0)              (4.4)

                                    —   0.137 r5,_1 + 0.0535
                                         (—2.8)              (1.7)

                     =   0.97           SE =      0.0234     e = 0.592
     where rz and r5 are the yields on Baa-rated corporate bonds and 3-
     month Treasury bills, respectively, L and S are the outstanding amounts
     of U.S. government securities maturing in more than and less than one
     year, repectively, all variables are expressed in natural logarithms,
     and the numbers in parentheses are t—statistics. Estimating the same
     equation using data through l980:Iv gives essentially similar results
      (including a coefficient of 0.0550, with t—statisttc 1.8, on the debt—
     management term).

13. See Friedman and Roley [17] for a general discussion of the structural
     and reduced—form approaches to modeling the determination of interest
     rates.

14. What matters in this context is the contribution of equities not to the
     level but rather to the variation of households' wealth. Given the
     great volatility of equity prices in contrast with the fixed-price
     nature of deposits, the typical 30% share of equities in households'
     total wealth greatly understates the role of equities in accounting
     for the variations of household wealth over time.

15. The most important element of financial quantity variables' effects on
     nonfinancial behavior in the MPS model is the credit availability
     effect in the mortgage market; see de Leeuw and Gramlich [5 1 and the
     papers by Gramlich and Hulett, Modigliani, and Jaf fee in Gramlich and
     Jaffee [18].

16. The model takes as exogenous the net bond purchases and sales of all
     investors and issuers other than those noted above. The explicitly
     modeled investors and issuers account for about 95% and 90%, respectively,
     of all corporate bonds issued in the United States.

17. The particular bond rate used in this model is the observed new-issue
     yield on long-term utility bonds rated Aa by Moody's Investor Service,
     Inc. Pn additional equation then determines the Aaa seasoned corporate
     yield, the bond rate used in the MPS model, as a simple direct function
     of the Aa new—issue yield and the longest-term government yield.
     Eliminating the Aaa seasoned yield altogether and using the Aa new-
     issue yield in its place would require re—estimating each MPS model
     equation in which the corporate bond rate appears.

18. The model takes as exogenous the net bond purchases of all investors
     other than those noted above. The explicitly modeled investors account
     for about 55% of all holdings of U.S. Treasury securities. The Federal
     Reserve SyAtem (24%) and foreign investors (18%) account for most of
     the remainder.

19. The particular yields corresponding to the four maturity ranges are
     the Treasury yields on 3-month bills and bonds in the 3-5-year,
     6—8—year, and 10-year—and—over groups.
20. See Friedman [9 1 for the development of the optimal marginal adjust-
     ment model used in all of the corporate bond demand and supply equations
     and most of the government security demand equations, and Roley [28]
     for the development of a more general alternative used in some of the
     government security demands (especially those for commercial banks).

21. If the estimation of the six sets of asset demand (and supply) equations
     imposed the full set of balance sheet constraints for all investors
      (and private—sector borrowers), solving the model would simply involve
     deleting the equilibrium condition for any one market chosen arbitrarily.
     Imposing these constraints, however, would have required also re—estimating
     the MPS model's aggregate money demand equation. In fact, the constraints
     are not fully imposed, and hence the model is overdetermined. In the
     simulations reported in Section III below, the composition of the
     Federal Reserve's portfolio is adjusted in each period so as to render
     consistent the Treasury bill rate proximately determined in the money
    market and the Treasury bill rate proximately determined in the shortest
    maturity sub—market of the government securities market model (see the
    discussion in Section III). Analogous simulations, based on an alterna-
    tive solution procedure in which the Treasury bill rate is proximately
    determined in the government securities market model and the MPS model's
    money demand equation is deleted, differ in some specifics but yield
    the same overall results.

22. At least in principle, a fully comprehensive structural model of all
     asset markets would be preferable. For efforts along these lines see
     Bosworth and Duesenberry [4], Rendershott [19] and Backus et al. [11;
     n:one of these models, however, distinguishes between government and
     corporate bonds and among maturity classes of government securities
     as in the model used here.

23. Because the U.S. Treasury does not ordinarily repurchase its outstanding
     long—term bonds, it is perhaps easiest to think of such a one—year
     program as carried out by Federal Reserve open market operations.

24. Carrying Out the investigation under conditions of underutilized
     resources in the economy is probably best because of familiar concerns
     about the underlying MPS model's representation of economic behavior
     near full employment. As is apparent from Figure 1 below, l974:IV
     is the quarter immediately preceding the trough of the large 1973-75
     recession. This period was also an interesting one in the context
     of the historical debt management policy; see again Section I.

25. With government purchases fixed in real terms, there is some slight
     offset to the increased tax revenues due to the rising price level.
     This effect is small in a ten—quarter simulation, however, so that
     most of the rise in revenues simply reduces the deficit. It is perhaps
     useful to note explicitly that this way of treating the financing of the
     induced reduction in government debt outstanding assumes, as in Tobin [31],
     that the Treasury is not pursuing a policy of minimizing interest costs
     (at least at this particular margin).
26. See again foothote 21. Here, too, the assumption is that the Federal
     Reserve does not act to maximize interest earnings on its portfolio.

27. The outstanding supply of long-term Treasury securities at the end of
     the ten quarters in the simulation is lower than the historical by
     $2.88 billion instead of $2.50 billion (10 quarters times $250 million
     per quarter) because of the smaller total volume of Treasury financing
      due to the induced rise in tax revenues and fall in transfers.
28. An interesting result is the apparent strong substitutabili y between
     securities in the third and fourth maturity classes. This result
      appears even more strongly in the second simulation, reported in
      columns (4) and (5).
29.   See Friedman [14] for a discussion of this proposal. The general result
      that quantitative actions to alter the supply-demand balance in the
      credit market have a disproportionate effect on capital formation
      also holds for the case of shifts in saving flows, analyzed in Friedman [15].

30. The public's shift from demand deposits to currency, within a fixed
     Ml total, is the conventional result associated with greater real in-
     come and higher short—term interest rates. The small increase in
     borrowed reserves occurs mostly because the simulation holds the discount
     rate fixed despite the rise in short—term market rates.

31. The reduction of the deficit is surprisingly large for the associated
     increase in income, even after allowance for the difference between
     nominal and real magnitudes.   (The CNP deflator's historical average
     during this period was 130.3.)

32. The difference is $4.22 billion instead of $4.0 billion (4 quarters
     times $1.0 billion per quarter) because of the smaller total volume of
     Treasury financing due to the induced rise in tax revenues and fall in
     transfers. By the end of the simulation period the outstanding amount
      is $5.19 billion less than the historical.
33. See again foothote 30.
34. See Friedman [9 1 for a discussion of the rationale underlying the role
      of   financial flow variables in interest rate determination   in the short
      run.    In the long run, only the stocks matter.
                                     Re ferences

1.    Backus, David, Brainard, William C., Smith, Gary, and Tobin, .Iames.
      "A Model of U.S. Financial and Nonfinancial Behavior." Journal of
      Money, Credit and Banking, XII (May, 1980), 259—293.

2.    Blanchard, Olivier-Jean, and Plantes, Mary Kay. "A Note on Gross
      Substitutability of Financial Assets." Econometrica, XLV (April, 1977),
      769—771.

3. Bodie, Zvi. "An Innovation for Stable Real Retirement Income." Journal
    of Portfolio Management, VII (Fall, 1980), 5—13.
4. Bosworth, Barry, and Duesenberry, James S. "A Flow of Funds Model and
    Its Implications." Issues in Federal Debt Management. Boston: Federal
    Reserve Bank of Boston, 1973.

5. De Leeuw, Frank, and Gramlich, Edward. "The Channels of Monetary Policy:
    A Further Report on the Federal Reserve - M.I.T. Model." Journal of
    Finance, XXIV (May, 1969), 265—290.

6. Fair, Ray C. "The Estimation of Simultaneous Equations Models with
    Lagged Endogenous Variables and First Order Serially Correlated Errors."
    Econometrica, XXXVIII (May, 1970), 507—516.

7. Feldstein, Martin, and chamberlain, Gary. "Multimarket Expectations
    and the Rate of Interest." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
    V (November, 1973), 873—902.

8. Feldstein, Martin S., and Eckstein Otto. "The Fundamental Determinants
    of the Interest Rate." Review of Economics and Statistics, LII
    (November, 1970), 363—375.

9.    Friedman, Benjamin M. "Financial Flow Variables and the Short—Run
      Determination of Long-Term Interest     Rates." Journal of political
      Economy, LXXXV (August, 1977), 661-689.
10. Friedman, Benjamin M.       "The Inefficiency of Short-Run Monetary Targets
     for Monetary Policy."      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No.3,
      1977), 293—335.

11. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Crowding Out or Crowding In? Economic Consequences
     of Financing Government Deficits." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
       (No.2, 1978), 593—641.

12. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Substitution    and Expectation Effects on Long-
      Term Borrowing Behavior and Long—Term Interest Rates." Journal of
      Money, Credit and Banking, XI (May, 1979), 131-150.
13.   Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Effect of Shifting Wealth Ownership on
      the Term Structure of Interest Rates: The Case of pensions."
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCIV (May, 1980), 567—590.
14. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Financing Capital Formation in the 1980s:
     Issues for Public Policy." Wachter and Wachter (eds.), A New U.S.
     Industrial Policy. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
      forthcoming.

15.   Friedman, Benjamin N. "Effects of Shifting Saving Patterns on Interest
      Rates and Economic Activity." Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
16. Friedman, Benjamin M., and Roley, V.Vance. "Models of Long-.Term
     Interest Rate Determination." Journal of Portfolio Management,
     VI (Spring, 1980), 35—45.
17. Friedman, Benjamin M., and     ROley,   V. Vance. "A Note on the Derivation
      of   Linear Homogeneous Asset Demand Functions."       Mimeo, Harvard University,
      1979.
18.   Gramlich, Edward M., and Jaffee, Ddght (eds.). Savings Deposits,
      Mortgages and Housing. Lexington: D.C. Heath and Company, 1972.

19. Hendershott, Patric H. Understanding Capital Markets Volume I: A
     Flow—of-Funds Model. Lexington, D.C. Heath and Company, 1977.

20.   Lintner, John. "The Aggregation of Investors Diverse Judgments and
      Preferences in Purely Competitive Security Markets," Journal of
      Financial and Quantitative analysis, Iv (December, 1969), 347—400.
21. Modigliani, Franco, and Shiller, Robert J. "Inflation, Rational Expecta-
     tions, and the Term Structure of Interest Rates." Econometrica, XL
      (February,   1973), 12—43.
22.   Modigliani, Franco, and Sutch, Richard. "Innovations in Interest
      Rate Policy." American Economic Review, LVI (May, 1966), 178—197.

23.   Modigliani, Franco, and Sutch, Richard. "Debt Management and the Term
      Structure of Interest Rates: An Empirical Analysis of Recent Experience."
      Journal of Political Economy, LXXV (August, 1967), 569—589.
24. Okun, Arthur M. "Monetary Policy, Debt Management, and Interest Rates:
     A Quantitative Appraisal." Commission on Money and Credit, Stabilization
      Policies. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice—Hall, Inc., 1963.

25. Poley, V. Vance. A Structural Model of the U.S. Government Securities
     Market. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1977.

26.   Roley, V. Vance. "A Theory   of   Federal Debt Management." American
      Economic Review, LXIX   (December,   1979), 915—926.
27. Roley, V. Vance. "The Effect of Federal Debt Management Policy on
     Corporate Bond and Equity Yields." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      forthcoming.
28. Roley, V. Vance. "A Disaggregated Structural Model of the Treasury
     Securities, Corporate Bond, and Equity Markets: Estimation and
      Simulation Results." Mimeo, National Bureau of Economic Research,
      1980.

29.   Sargent, Thomas J. "The Fundamental Determinants of the Interest Rate:
      A Comment." Review of Economics and Statistics, LV (August, 1973),
      391—393.

30. Sargent, Thomas J.    "A Note on Maximum Likelihood     Estimation of the
      Rational Expectations Model of the Term     Structure." Journal of
      Monetary Economics, V (January, 1979), 133-143.

31. Tobin,      James.    "1n Essay on Principles of Debt Management." Commission
      on Money and Credit, Fiscal and     Debt Management Policies.   Englewood
      Cliffs: PrentiCe—Hall, 1963.

32. Tobin,    James.     "A General Equilibrium Approach To Monetary Theory."
      Journal    of   Money, Credit and Banking, I (February, 1969), 15-29.
</ref_section>
