NBER WORKINQ PAPER SERIES

THE ROLES OF MONEY AND CREDIT
IN MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS

Benjamin M. Friedman

Working Paper No. 831

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
December 1981

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #831
December 1981

THE ROLES OF MONEY AND CREDIT IN MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS

Abstract

This paper considers the implications, for macroeconomic modelling

and for monetary policy, of the interrelationships among money, credit and

nonfinancial economic activity. Data for the United States since World War II
show that the volume of outstanding credit is as closely related to economic

activity as is the stock of money, and moreover that neither money nor credit
is sufficient to account fully for the effect of financial markets in deterinin—

ing real economic activity. Instead' what appears to matter is an interaction
between money and credit. This result is consistent with a macroeconomic
modelling strategy that deals explicitly with both the money market and the
credit market, and with a monetary policy framework based on the joint use
of a money growth target and a credit growth target.

Benjamin M. Friedman
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 127
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 495—4246

Revised
October, 1981

THE ROLES OF MONEY AND CREDIT IN MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS

Benjamin M. Friedman*
Harvard University

In thinking about the relationships between nonfinancial economic
activity and quantity measures of what is happening in the financial markets,

most economists and most economic policy makers today focus primarily —

if

not exclusively — on money. At the theoretical level, the implicit assumption underlying most current macroeconomic analysis is that the money stock
is both necessary and sufficient to represent the relevant information con-

tained in financial quantities. Almost every macroeconomic model, no matter
how simplified, includes the money stock among the variables it represents
explicitly, and few such models include any financial quantities other than

money. At the applied policy level, the formulation of monetary policy
in most of the industrialized Western countries takes place in terms of

target rates of monetary growth. The most prominent exception to the pervasive emphasis on money in macroeconomic analysis is that the large macro—
econometric models often do include non—money financial quantities, but

even here such variables are usually only peripheral)
This single-minded devotion to the money stock raises issues that go

beyond mere questions of definition. Any specific monetary aggregate is,
after all, a collection of certain of the public's financial assets.

Although it would strain the meaning of the word "money" to include in it
such items as equity claims and long—term debt instruments, as long as the
focus of analysis is exclusively on the public's assets the question of which

ones to include is, in the end, a matter of definition.2 The more fundamental
issue stems from the underlying reality that any balance sheet has two sides.

—2—

Except in the trivial sense that the entirety of the public's assets equals the
entirety of its liabilities plus net worth, the distinction between assets and

liabilities — between money and credit —

is

not definitional. Merely redefining

ways of adding up the various items on the asset side of the public's balance
sheet is not sufficient if there is also valuable information contained in the
liability side.

What accounts for the current preoccupation with money to the exclu—
siori of other financial quantities? Is there something about money that is
"special" in an a priori sense, or is the reason instead an empirical

presumption that, for reasons unexplained, variations in money somehow
correspond more closely to the variations in the nonfinancial aggregates

which are the primary object of macroeconomic inquiry?
Apart from government—issued base money, which is usually not the

definition that people have in mind either in economic analysis or in discussions of monetary policy,3 there is nothing "special" about money in an

a priori sense. In the simplest abstraction of an economy with no privately
issued financial instruments, base money is the only financial asset, and

there are no liabilities. In modern economies, however, most money is not
base money but bank money, and privately issued financial instruments constitute the great majority of all such instruments issued, held and traded.

For given growth in base money (if that is what the relevant authority does
in fact control), the behavior of the banking system and that of the nonbank
public together determine the growth of both bank money and bank credit,
and do so jointly with the determination of nonbank financial assets and

liabilities as well as nonfinancial economic activity. Economic theory
provides no a priori reason at all to expect a role for the nonbank public's
money holdings but not its credit liabilities.

The reason for emphasizing money in macroeconomic analysis must

—3—

instead be a set of presumptions about the empirical relationships connecting
money and the behavior of key measures of nonfinancial economic activity,

including especially income and prices. Indeed, during the last two decades
a vast literature has developed documenting money—income arid money-price

relationships, in a variety of forms corresponding to variations in the
underlying theoretical framework, and for a large number of different countries and different time periods.

Now more recent work has shown that, at least for the United States

during the period since the 1951 Treasury—Federal Reserve Accord, the relationship between economic activity and the public's outstanding credit
liabilities exhibits the same degree of regularity and stability as does

the relationship between economic activity and the public's holdings of

money balances. Moreover, still incomplete analysis suggests that the
approximately equal regularity of the credit—income and money—income relationships holds for other countries as well, including Canada, Germany,
Japan and the United Kingdom.4
The object of this paper is to present the empirical case for a

redirection of emphasis in macroeconomic research, as well as in the formu-

lation of monetary policy, away from the sole focus on money among financial
quantities. The goal is not to show that the money stock contains no information that is useful in these two contexts, nor even to suggest that some
non—money quantity dominates the money stock in these contexts and therefore

should replace it as the fulcrum of analysis. The point is simply that
the available empirical evidence does not warrant an exclusive focus on

any one financial quantity. Moreover, if for some reason there is a need
to focus on just one financial quantity, the evidence provides no reason
to conclude that that one should be a monetary aggregate rather than a

—4—

credit

aggregate.

Section I reviews the evidence documenting the approximately equal

regularity and stability of the relationships between money and income and
between credit and income in the United States. Merely finding empirical
regularities settles few interesting questions, however. Indeed, it is
difficult to think of a familiar economic hypothesis that is contradicted
merely by the finding of a close relationship between credit and income.
It could always be the case, of course, that the operative chain of causation ran from money to income and thence from income to credit, so that

the public's decisions with respect to credit liabilities remained a peripheral aspect of economic behavior, one which macroeconomic analysis could
safely ignore in the interest of simplification.
Section II examines evidence bearing on the interaction among money,

credit and economic activity, drawn from statistical investigations that are

prior to structural economic model building.5 Here too the results provide
no justification for a special emphasis on money to the exclusion of credit

in macroeconomic analysis. At the same time, the results do go beyond
merely indicating parallel roles for money and credit. Especially in the
context of the determination of real income, what apparently matters is

neither money nor credit alone but rather the interrelationship between them.
Section III goes on to consider what kind of structural economic

model would be consistent with this set of empirical observations. This
line of investigation inevitably leads to the issue of the role of financial
prices (in other words, interest rates), in addition to financial quantities,

in determining nonfinancial economic behavior. Here the evidence indicates
a significant, but still less than complete, connection between the relation-

ship of income to credit documented in Sections I-li and the familiar

—5-.

relationship of income to interest rates documented in a precise way in

other recent work. Because the interest rate is the price of credit in
terms of money, this analysis leads naturally to the idea of a three—market

model — including the markets for goods and services, for money and for
credit — as an appropriate framework for structural analysis.
Section

IV brings together the major conclusions reached in the

paper and then explores their implications for monetary policy. In the
absence

of evidence supporting a special role for money in macroeconomic

behavior, there is little support for the intermediate target procedure as
currently

implemented with monetary aggregates as the sole intermediate

targets. One alternative, of course, would be to abandon intermediate targets
altogether and focus directly on the ultimate nonfinancial
monetary

policy. Alternatively, a two-target framework combining one monetary

aggregate
emphasis

objectives of

and one

credit aggregate offers some advantages over

the

current

on monetary aggregates alone, in that it would at least facilitate

the formal incorporation into the monetary policy structure of information
from both sides of the public's balance sheet.

—6—

I. The Relative Stability of the Money-Income and

Credit-Income

Relationships

Results based on a variety of methodological approaches consistently
indicate

borrowers

that the aggregate outstanding indebtedness of all nonfinancial
in the United States bears as close and as stable a relationship

to U.S. nonfinancial economic activity as do the more familiar asset aggregates like the money stock (however defined) or the monetary base.6
Moreover, in contrast to the familiar asset aggregates, among which there

appears to be little basis for choice from this perspective, total nonfinancial debt appears to be unique in this regard among major liability aggregates.

Figure 1 plots data for 1946—80 showing the yearend credit market
indebtedness, as a percentage of fourth—quarter gross national product, for
the aggregate of all U.S. nonfinancial borrowers and for five different

categories of borrowers that together comprise the total.7 These
data are "net" in the sense that they net out financial intermediation.
For example, the data include such items as a household's mortgage
issued to a bank, or a corporation's bonds sold to an insurance company,

but they exclude any liability issued in turn by the bank or the insurance

company in order to finance that lending activity. The data also exclude
debt issued by separate financial subsidiaries of nonfinancial corporations,

as well as by federally sponsored credit agencies and mortgage pools. The
data are "gross," however, in the sense that they include all of an individual

househo]d or firm's outstanding credit market liabilities, not just any
excess of liabilities over either financial or total assets, and also in
the sense that they include one household's borrowing from another or one
firm's borrowing from another.

The strong stability of the total nonfinancial debt ratio, shown in

I

1955

I

-. -. -

1

.— .

-

•

BORROWERS

1970

-. -. -.

DEBT OF U.S. NONFiNANCIAL

FIGURE

1960

1965

—. —. —. -. —. —. —.
.—
•

Households

I
I

1975

—. —. —•

/
__---—-——---..----

Total Nonfinancial Debt

I

State & Local Governments

—•

OUTSTANDING

1950

——

Corporations

—

Federal Government

I

Nonfinancial Business

GNP

1946

0

50

100

150

%of

1980

—7—

the top line in the figure, stands out in stark contrast to the variation

of the individual sector components. The nonfinancial economy's reliance
on debt, scaled in relation to economic activity, has shown almost no trend
and but little variation since World War II.

After falling from 155.6%

of gross national product in 1946 to 126.6% in 1951 and then rising to
143.9% in 1960, the total has remained within a few percentage points of
that level ever since (the 1980 level was 142.9%).8 Otherwise it has exhibited
a slight

cyclicality, typically rising a percentage point or two in reces-

sion years (when gross national product, in the denominator, is weak).
The individual components of this total, however, have varied in

sharply different directions both secularly and cyclically. In brief, the
secular postwar rise in private debt has largely mirrored a substantial
decline (relative to economic activity) in federal government debt, while
bulges in federal debt issuance during recessions have mostly had their

counterpart in the abatement of private borrowing. Households have almost
continually increased their reliance on debt in relation to their nonfinan-

cial activity throughout this period. Both corporations and unincorporated
businesses have also issued steadily more debt, on a relative basis, except

for temporary retrenchments during recession years. State and local governments steadily increased their relative debt issuing activity during the l950s

and l960s, but just as steadily reduced it during the 1970s. Except only
for 1975—76 and 1980, the federal government has reduced its debt ratio
in every year since 1953, although this relative shrinkage of the federal
debt has been slower in years when recession has temporarily inflated the bud-

get deficit (and, again, depressed gross national product in the denominator).
The first four columns of Table 1 summarize the stability of the

ratios to gross national product of ten financial aggregates —

five

liability

12.4
5.2
6.8

PND

TD

BC

2.9

1.9*
1.4

34*
1.5

M3

TNA

Note:

4.4

3.6

22.3
4.3

Ml

1.5

1.8*

2.8

3.6

5.2%

3.2

1.8

4.1
3.5

1.9%

(4)

M3 statistics indicated by * are based on data for 1960-78.

1.6

35*

22.0

5.1%

16.5%
16.8%

6.8

5.4

12.3
12.6

2.0%

(3)

Data

195 3-78

Quarterly
Raw
Detrended

MB

Asset Aggregates

3.2

1.6

3.5

4.1

11.9

TND

NFD

(2)

(1)

1.8%

Aggregates

Detrended

—

Variation,

Raw

Annual Data

2.5%

Liability

1

(Table 1

.46

.38*

.38

.42

.32

.28

.40

.36
.38

.38

(5)

____

.30

.11

.08

.20

.02

.18

.32

.20
.21
.18

(7)

R2

.084

.095

.096

.090

.099

.091

.083

.090
.089
.091

(8)

SE

continued on next page)

.085

.077*

.091

.088

.095

.097

.089

.092
.090

.091

(6)

SE

Regression Results (Quarterly Data)
1953-78
1970-78

STABILITY TESTS FOR LIABILITY AND ASSET AGGREGATES

Coefficient of

COMPARATIVE

TABLE

continued

governments)

1,

Monetary Base

Money Stock (currency outside banks plus demand deposits)
Money Stock (Ml plus savings and small time deposits at commercial banks)

=

=

=

MB

Ml

M2

M3

= Money Stock (M2 plus savings and small time deposits at thrift institutions)
TNA = Total Net Assets (total holdings of credit market instruments by U.S. nonfinancial holders)

(bank reserves plus currency outside banks)

Asset Aggregates

Bank Credit (commercial bank loans and investments)

=

BC

Debt (TND plus credit market debt of U.S. financial intermediaries)

Total

=

TD

TND

= Total Nonfinancial Debt (total credit market liabilities of all U.S. nonfinancial sectors)
NFD = Non-Federal
Debt (TND less credit market liabilities of the federal government)
PND = Private Nonfinancial Debt (NFD less credit market liabilities of state and local

Liability Aggregates

Definitions of Variable Symbols:

Table

-8—

groupings, including the "total nonfinancial debt" measure plotted in Figure 1,
and

five

asset groupings

deviation

by showing the coefficient of variation (standard

normalized by mean) for each ratio computed from both annual nd

quarterly U.S. data over the 1953-78 sample period (except for the M3 money

stock, for which data begin only in 1959). In each case the table shows
the coefficient of variation computed from raw data, and also computed from
detrended data.

As columns (1) and (3) of Table 1 show, the comparison for data

including time trends indicates that total net assets and total nonfinancia1
debt are (in that order) the most stable, while the Ml money stock and the
monetary base (in that order) are the least stable, among the ten aggiegates,
Whether or not a particular relationship exhibits a time trend, however,

has little to do with its "stability" in the usual economic sense. The
corresponding comparison for detrended data, shown in columns (2) and (4,
again indicates that total net assets is the most stable aggregate in rela-

tion to gross national product, with toal debt and total nonfinancial
debt, respectively, a close second and third. The monetary base exhibits
the least stability on a detrended basis, with private nonfinancial liabilities

and the Ml money stock close behind. Orderings based on annual data are
essentially the same as those based on quarterly data.
Simple ratios of precisely contemporaneous observations may well

fail to capture the relevant concept of "stability" in the relationship
among variables that move over time with some general lead or lag pattern

between them. The remaining columns of Table 1 present the respective
coefficients of determination and standard errors of ten estimated regre—
sion equations, in each case relating the growth of nominal gross national
product to a moving average of the growth of one of the ten financial

—9—

listed

aggregates

in the table, plus a moving average of a fiscal policy

measure. The equations are estimated in the familiar form
4

c +

13.AFt.

4

+

Y.AEt.

(1)

where Y is gross national product, F is any of the five liability aggregates
or five asset aggregates and E is federal government expenditures calculated
on a high employment basis, all expressed in natural logarithms, and c, the
13. and the y.
are scalar coefficients, with the fB. and y. constrained to
1
1
1

lie

along respective fourth-order polynomials with the implied

=

=
135

= 15 = 0.
Columns (5) and (6) of Table 1 show the results of estimating equations
of the form (1) using quarterly data for the same 1953-78 sample period

used in comparing the simple ratios. Total net assets performs best in this
test, with a standard error of 0.85% per quarter in "explaining" the historical
growth of gross national product, while bank credit (standard error 0.97%)

performs worst. Total nonfinancial debt is about in the middle. Because
there is evidence of a significant break in most of these regressions at

around 1970, however —probably associated with the Federal Reserve System's
change to a monetary target strategy and/or the elimination of the Regulation Q
interest ceiling from large certificates of deposit, both of which occurred
in 1970

columns (7) and (8) also show the respective results for analogous

regression equations based on data for 1970-78 only.9 For this shorter
period the relative performance of total nonfinancial debt is somewhat
better, equalling that of the Ml money stock.
In part because of the extent to which regressions of the form (1)

have been discredited by a variety of criticisms, researchers examining
the money—income (or, here, credit—income) relationship have increasingly

—10-j

turned to methods that allow for a richer dynamic interaction between money
and income by relating the variation of income not to the entirety of the
variation of money but only to that part of it which cannot already be deduced either from the past history of money itself or from the joint past

history of both money and income)° In this context a key indication of
the stability of the relationship to income of any financial aggregate is
the behavior of that relationship following just such an "innovation," or
unanticipated movement, in the aggregate (or in income). A more general
representation of (1) that is consistent with this interpretation (but
that omits the fiscal variable, so as to keep the order of the system small)
is the vector autoregression

t

Y
I

B

B
U 121

a

i

=

Ft

I

t—i
1B21 B221 Ft_i

a21

pitl

(2)

+ 2tf

where Y and F are again as in (1), the p. are disturbances, the a. are
1
1
fixed scalar coefficients to be dstimated, and the B. .
1J

are

fixed—coefficient

lag operator polynomials to be estimated.
Solution of the autoregression (2), once it is estimated, yields a

moving—average representation of the form

=

where the

i

liI

2I

and 0. .

1J

I° l2i

+

(3)

21 O22 H2t

are respectively fixed scalar coefficients and fixed—

coefficient lag operator polynomials derived from recursive substitution of
the a. and B. .
1
1J

from (2) to express both Y and F as functions of the current

values and past histories of both

and p2, and the normalization convention

imposed in estimating (2) constrains the zero-lag elements of the four
polynomials in (3) to

Y disturbance" and

=

22

= 1 and 12 =

2l

0 (so that

is "the

"the F disturbance"). The orthogonalization of (3)

that extracts the independent part of p2 (say, 62) as "the F innovation"

—11—

is then just

—

l

+

Ft

where the .. and the E.

1l l2 Elt
2l 22 E2t
follow

(4)

from the e.. and the p., respectively, and

the s. are now independent.
The upper half of Table 2 summarizes simulations of (4), estimated
in the form (1) using quarterly data for nominal gross national product and
three each of the liability and asset aggregates from Table 1, with eight

quarters of lags on each variable in each equation. For convenience the
table reports the response of F/Y rather than the individual responses of

F and Y separately. Each column in the table presents values, for the initial
quarter and then for the final quarter in each of the first five years,
indicating the time path followed by F/y (for the definition of F indicated)
in response to a 1% innovation in F.
What stands out in these results is the contrast between the time

paths for the three asset aggregate ratios, each of which declines rapidly
albeit irregularly after such an innovation, and those for the three liability

aggregate ratios. The total nonfinancial debt ratio declines rapidly too,
indicating about the same stability in this respect as does any of the asset
aggregates; but both the (narrower) private nonfinancial debt ratio and the
(broader) total debt ratio show pronounced instability, with overshooting
lasting up to three years beyond the initial innovation in F.12

A further aspect of the tendency in recent research to avoid simple
nominal income regressions of the form (1) has been a reluctance to ignore
the distinction between the real and price components of nominal income

variation. The lower half of Table 2 summarizes simulations that are analogous to those shown in the upper half of the table but based on the moving-

.12

(Y,F)

.92
.82

1.00%
2.17
2.66
2.02

System

Aggregates

Notes:

.03
.01
.45

.79
.30

1.00%
1.51
1.50
—

.11

.01

1.00
.31

1%

innovation in

F.

—

—

—

—

—

—

.10
.11

.30

.03

.30
—

1.00%
—

.01
.14
.12
.17
.08

.07

—

—

.26
.06

.17
.08

1.00%
.55

—

.14

.14
.30
.11

1.00%

—

.60

—

—

—

—

1.00%
.64
.15
.13

1.00%
.19
.43

Aggregates

1.00%

.23

.32

—
—

1.36
.84

.23
.37
.38
.43
.42

1.00%
—

•93

1.00%

Asset

LIABILITY AND ASSET RATIOS

Values shown are responses of F/y to a
See Table 1 for variable symbols.

—

—

20

.09
.05

.34

1.00%
—

12
16

1
4
8

Quarter

Simulations of Trivariate System (X,P,F)

.18

20

.07
.36
.32

1.00%

of Bivariate

16

12

1
4
8

Quarter

Simulations

Liability

DYNAMIC RESPONSES OF

TABLE 2

—12—

average representation solved out from the trivariate vector autoregression

B11 B12 B13 X1
B21 B22 B23 t—l +
B31 B32 333 Ft1

(5)
P3

where X is real gross national product and P is the price deflator (both in

natural logarithms). Once again the results show a fairly rapid return
of the F/(X•P) ratio after an innovation in any of the three asset aggregates and also in total nonfinancial debt, but a slower and less stable
return after an innovation in either private nonfinancial debt or total
debt.

among the various liability measures considered, therefore, these

results suggest that there is indeed something unique about total nonfinan-

cial debt. It is as if the Ml money stock ratio were sharply unstable, but
adding commercial bank time and saving deposits to form the M2 money stock
ratio: yielded stability, and further adding thrift institution deposits

to'form the M3 money stock ratio destroyed that stability — none of which
appears to happen. Hence not only does the total nonfinancial debt ratio
exhibit just as much stability as any of the five asset ratios in these
dynamic tests, it does so uniquely among the various liability aggregates
tested.

In sum, the evidence provided by a variety of methodologies shows
that at least one aggregate measure of outstanding credit liabilities in the

United States —

total

nonfinancial debt —

consistently

exhibits just as

much stability in relation to U.S. economic activity as do the more familiar

asset aggregates. Indeed, the debt—to—income relationship measured in this
way can appear to be more stable than any particular money-to—income relationship, depending on the specific measure of money and the specific test used.

—13—

Regardless of whether the credit—income relationship is "as stable as"
or "more stable than" that for money, however, like the money—income
relationship it is potentially important for understanding economic behavior.
Nevertheless, although the money-income relationship has long been the
focus of attention, the credit-iicome relationship has to date stimulated
little investigation.

—14—

II. Money, Credit, Income and Prices
The mere finding of a regular empirical relationship between the
outstanding debt of nonfinancial borrowers and the economy's nonfinancial

activity is suggestive, but it is not necessarily of direct importance for

either economic model building or economic policy making. For example,
what if the explanation for this observed phenomenon were simply that people
always adjusted their borrowing to stay in line with their incomes, while

their real spending and saving decisions remained predetermined with respect

to their activity in the credit market? The total nonfinancial debt variable
in that case would be interesting from the standpoint of an investigation

of the credit market per se, but there would be little sacrifice to economic
analysis in omitting it from a model primarily intended to deliver insights
into the determination of nonfinancial behavior itself.

Alternatively, what if the observed stability of the credit-to-income
relationship reflected the outcome of a process in which people took decisions

with

respect to their spending and borrowing behavior jointly? Such a process

could emerge if

yield

spending

and saving decisions were sensitive to the expected

levels that cleared the credit market, for example, or if the credit

market did not clear and people's ability to spend were constrained by their

ability to borrow. In that case a model that failed to account for whatever
joint decision process connected spending behavior and borrowing behavior

would be inadequate, even if understanding the determination of nonfinancial
activity constituted the sole objective of the analysis.
The same arguments apply, of course, to the role in economic analysis

of money (or other asset aggregates). Nevertheless, although few models of macro—
economic behavior include an explicit representation of the credit market, almost all include at least a money demand function and an equilibrium condition

—15—

for the money market, and many go on to treat the supply of money in some

detail as well. Were it not for evidence like that summarized in Section I,
it would perhaps be possible to rationalize this disparity on empirical

grounds — although, even so, the distinction between making money
an integral or a peripheral part of the analysis would again depend
on whether or not the money market played a role in determining nonfinancial
economic activity.
In light of the evidence summarized above shOwing that there is
little to distinguish the respective stability of the money-incqme and
credit—income relationships on empirical grounds, however, the rationalization for including the money market but excluding the credit market in

macroeconomic analysis must hinge on a presumption that money is central to

nonfinancial decisions while credit is not — in other words, that people
jointly determine how much to spend and save and how much money to hold,
but only secondarily determine how much to borrow.

Is there evidence to support this distinction? Just what constitutes
evidence in this context depends in large part on what it means for two

actions to be jointly determined or, alternatively, for one to be predte,mined with respect to another. "Causality" is a concept with a precise

meaning

in logic (indeed, several precise meanings), but there is little

prospect of using time—series evidence to settle directly questions of
economic causality)3 "Exogeneity" is a concept with a precise meaning in
econometrics, and time—series evidence is better suited to bear on questions

of econometric exogeneity. In recent years the literature of this subject
has therefore moved away from asserting that one variable "causes" another
to the alternative formulation that the one "is exogenous with respect to"

the other. Even so, as the development of this literature during the past

—16—

decade has amply shown,

whether

one variable is or is not predetermined with

respect to another, even in the narrower sense of econometric exogeneity,
depends on (among other considerations) what if any third or further variables

the analysis incorporates)4
Perhaps the best way of formulating the question at hand so as to
convey the actual meaning of the tests developed for such purposes by

Granger [9] and Sims [18] is to ask whether one variable "incrementally

or "incrementally explains" another. Because the basis of such

predicts"

tests consists of regression equations relating one variable to lagged
values

of another, the issue is really whether the lagged variation of the

right-hand-side

variable predicts (in beyond-sample analysis) or explains

(in within—sample analysis) the variation of the left—hand—side variable.

The relevant prediction or explanation is not absolute but incremental,
however,

in that the lagged values of the specific right-hand—side variable

which is the focus of the inquiry are not the equation's only regressors.

Hence the question these tests address is, more accurately, whether the
lagged values of that specific right—hand-side variable make an incremental
contribution to the equation's predictive or explanatory capacity over and
above that already provided at least by lagged values of the left-hand-side
variable itself and perhaps by lagged values of still other variables as
well.

Put in these terms, one rationale for focusing on the money market but
not the credit market in macroconomic analysis would be a presumption that
money incrementally explains real economic behavior in a way that credit

does not Table 3 summarizes evidence testing this proposition, drawn from
two of the trivariate vector autoregression systems estimated as in (5)

above. The upper half of the table presents statistics for the estimation

.9987
.9998
.9998
.0088
.0031
.0040

Notes:

C

x
p

***

**

*

X
P
M
C

Equation

2.81*

.0027

45*

1.49

20

319 97*
1.05
2.72**

F(X)
_____

.0033

.0090

money stock (demand deposits plus currency)
total nonfinancial debt

gross national product in constant prices
gross national product price deflator

significant at 1% level
significant at 5% level
significant at 10% level

=

=
=
=

.9986
.9998
.9999

Estimation of Trivariate System (X,P,c)

M

x
p

Equation

Estimation of Trivariate System (X,P,M)

SE

33**

l.95***
346.09*
2 .40**

215. 36*
2. 70**

2.

F(P)
_____

1.39
3.30*
335• 34*

F(M)

ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR SYSTEMS INCLUDING EITHER MONEY OR CREDIT

TABLE 3

2 .23**
196.09*

1.07

F(C)

—17—

of the trivariate system consisting of real gross national product, the
price deflator and the Ml money stock (hereafter called simply "money").
The lower half of the table presents analogous statistics for the estimation
of the trivariate system consisting of real gross national product, the price
deflator and total nonfinancial debt (hereafter called simply "credit").
Once again all variables are in natural logarithms, and each of the lag

operator polynomials includes eight quarterly values. For each estimated
equation the table shows the coefficient of multiple determination and the
standard error, and, for each lag operator polynomial, the F-statistic for
the test of the null hypothesis that the polynomial's coefficients are all
equal to zero.
The results presented in Table 3 provide no basis whatever for dis-

tinguishing money from credit along lines that would warrant including the

money market but excluding the credit market in macroeconomic models. The
evidence indicates that neither money nor credit incrementally explains real
income, given the explanatory power already contained in lagged values of

real income and prices. By contrast, both money and credit do incrementally
explain prices, this time given the explanatory power already contained in
lagged values of prices (and of real income, which does not significantly

contribute). Finally, both money and credit are incrementally explained
by real income and by prices, even given the explanatory power of one another
as well as of lagged values of money or credit, respectively.

Hence the evidence does not support the proposition that money holdings and nonfinancial behavior are jointly determined in some sense in
which credit borrowings and nonfinancial behavior are not, nor does it
support the proposition that money is prior to nonfinancial behavior while

credit is not. Indeed, the results reject at the 1% level the proposition

—18—

that money is predetermined with respect to either income or prices. By
contrast, a test of the proposition that money is predetermined with respect
to nominal income (that is, that nominal income does not incrementally explain
money), as in Sims [18], would impose on the analysis the constraint that
the respective coefficients of lagged real income and lagged prices must

be identical in the equation explaining money — a constraint that the dat4
decisively reject.15

Although the finding that real income and prices incrementally explain
both money and credit is not surprising (at least not to this writer),
the apparent absence of any effect of either money or credit on real income

is somewhat surprising. Because prices apparently do incrementally explain
real income (albeit weakly in the second system), while both money and credit
incrementally explain prices, this result is not evidence for any straight-

forward classical neutrality proposition. Even so, it would be surprising
if prices were a sufficient statistic for whatever information financial

quantities conveyed about decisions with respect to real spending, output
and income.

Table 4 helps to resolve this puzzle by presenting statistics, an4ogous to those in Table 3, for the estimation of the four-variable vector
autoregression system including both money and credit in addition to real

gross national product and the price deflator. Apart from the expansion to
include all four variables, the system summarized in Table 4 is identical
to those represented by (5) above.

The contrast between the results for the four—variable system and he
corresponding results for the two trivariate systems once again illustrates
that whether or not one variable incrementally explains another depends

crucially on the base from which the increment is measured — and not always

See Table

3

.0026

.9999

C

Note:

.0040

.9998

M
1.01

2.50**

0.28

10.77*

F(X)

for definitions of variable symbols.

.0032

.9998

p

.0083

.9988

SE

x

Equation

4

1.71

2.67**

59.83*

2.42**

F(P)

-

1.95***

107.11*

1.35

2.47**

F(M)

ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR SYSTEM INCLUDING BOTH MONEY AND CREDIT

TABLE

161.10*

0.92

0.55

2.14**

FCC)

—19—

in the direction that a larger information base makes the relevant increment

harder to detect. Although neither money nor credit incrementally explains
real income in the absence of the other, both do so in the presence of one

another. In intuitive terms, what appears to matter for the explanation
of real income is neither money nor credit but, instead, the interrelation

between the two. Moreover, even in the presence of both money and credit,
prices still also incrementally explain real income. Hence the effect on
income represented by the price variable is at least in part independent of
the effect of financial quantities; prices are not a sufficient statistic for
the relevant information contained in financial quantities, nor do money

and credit even jointly constitute a sufficient statistic for the relevant
information contained in prices.

The other results presented in Table 4 are less striking but

interesting nonetheless. Although money and credit each incrementally
explain prices in the absence of the other, neither does so in the presence

of the other (and of lagged prices and real income). Hence money and credit
both apparently convey largely the same information about the determination
of prices, and neither contributes significantly beyond what is contained

in the other. Credit does not incrementally explain money, nor does its

presence overturn the result that both real income and prices do. By contrast
money does incrementally explain credit (although only weakly), and in the
presence of money neither real income nor prices any longer do so.
The results of vector autoregression analysis of real income, prices,

money and credit therefore do not provide any basis for focusing on money

to the exclusion of credit in macroeconomic analysis. From the perspective
of explaining the variation of real income, what appears to be important is
neither money nor credit separately but the relationship between the two. From

te

—20—

perspective of explaining the variation of prices, either one will do, and

the

choice between them is largely arbitrary.16 Finally, the interrelation-

ship between money and credit themselves is apparently not so simple as to

warrant including one and not the other in the analysis. Macroeconomic
analysis should be sufficiently broad to include both the money market

and

the credit market.

—21—

III. The Market for Money and the Market for Credit
The conclusion that both the money market and the credit market
should play an integral role in macroeconomic analysis immediately recalls

Patinkin's [15] classic statement of the static neoclassical monetary equili—

brium framework. In its full form this model includes four markets —

those for goods and services, labor, money and credit'7 — but by invoking
Walras' Law Patinkin was able to eliminate any one. He chose to eliminate
the labor market and work with the markets for goods and services, money
and credit.

17

Figure 2 illustrates the sense in which the markets for money and

credit are both fundamental in Patinkin's model. The object of the analysis
here

is to determine the price level P and interest rate r — in other words,

the two rates of exchange spanning the three markets. An equilibrium in
(r,P)

space is determined by the

joint intersection, as

at point E1, of the

three curves representing the market—clearing (r,P) combinations for the

three markets: Xx for the goods and services market, MM for the money
market and CC for the credit market. A change in the underlying conditions
that shifts any of the three curves must also shift at least one of the others.
For example, if the introduction of checkable money market mutual funds

were to reduce people's demand for "money," and therefore shift the market—
clearing curve for the money market from MM to M'M', the logic of the budget

constraints underlying the model's construction dictates that people would
also either increase their demand for goods and services or decrease their

demand for borrowing, or both. If only the demand for goods and services
changed, the XX curve would shift so as to intersect both M'M' and CC at

point E'. If only the demand for borrowing changed, CC would shift so as to intersect both M'M' and XX at E''. The figure as drawn shows a shift in both

r
x'
x
C

M

C'

r2

r1
XI

X

p

P1

P2

FIGURE 2

PATINKIN'S THREE-MARKET MODEL

—22—

curves to a new equilibrium at E2.
Two lines are sufficient to determine a point, of course, so that
even in this framework it still is formally possible to eliminate one of

the three markets. What remains impossible, however, is to determine the
effects of a change affecting any one market without, at the very least,
making a potentially refutable assumption about a corresponding change in

at least one other. In the example of the money market mutual fund, shifting MM to M'M' and leaving XX in place, as is analogous to the practice in

the more conventional Hicks-Keynes IS—LM analysis, is equivalent to assuming

a specific shift in CC. Similarly, analyzing an increase in government
spending that shifts XX to XIX' by leaving MM in place is again equivalent

to assuming a specific shift in CC. In either case, behavior in the credit
market may or may not warrant such an assumption. The results presented
in Tables 3 and 4 suggest that, at least from the perspective of the determination of real income (though not of prices, as in Patinkin's full employment model), it is not safe to assume that the credit market passively

absorbs the necessary shifts in this way. Changes in the quantity of money
may or may not have implications for real income, depending on what is
happening to the quantity of credit.
In the context of this three—market representation of economic activity,

the four-variable system summarized in Table 4 uses the quantity of credit
to represent the relevant aspects of behavior in the credit market,

while the remaining three variables represent the quantities in the other
two markets (goods and services and money) and the rate of exchange between

them. To the extent that the objective is simply to include some represen—
tatibn of the credit market, however, the quantity of credit is not the only

logical choice for this purpose. The alternative is either the rate of

—23—

exchange between credit and money in a market with nominal bonds, or the
rate of exchange between credit and

goods in a market with indexed bonds.

Following Mehra's [13] demonstration that including the interest
rate in the analysis is sufficient to reverse Sims' [18] earlier findings that

money incrementally explains income but not vice versa, Sims [19] has estimated
the analog to the system in Table 4 using the rate of exchange between credit

and money —

that

is, the nominal interest rate — to represent the role

of the credit market. Table 5 summarizes the results of estimating a four—
variable system like Sims', but using the same data and details of estimation

as in the work presented above.19 The results are close to Sims', and they
offer some interesting contrasts to those in Table 4. The interest rate
incrementally explains real income, while prices no longer do, nor does

money.2° In the absence of the credit quantity, however, money once again
incrementally explains prices. Real income again incrementally explains
money, but in the presence of the interest rate prices no longer do. Money
does not incrementally explain the interest rate here, although it does
incrementally explain the credit quantity in Table 4.
Beyond the simple distinction between using the quantity variable

and using the relative price variable to represent the third market, is
there any relationship between the two systems summarized in Tables 4 and 5?
Figure 3 shows two alternative representations of the credit market in a linear

stochastic model. In each the intersection of the deterministic parts of

the demand and supply curves —

for

borrowers and S0 for lenders, respec-

tively — indicates the expected equilibrium in (r,C) space. In panel (a)
only the demand curve is stochastic, and the resulting deviations of the
interest rate and credit quantity around expected equilibrium (r0,C0) are

perfectly positively correlated. In panel (b) only the supply curve is

Notes:

r

M

P

X

Equation

.0090

.0038

.0029

.0079

1.13

2.24**

1.21

129.24*

F(X)
____

r = interest rate on 4—6 month prime commercial paper.
See Table 3 for definitions of other variable symbols.

.9491

.9998

.9999

.9989

SE

0.58

1.60

210.23*

0.55

F(P)
____

1.71

193.71*

2.16**

1.31

F(M)
____

ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR SYSTEM INCLUDING MONEY AND AN INTEREST RATE

TABLE 5

20.30*

1.55

2.39**

2.93*

F(r)

r
So

r0

r"
D'

I
I
I

C'

C0

I
I
I

C

C"

(a) Instability in Credit Demand

r

C'

C1

C"

(b) Instability in Credit Supply
FIGURE 3
ALTERNATIVE EXTREMES OF A STOCHASTIC CREDIT MARKET

—24—

stochastic, arid the resulting deviations around (r0,C0) are perfectly negatively
correlated.

Both credit demand and credit supply are presumably stochastic in

reality, so that the actual correlation will be imperfect. The value of the
correlation coefficient constitutes potentially useful information, however.

First, the correlation's sign will indicate whether the dominant source of
stochastic variation in the credit market comes from the behavior of borrowers

or lenders. Second, and more importantly, the correlation's absolute value
will indicate to what extent a univariate representation of the credit market

— either the interest rate or the credit quantity — is adequate. In the
extreme case in which either credit demand or credit supply is nonstochastic,
so that the correlation is perfect, either variable contains all of the rele-

vant information about stochastic shifts in the credit market. At th other
extreme, if credit demand and credit supply are both about equally stochastic
(in independent ways), the two variables contain two separate sets of information, both of which are necessary.

Table 6 shows the pairwise correlations between the independent innovations associated with the credit quantity in the orthogonalized moving—average
representation solved out from the four—variable vector autoregression

system

summarized in Table 4 and the independent innovations associated with

the interest rate in the analogous representation of the system summarized
in

Table 5. Table 6 shows correlations between the innovations per Se, as

well as between their respective first differences. In addition, because
the ordering assumed in the orthogonalization in general affects the computation of the innovations corresponding to particular variables, the table
shows correlations for the innovations computed for credit and the interest
rate ordered last in their respective systems (as in Table 2 above) and

TABLE 6
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN CREDIT AND INTEREST RATE INNOVATIONS

Pairwjse Correlations
CE:

C,r

ordered last

C,r ordered first

Note:

,E
Cr

)

.41*

.50*

.27*

•39*

E = orthogonalized innovation
C = total nonfinancial debt
r = interest rate on 4—6 month
*

significant

(AEC ,AEr)

at 1% level

commercial paper

—25—

also for these variables ordered first. In each case the interest rate
innovations are lagged one period so that the 4—6 month span of the interest
rate

approximately centers on the corresponding credit quantity observation

(measured as of the end of the quarter).
The correlation between the two innovations is positive regardless
of the details of the computation, indicating that credit demand —that

is, the behavior of borrowers — is the dominant source of stochastic variation in the credit market. None of the correlations approaches unity,
however, confirming that credit supply is also importantly subject to

stochastic variation. Hence it is highly unlikely that either the credit
quantity or the interest rate constitutes, by itself, a sufficient representation

of the credit market.
Some representation of the

is

credit market in

macroeconomic analysis

clearly better than none, and the chief contribution of the four—variable

systems presented in Tables 4 and 5 is that each includes one variable

for this purpose: a quantity in the former and a relative price in the
latter. Nevertheless, the evidence presented here suggests not only that
macroeconomic analysis should explicitly incorporate the credit market but
also that it should do so with both a quantity and a relative price variable.
The resulting framework would then be a fully specified three-market model,
including real income, money and credit (the quantities in all three markets)

as well as the price level and the interest rate (the two rates of exchange
spanning them)

20

—26—

IV. Implications

for Monetary Policy

The evidence presented in this paper supports three conclusions about
the respective roles of money and credit in macroeconomic analysis:
First, the relationship between credit and nonfinancial economic

activity is just as regular and stable as is that between money and economic

activity. The evidence does not warrant including the money market but
excluding the credit market on grounds of the closeness, or lack thereof,
of the observed empirical relationships.
Second, real income and prices are not predetermined with respect to

credit, any more so than they are with respect to money. The evidence does
not warrant excluding either the credit market or the money market on grounds
of being only peripheral to the determination of nonfinancial economic activity.

Third, the interest rate and the quantity of credit both represent
aspects of behavior in the credit market that matter for nonfinancial

economic activity. The evidence suggests, however, that neither variable
alone is adequate to convey all of the information about the credit market
that is relevant to macroeconomic analysis.

These conclusions also bear parallel implications for the choice of

framework for conducting monetary policy. The same evidence that rejects
the propositions which, if true, would rationalize a special role for money
over credit in analysis also rejects the corollary propositions which, if true,

would rationalize a special role for money over credit in the design and

execution of monetary policy. Hence this evidence suggests that there is
little basis for the conventional monetary policy procedures currently in
practice in the United States, as well as in most other industrialized Western
economies, which revolve around specific target rates of growth for some
measure(s) of the money stock with minimal attention paid to credit measures.

—27—

One way to read the evidence developed in this paper is simply as
further support for the case against having any kind of intermediate target

for monetary policy at all. Under the intermediate target procedure, the central
bank first determines for some financial quantity a time path believed to be
consistent with achieving its ultimate objectives for the nonfinancial economy,

and

then

acts as if its objective were to control that quantity so that its

subsequent growth follows the chosen path to within a predetermined range of

tolerance. Hence the intermediate target, which is observable on a timely
basis in the financial markets, stands as a proxy for the ultimate nonfinancial
objectives of monetary policy in a world characterized by uncertainty and

lags of several kinds. In practice, central banks using the intermediate
target procedure have typically chosen a measure of the money stock as the
intermediate target, and the main impetus for the adoption of this procedure
has usually rested at least in part on notions of the special relationship
between money and nonfinancial economic activity.
In fact, the intermediate target procedure would constitute an optimal

way to conduct monetary policy only under extremely stringent conditions
describing the relationship between the intermediate target and the nonfinancial

objectives of monetary policy.22 Even in the context of a simple macroeconomic
model, for example, the intermediate target procedure based on the money stock
as the intermediate target is optimal only if the demand for money is both
perfectly stable and perfectly insensitive to interest rates.
In the wake of the widely publicized collapse of previously well

accepted U.S. money demand functions during the l970s, further evidence that
the demand for money does not meet these conditions is hardly necessary.

Even so, the evidence presented in this paper further strengthens the case

—28—

against the intermediate target procedure by indicating the complexity of

the relationship among money, credit and economic activity. Indeed, the
evidence shows that there is no more empirical justification for using money
as the intermediate target than there is for using credit as the intermediate

target. To the extent that arguments for this way of conducting monetary
policy have traditionally rested on the presumption that money plays a special
role, and hence that money should serve as the intermediate target, this

evidence casts further doubt on the appropriateness of the entire intermediate
target procedure.
Even within the more limited context of the intermediate target

procedure itself, the evidence presented in this paper suggests that at the
very least a two-target framework based on one monetary aggregate target and
one credit aggregate target would be superior to a framework based on monetary
targets only, in the usual sense of delivering a greater likelihood of
achieving outcomes for key nonfinancial variables falling within any given
tolerance around corresponding set objectives.

(The evidence even provides

some ground for believing that a three-target policy, including an interest
rate in addition to money and credit, would be superior still.)

How would monetary policy function in an explicit two-target money—

and—credit framework? Only with infinitesimal probability, of course, would
the stated target for money and the stated target for credit ever turn out

to be precisely compatible. The diversion between the two aggregates in an
environment of uncertainty would indeed present a problem if the central
bank were to interpret the intermediate target procedure in a strict sense.
If, however, it instead regarded each intermediate target as an "information
variable" which identified a limited set of incoming information to which
there would be a presumption that the central bank would respond as a matter

—29—

of course, there would be neither analytical nor practical difficulty in having

two such targets instead of one.2 Indeed, according to the published policy
records of the Federal Open Market Committee, as well as reports to the Congress

by the Chairman of the Federal Reserve System, monetary policy in the United
States currently uses just such a two—target framework, but with the Mi—B and
M2 money stocks serving as the two targets.
The key advantage of an explicit two—target framework based on money

and credit in comparison to a two—target framework based on two separate
definitions of the money stock, however, would be the incorporation of a more
diverse information base in the set of signals that presumptively matter

for monetary policy. Money is, after all, an asset held by the public, and
each monetary aggregate is just a different way of adding up the public's
assets. The conthination of an Mi—B and an M2 target therefore relies solely
on the asset side of the public's balance sheet, although it aggregates those

assets in two separate ways. A framework based on a money target and a credit
target would instead establish a presumption that the central bank would
respond to signals from both sides of the public's balance sheet, and the
evidence presented here indicates that both sides of the balance sheet do
contain information that is relevant to the determination of nonfinancial
economic activity.

In sum, the evidence presentd in this paper provides no support for
the intermediate target procedure for monetary policy, as currently implemented
with some measure(s) of the money stock used as the only intermediate target(s).
The evidence is instead consistent with either abandoning the intermediate
target procedure altogether and addressing monetary policy directly to its
nonfinancial objectives, or else adopting a two—target monetary policy framework based on both money and credit.

Footnotes

*

I

am grateful to Richard Clarida and Angelo Melino for research assistande;
to them as well as Philip Cagan, John Linther, Robert Litterman, Robert Shiller,
christopher Sims and Laurence Summers for helpful discussions and comments
on an earlier draft; and to the National Science Foundation (grant DAR79-l0519)
and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for research support.

1. An exception in this regard is the role of the quantity of home mortgage lending in determining residential construction (and hence the
level of income generally) in the MIT—Penn-SSRC model; see de Leeuw
and Gramlich [ 41.

2.

Indeed, one strand of literature seeks to define "money" simply as
that asset aggregate which bears the closest empirical relationship
to economic activity.

3. An exception is the work of Brunner and Meltzer, who have always
emphasized the role of the monetary base; see, for example, [3 1.

4.

I refer here to my own current research, which will be the basis of a
forthcoming paper encompassing all four of these countries, as well
as to work by Islam [11] on Germany and Japan.

5. The concept of these analyses' being prior to structural model building
is in the sense of Zellner and Palm [22] and Sargent [16].
is not
to be confused with the proposition that such analyses are a substitute
for structural model building.

It

6. This section draws heavily on my earlier papers [6 ,
[6 ] for the full set of results.

7 1; see especially

7. In part because of the capital export controls that were in effect
during 1964—74, foreign obligors have accounted for only a small fraction
of borrowing in U.S. markets throughout this period. Including foreign
borrowers would make
difference to the analysis that follows.

little

8. With the exception of the depression years and (less so) World War II,
the stability in fact goes back at least to 1921 when the ratio stood
at 141.9%; see again [6].
9. Apart from the equation for M3, which is based on a shorter sample
period because of limited data availability, the F-statistic for a
break at 1970 is significant at the 10% level for all of these equations
and at the 5% level for all but two (total debt and
net assets).

total

10. Among the most important criticisms of the St. Louis approach have
been those of Goldfeld and Blinder [8 1, Sargent [171, and Modigliafli
and Ando [14]. The methodology underlying the tests described below
is due largely to Granger and Sims; see especially Sims [18].

11. The orthogonalization procedure is

l1 12
2l 22

—
—

Eit

—

E2t

®11

°l2

°2l

022

1
—A

A 1

it

1 2t

cov(j ,p2)/var(p1). This orthogonalization is equivalent to
placing F las in the pairwise causal ordering of Y and F. The alternative ordering placing F first, which follows from transposing the
A (or —A) and the zero elements, gives results that are close to those
reported below; see [6 1.
for A =

12. 7nalogous simulations for the M3 money stock, net financial assets
and non-federal debt all support this contrast. Bank credit also
appears to be stable, however.
13. See, for example, Tobin [20] and Zeliner [21].
14. The contrast between the results of Sims [18] and the results of Mehra [131
and Sims [19], discussed below, is a striking example of this phenomenon.
15. The F—statistic for this additional constraint is 2.22, which is
significant at the 5% level. Moreover, results for the bivariate
system which does impose this constraint also reject at the 1% level
(F-statistic 2.89) the proposition that nominal income does not incrementally explain money.
16. Only at the 1% significance level is it true that money incrementally
explains prices while credit does not.
17. Patinkin referred to all debt instruments as "bonds" and, for simplicity,
assumed that they were perpetuities. In reality the instruments included
in the total nonfinancial debt aggregate span the entire maturity
spectrum but, at least for the United states, do not include perpetuities.
What actually matters for the pricing of debt instruments is not stated
maturity anyway but the duration (see, for example, Hopewell and
Kaufman [10]) which is always shorter for coupon-bearing instruments,
especially after allowance for the probability of call (see Bodie and
Friedman [2]).
18. The choice of the labor market was perhaps appropriate for Patinkin's
equilibrium analysis, but, as subsequent work (Barro and Grossman [1 :i,
for example) has shown, the labor market is apparently central to
disequilibrium analysis.

19. Sims used monthly data, industrial production instead of real gross
national product, and the wholesale price index instead of the gross
national product deflator.

20. The finding that the nominal interest rate renders the price variable
insignificant everywhere except in the price equation is not surprising

since, with an eight—quarter lag, the F—test for prices is hard to dis—

tinguish from an F-test for the inflation rate.

21. A forthcoming paper will report my analysis of such a five-variable
system.
22. See Friedman [5).
23.

See Kareken et al. [121 and Friedman [5] for the development of the
"information variable" concept in the context of intermediate targets
for monetary policy.

References

1. Barro, Robert J., and Grossman, Herschel S. "A General Disequilibrium
Model of Income and Employment." Pmerjcan Economic Review, LXI (March,
1971), 82—93.
2. Bodie, Zvi, and Friedman, Benjamin M. "Interest Rate Uncertainty and
the Value of Bond Call Protection." Journal of Political Economy,
LXXXVI (February, 1978), 19—43.
3. Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H. "Money, Debt and Economic Activity."
Journal of Political Economy, LXXX (September/October, 1972), 951-977.
4. DeLeeuw, Frank, and Cramlich, Edward. "The Channels of Monetary Policy:
A Further Report on the Federal Reserve - M.I.T. Model." Journal of
Finance, XXIV (May, 1969), 265—290.
5. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Targets, Instruments and Indicators of Monetary
Policy." Journal of Monetary Economics, I (October, 1975), 443-473.

6. Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Relative Stability of Money and Credit
'Velocities' in the United States: Evidence and Some Speculations."
Mimeo, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1981.
7.

Friedman,

Benjamin M. "Debt and Economic Activity in the United States.

(ed.), The Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing U.S.
Capital Formation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
Friedman

8.

Goldfeld, Stephen M., and Blinder, Alan S. "Some Implications of Endogenous
Stabilization Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 3, 1972),

9. Granger, C.W.J. "Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models
and Cross-Spectral Methods." Econometrica, XXXVII (July, 1969), 424—438.
10. Hopewell, Michael H., and Kaufman, George G. "Bond Price Volatility
and Term to Maturity: A Generalized Respecification." American
Economic Review, LXXII (September, 1973), 749—753.
11. Islam, Shafiqul. "Monetary and Credit Aggregates as Intermediate Targets:
Empirical Evidence from Three Industrial Countries." Mimeo: Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, 1981.

12. Kareken, J.H., Muench, T., and Wallace, N. "Optimal Open Market Strategy:
The Use of Information Variables." The American Economic Review, LXIII
(March 1973), 156—172.

13. Mehra, Y.P. "Is Money Exogenous in Money-Demand Equations." Journal
of Political Economy, LXXXVI (April, 1978), 211—228.

14. Modigliani, Franco, and Ando, Albert. "Impacts of Fiscal Actions on
Aggregate Income and the Monetarist Controversy: Theory and Evidence."
Stein (ed.), Monetarism. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company,
1976.

15. Patinkin, Don. Money, Interest and Prices. 2nd ed. New York: Harper
& Row, 1965.

16. Sargent, Thomas J. "A Classical Macroeconomic Model of the United
States." Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIV (April, 1976), 207—237.
17. sargent, Thomas J. "The Observational Equivalence of Natural and
Unnatural Pate Theories of Macroeconomics." Journal of political
Economy, LXXXIV (June, 1976), 631—640.
18. Sims, cthristopher A. "Money, Income and Causality." American Economic
Review, LXII (September, 1972), 540—552.
19. Sims, thristopher A. "Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business
Cycles: Monetarism Reconsidered." American Economic Review, LXX
(May, 1980), 250—257.

20. Tobin, James. "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc." Quarterly
Journal of Economics, LXXXIV (May, 1970), 301—317.

21. Zellner, Arnold. "Causality and Econometrics." Brunner and Meltzer
(eds.), Three Aspects of Policy and Policymaking: Knowledge, Data and
Institutions. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1979.
22. Zellner, Arnold, and Palm, Franz. "Time Series Analysis and Simultaneous
Equation Econometric Models." Journal of Econometrics, II (May, 1974),
17—54.

