NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS AND THE
OVERSHOOTING HYPOTHESIS

Jacob A. Frenkel
Carlos A. Rodriquez

Working Paper No. F32

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
January 1982

This is a revised version of an earlier paper written in the fall
of 1977 and entitled "The Anatomy of the Overshooting Hypothesis in
the Market for Foreign Exchange." We are indebted to Joshua
Aizenman, Kent Kimbrough, Michael Mussa, and to participants of the
joint international economics workshop of Tel—Aviv University and
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem for useful comments. J.A.
Frenkel acknowledges research support from the National Science
Foundation, grant SOC 78—14480. This research is part of the
NBER's programs in International Studies and Economic Fluctuations.
Work on this paper was done while the authors were consultants with
the International Monetary Fund. The views expressed are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the NBER.

NPER Working Paper #832
January 1982

Exchange Rate Dynamics nd the. Overshooting Hypothesis
Abstract

In this paper we analyze the determinants of the evolution of exchange rates within the context of alternative models of exchange rate

dynamics. We examine the overshooting hypothesis in models which emphasize differential speeds of adjustment in asset and goods markets as

well as in models which emphasize portfolio balance considerations. We
show that exchange rate overshooting is not an intrinsic characteristic
of the foreign exchange market and that it depends on a set of specific

assumptions. We also show that the overshooting is not a characteristic
of the assumption of perfect foresight nor does it depend in general on
the assumption that goods and asset markets clear at different speeds.

As long as the speeds of adjustment in the various markets are less than
infinite, the key factor determining the short run effects of a monetary

expansion is the degree of capital mobility. When capital is highly
mobile, the exchange rate overshoots its long—run value and when capital
is relatively immobile the exchange rate undershoots its long—run value.

Within the context of the portfolio—balance model we show that the effects
of a monetary expansion on the dynamics of exchange rates and in particular on whether exchange rates overshoot or undershoot their equilibrium
path depend critically on the specification of asset choice, on the degree
of substitution among assets, and on the quality of the various assets In

being an inflation hedge. Specifically, when Internationally traded goods
are a better inflation hedge than nontraded goods, the nominal exchange

rate overshoots the domestic price leveland conversely.

Professor Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago. IL 60637
312—753—4516

Carlos A. Rodriquez
CEMA
Buenos Aires
Argentina

I. Introduction

The evolution of the international monetary system into a regime of
flexible exchange rates and the large volitility of these rates during
the 1970s have led to a renewed interest in studying the principal determinants of equilibrium exchange rates. The large fluctuations stimulated
theories of exchange rate dynamics and have led to the development of various versions of the overshooting hypothesis. 1/ The explanations of the
overshooting phenomenon vary. All explanations rely on the short—run fix—
ity of some nominal quantity. Some account for it by the assumption that
in the short run commodity prices are slow to adjust relative to asset
prices (Dornbusch, 1976); some attribute it to the lack of sufficient speculation in the markets for foreign exchange (McKinnori, 1976); some attribute
it to the differential effects of new information on commodity and asset
markets (Dornbusch, 1978; Frenkel, l981a, 198lb; Frenkel and Mussa, 1980;
Mussa, 1979) and some attribute it to the implications of the process by
which asset holders restore portfolio balance in the face of disturbances
(Calvo and Rodriguez, 1977; Branson, 1979; Kouri, 1976; Ethier, 1979). 2/

1/ For a classification of the various versions of the overshooting
hypothesis, see Levich (1981).
2/ In addition to the studies mentioned above, a partial list of recent
studies includes Bilson (1979), Flood (1979), Henderson (1979), Kimbrough
(1980), Liviatan (1980), Mussa (1982), and Shafer (1980). Further references
are included in the following sections of this paper.

'-2—

In this paper we analyze the implications of two classes of models
for the dynamics of exchange rates. We assume throughout that expectations are formed rationally and that individuals are fully informed. We
therefore preclude the possibility that the dynamics of exchange rates
are due to systematic expectational errors.
In Section II we analyze the dynamics of exchange rates in a model
in which commodity prices are slow to adjust. The basic structure of the
model is due to Dornbusch (1976). Our extension allows for a finite rate
of capital mobility and we show that the speed of adjustment in capital
markets plays a critical role in determining whether or not following a
monetary disturbance the exchange rate overshoots its equilibrium value.
It is shown that when the degree of capital mobility is low, the exchange
rate is likely to undershoot its equilibrium value.
In Section III we analyze the dynamics of exchange rates within the
framework of the portfolio—balance model with complete flexibility of
prices. In this context we interpret earlier results of Calvo and Rodriguez (1977) concerning the effect of monetary growth on the real exchange
rate. We show that the fundamental factor determining the dynamics of the
real exchange rate is. the specification of the portfolios of assets, the
degree of capital mobility, and the relative qualities of the various
The study of the dynamics of the
assets as hedges against inflation.
real exchange rate shows that throughout the adjustment process the noini—
nal exchange rate is changing at a rate which differs from the rate of

inflation. It follows that a policy which ties the exchange rate to the

rate of inflation would be inconsistent with the equilibrium self—fulfilling expectations adjustment path.

II.

Exchange Rate Dynamics and the Speed of Adjustment in
Commodity and Asset Markets

In this section, we analyze the dynamics of exchange rates and the
overshooting hypothesis from the perspective which emphasizes the speeds
of adjustment in commodity and asset markets. This perspective was developed by Dornbusch (1976) who assumed that, as a first approximation,
asset markets clear instantaneously while adjustment in commodity markets
Dornbusch showed that when these assumptions are coupled
is sluggish.
with the assumption that expectations are rational, a monetary expansion
induces an immediate depreciation of the currency in excess of its long—
run equilibrium value; i.e. , a monetary expansion results in an overshooting of the exchange rate. To gain further understanding into the rela-

tionship between the dynamics of exchange rates and the speeds of adjustroent in goods and asset markets, we modify the Dornbusch model and allow
for a finite speed of adjustment in asset markets. It is shown that under these circumstances the key factor determining whether the exchange

—3—
rate overshoots or undershoots its equilibrium value is the relationship between the speed of adjustment in asset markets, the interest elasticity of the demand for ney, and the effects of relative prices on the

balance of trade. The speed of adjustment in comndity markets does not
seem to be a fundamental factor.
Our analysis draws on the analytical framework developed by Dorn—

busch (1976) and, in

ridel

order to highlight the key point, we simplify the

by abstracting from many of the inconsequential details. We assume
that the economy faces a given price of foreign output and a given world
rate of interest, that domestically produced goods differ from foreign
goods, and that the spply of output is fixed.

11.1. The Money Market
Let the demand for real balances depend on real income, Y, and on
rate of interest, and let the logarithm of the demand be linear in
the logarithm of income, y, and in the rate of interest, i. Equilibrium
in the money market attains when

the

(1)

1.

m—p=y—1

where m and p denote, respectively, the logarithms of the nominal quantity of ney and the price level. Thus, the equilibrium rate of interest can be written as:

(2) i=by—b(m—p).

11.2. The Goods Market
The demand for domestic output, D, is composed of domestic demand
and foreign demand. This demand can be expressed as the sum of total
domestic absorption (domestic demand for domestic and foreign goods) and
the excess of exports over imports (the trade balance surplus). Absorption

is assumed to depend on real income, while the trade balance is as-

sumed to
Total

1/

depend on. the relative price of domestic and foreign goods. 1/

demand for domestic output can therefore be written as:

This specification abstracts from the effects of the rate of interest on absorption, the effects of income on the trade balance, and the
distinction between GNP and GDP that results from interest income on net
ownership of foreign securities. These abstractions are made for simplicity since they do not affect the nature of the argument. Some of these
factors are allowed for by Dornbusch (1976).

—4—

(3)

A(Y) + T(SP*/P)

D =

where A denotes domestic absorption, T denotes the balance of trade, S
denotes the exchange rate (the price of foreign exchange in terms of do—
mestic currency), * the fixed foreign price level (in tern's of foreign
currency), and P the price of domestic output. For convenience we define
units so as to equate the foreign price level to unity; therefore, the
=
trade balance may be viewed as depending on the real exchange rate s
and
S/P. Furthermore, since real output is given, absorption is fixed

the demand for domestic output varies with the real exchange rate.

Long—run equilibrium obtains when the demand for domestic output
equals the fixed supply, that is, when D = Y. We define the real exIn
change rate that is associated with this long—run equilibrium by .
order to abstract from long—run accumulation of foreign assets, we assume
that in the long run the trade balance is zero, so that T() = 0. This
assumption, that is made for convenience only, implies that absorption
Y).
equals the given level of output (A(Y)

Proceeding with the log—linear specification, the trade balance is
written as

(4)

T =

5

2.n (s/i)

or equivalently as

(4') T (e—p —k)
Subwhere e, p, and k are the logarithms of S, P, and , respectively.
the
demand
for
domesstituting (4') in (3), and recalling that A(Y) = Y,
tic output is

(3') DY+ (e—p—k).
The percentage change in the price level, j,
portional to excess demand (D — Y):

(5)

=

i(D

— Y)

is

assumed to be pro-

—5—
where the parameter iT measures the speed of adjustment in the goods mar—

ket.l/ Substituting (3') into (5) yields:
(6)

where

=a (e—p—k)
a =

rrc5.

At each moment of time, the price level is given and its evolution
The coefficient a is the product of two
factors:iT——the speed of adjustment in the goods market, and ——the sensitivity of the balance of trade to the real exchange rate. As will be
seen below, of these two factors only the latter plays a role in determining whether or not nnetary changes result in exchange rate overshoot—
is described by equation (6).

i ng.

11.3 The Capital Account and the Balance of Payments

Equilibrium in the world asset market attains when the difference
between the rates of interest on domestic and foreign securities, that
are identical in all respects except for the currency of denomination,
just equals the expected rate of change in the exchange rate. For example, when the domestic currency is expected to depreciate at the percentage rate x, long—run equilibrium requires that

(7)

where i' denotes the rate of interest on assets with foreign currency
denomination.
It is assumed that expectations concerning the percentage
rate of depreciation depend on the relationship between the equilibrium
and the current rate, S. Expressed logarithmilong—run exchange rate
cally,
(8)

x = O(e —

e);

0 > 0

where
is the logarithm of S and where 0 denotes the expectations ad just—
ment coefficient, the determinants of which are analyzed below. Equation
(8) states that when the long—run value, , exceeds the current value,
e, individuals expect a depreciation of the currency toward , i.e. , the
expected depreciation, x, is positive.

1/ The assumption that prices change at a finite speed is taken as a
stylized fact and we do not attempt to rationalize it here. For an interesting theory of sticky prices see Mussa (1978). The specification
of the rate of inflation as a function of excess demand is analogous to
the specification in Dornbusch (1976), equation (8).

—6--

The equilibrium that is described in equation (7) is attained through
the mechanism of arbitrage that is effected through the international moIt is assumed that capital flows are proportional to
bility of capital.
— x)——the discrepancy between the net rates of return on the var(i —
ious securities. Substituting equation (8) for the expected depreciation

of the currency, we can specify the international flow of capital as:

(9) C =

fi

—

i

—

e(e

—

e)}

where C denotes net capital inflow (the surplus in the capital account)
and where 3 denotes the speed of adjustment in asset markets.1/ When
=
and the mobility of capital ensures
capital is perfectly mobile,
On the other extreme, chen 3 = 0
that equation (7) holds all the time.
capital is completely immobile and the mechanism of arbitrage in asset
markets is completely inoperative. It is shown below that the magnitude
of S is a key factor determining the dynamics of exchange rates.

Equilibrium in the balance of payments in the absence of Central
Bank intervention is attained when the sum of the trade balance and the
capital account is zero. Adding equations (4') and (9) and substituting
equation (2) for the (equilibrium) domestic rate of interest yield

(10) (e - p - k) +

3{by

- b(m -

p) —

i* -

- e)}

= 0

as the equilibrium condition for the balance of payments. It should be
noted that the equilibrium condition for the balance of payments (which
in
is a flow relationship) is necessary since the speed of adjustment
instanasset markets is assumed to be finite. When asset markets clear
taneously, equation (10) always holds as an identity and the equilibrium
condition is replaced by the interest parity condition as in equation (7)
above .

2/

The theoretical deficiencies of the capital flow equation (9) are
Since our purpose is to highlight the role of alternative
well known.
assumptions concerning the speed of adjustment in asset markets, we chose
to specify the simplest formulation and to abstract from many other is-

1/

sues.

2/ For a discussion of the role of flow equilibrium when asset markets
adjust slowly see Kouri (1976) and Niehans (1977). For a discussion of
the conceptual issues involved in the formulation of flow equilibrium in
asset markets see Mussa (1976). See also Driskill (1978).

—7—
11.4. Equilibrium Exchange Rate, the Speed of
Adjustment, and the Price Level
We turn now to an analysis of the equilibrium exchange rate and the
relationship between the exchange rate, the price level, and the speed
of adjustment in goods and asset markets. We first note that in the long
run, given the quantity of money, the exchange rate equals its long—run
value 1/ and i =
Substituting 1* for i in equation (l)——the condition for money market equilibrium——the long—run price level, , can be
expressed as

i'.

(11)

To obtain the relationship between
and , we note that in the long run
= 0; it follows from
excess demand for goods is zero and, therefore,
equation (6) that

(12)

ep+k.

As may be seen from equations (11) and (12), the system satisfies the

postulate: a given change in the money supply results in an
equiproportional change in the long—run equilibrium price level and the
exchange rate. Using equations (11) and (12) in equation (10), we can
write the equilibrium in the balance of payments as
homogeneity

(13) {(e -

) - (p -

+ [b(p -

-

- e)]=

0.

Equation (13) expresses the various accounts in the balance of payments
as functions of the discrepancies between current and long—run values of
the price level and the exchange rate. Since at each moment of time the
price level is given, equilibrium in the balance of payments is obtained
only when the exchange rate is at a level which satisfies equation (13).
By collecting terms in (13), the equilibrium exchange rate can be written
as

(14) e=e+c(p—)
where c =

1/

— 2b

+

>

0.

In the present framework the long—run value of the exchange rate is
In general, the equilibrium value may be specified in terms of a
movement along an equilibrium path; see Mussa (1982).
fixed.

—8--

(14),

which is central to our analysis, relates the equilibrium

rate to its long—run value and to the discrepancy between current and long—run prices. This is a reduced form relationship which
holds at each moment of time. it is pertinent to note that, depending
level
on the sign of the parameter r, the relationship between the price

Equation
exchange

and the

exchange rate may be positive or negative.

As may be seen, the

depends on the degree of capital market integration which we
have characterized in terms of the speed of adjustment 3. When the speed
case, given and , the
of adjustment is low, >8b and c> 0. In thatthe
same direction. When
exchange rate and the price level must move in
<
b
and
the
opposite
holds. In the
the speed of adjustment is high,
= ° the price level and the exchange rate are
extreme case for which
that case c = —(bIO) < 0.11 The determinants
related
since
in
inversely
be
of the relationship between the price level and the exchange rate may
values
interpreted in terms of equations (10) or (13). For given long—run
the balsign

of

of prices and exchange rates, a rise in the price level worsens
ance of trade and improves the capital account. The improvement in the
the rate of interest necessary
capital account results from the rise in
to restore money market equilibrium in the face of a higher price level.
The extent of the required rise in the rate of interest depends on b——the
When the speed of
interest (semi) elasticity of the demand for money.
in
the
rate of interest
asset market adjustment is high, a given rise
in
the
capital
account,
which is likely
results in a large improvement

more than offset the deterioration in the balance of trade. To resdomestic currency will
tore equilibrium in the balance of payments, theThe
reduction in e serhave to appreciate (i.e., e will have to fall).
to

restore equilibrium by worsening the trade balance and by creating
expectations of currency depreciation and, thereby, worsening the capital

ves to

tn this case, the exchange rate and the price level move in
in
opposite directions. If, on the other hand, the speed of adjustment

account.

asset markets is low (or more precisely, if

is low relative to (5/b),

in the price
the deterioration of the trade balance following the rise and balance

would outweigh the improvement in the capital account,
of payments equilibrium would require a depreciation of the currency,
of adjusti.e., a rise in the exchange rate. In that case the dynamics
ment are characterized by a situation in which prices and exchange rates
move in the same direction.
level

11.5. The Effect of Monetary Expansion: Overshooting
and Undershoo4g

In the previous section we characterized the relationship between
the exchange rate, the price level, and the speed of asset market adjustment. This relationship can be illustrated with the aid of Figures 1 and
In
2 which will then be used to analyze the effects of monetary changes.
these
1/

figures, the

0 schedule shows a combination of exchange rates

the 5}nbusch case. In that case iT
,
is
(14) coincides with equation (6) in Dornbusch (1976, p. 1164).

The case for which

equation

=

and price levels for which there is no excess demand for domestic output.
The schedule plots equation (6) and its slope is unity.l/ The intercept
of the schedule corresponds to the (logarithm of the) equilibrium long—run
Also, along this schedule the balance of trade
real exchange
= 0 lomust be balanced so that T = 0.

rate k.

All points to the right of the

cus correspond to an excess demand for goods and to a trade balance surplus. Consider next the schedule along which the capital account is balanced. From (13), the capital account can be written as
c

=

—

[b(p

)

— 3

( —

e)].

Thus,

the slope of the schedule along which the capital account is balanced (C=O) is —3/b < 0 as is shown in Figures 1 and 2. Points below the
C0 schedule correspond to a deficit in the capital account.

The equilibrium relationship between the price level and the exchange
rate (which must hold at each moment of time) is summarized by equation
(14) that is plotted as the QQ schedule in Figures 1 and 2. The slope of
the schedule is 1/c which may be positive or negative depending on the
sign of c which in turn depends on whether
is smaller or larger than
< (5/b and the slope of
(5/b. When the degree of capital tbility is low,
the schedule is positive and larger than unity since
< 1.
When asset
markets adjust relatively fast, the QQ schedule is negatively sloped.
Since along the equilibrium path the balance of payments is balanced, the
QQ schedule must pass in a region which is characterized by a surplus in
the balance of trade and a deficit in the capital account (T > 0, C < 0)
or by a deficit in the balance of trade and a surplus in the capital account (T < 0, C > 0). Thus, when the QQ schedule is negatively sloped as
in Figure 1, it must be steeper than the C0 locus. 2/

Consider point B in Figures 1 and 2.

At this point, there is an ex-

demand for goods and > 0. Also at point B there is a trade balance
surplus (T > 0) and a capital account deficit (C < 0). The path of adcess

justment is described by the arrows along the equilibrium schedule QQ and
long—run equilibrium is reached at point D where prices and exchange rates
reach their equilibrium values
and
At this point expected depre-

ciation of the currency is zero, domestic and foreign rates of interest
are equalized so that the capital account is balanced and goods market
clear so that p = 0, and the balance of trade Is balanced. As is evident,
in this del the trade balance and the capital account play a symmetric
role in determining the equilibrium exchange rate. It may not be argued
therefore that the exchange rate is determined exclusively in asset mar—

1/

The

schedule would be flatter than a 45 line i th demand
In that case a rise in the price level lowers the demand

= 0

for goods were to depend negatively on the rate of interest as in Dorn—
busch

via

(1976).

the higher relative price and via the rate of interest that must be
higher in order to restore uney market equilibrium.
2/ The two schedules tend to coincide in the limit when the magnitude
of

B tends to infinity.

—10 —

kets and not in the commodity markets.

In the extreme case, however,

when =oo , as in Dornbusch's model (1976), this dichotomy does exist.
The exchange rate is determined at that level that ensures that the rates
of return on domestic and foreign securities are equalized at each instant so as to satisfy equation (7). The size of the capital account in
turn is determined by the balance of trade so as to ensure equilibrium in
the balance of payments.

To analyze the effects of a monetary expansion, consider an initial
as the corresponding price
and
long—run equilibrium at point A with
level and exchange rate. Through point A passes a QQ schedule (not drawn)
which corresponds to the initial quantity of money. A rise in the money
supply raises the long—run equilibrium values of prices and the exchange
rate equiproportionally to j5 and i and thus moves the long—run equilibrium combination from point A to point D. The initial QQ schedule moves
to the right to the position that is drawn in Figures 1 and 2. Upon the
change in the money supply the price level is given at its initial value

Equilibrium in the balance of payments requires that the exchange
at
rate jumps immediately to e1 and the short—run equilibrium is attained
markets
point B. As may be seen, when the speed of adjustment in asset

is

relatively high, the exchange rate overshoots its equilibrium long—run
value (as in Figure 1) while when the speed of adjustment is relatively
low, the exchange rate undershoots its long—run equilibrium value (as.in
Figure 2).

in terms of
The impact effect of the monetary change can be analyzed
= d and thus, given
d
equation (14). By the homogeneity postulate dm =
with res-

the price level, the short—run elasticity of the exchange rate

pect to the

(15)

=
dm

money supply is:
i.

—

and substituting (14) for ,

(15')

dm

= i

—
—

>

the

elasticity can be written as

1.

> 5/b, c < 0
When the speed of adjustment is relatively high so that
1.
This is the
and the short—run elasticity exceeds unity as in Figure
Dornbusch
case.
On the
overshooting phenomenon that corresponds to the
other hand, when the speed of adjustment is relatively low so that S <5/b,
C
positive but smaller than unity, the short—run elasticity is smaller
than unity, and the exchange rate undershoots its new long—run equili—
rium value. In the border case for which = /b, the QQ schedule
tical and the exchange rate reaches immediately its long—run value asthee1
It may also be noted from equation (15') that ——
coincides with e1.
e
extent of overshooting or undershooting depends on the magnitude of

is

is ver-

- lOc -

Figure 1: High Capital Mobility

= O(T=O)

c=o

Q

k

e1

— 11—

the speed of adjustment of expectations, the determinants of which are
analyzed below. As is clear from equation (15'), other things equal, the
short—run elasticity gets closer to unity as the value of e increases,
thereby reducing the extent to which the current exchange rate differs
from its long—run value. It is also evident that as long as e is not neg—
gative its magnitude is irrelevant for determining whether the short—run
smaller than unity and, therefore, the analysis
elasticity
is consistent with a variety of assumptions concerning the formation of
expectations ranging from the assumption of static expectations (for which
e = 0), to the assumption of perfect foresight which is analyzed below.

is larger or

As is evident, the key factor determining whether the exchange rate
overshoots or undershooots its long—run equilibrium value is the relationand S/b. These parameters characterize the speed of adship between
justment in asset markets, the sensitivity of aggregate demand (the balance of trade) to relative prices, and the interest (semi) elasticity of
As long as the speeds of adjustment are finite, the
the demand for money.
speed of comnxdity price adjustment, ri, does not determine whether or not
there is overshooting.
Turning to the effect of the monetary expansion on the international
accounts, we note that, at point B, independent of whether the exchange
rate overshoots or undershoots, the rise in e improves the balance of
trade and the rise in m deteriorates the capital account by lowering the
rate of interest. The deterioration in the capital account due to the
interest rate effect is mitigated when the exchange rate overshoots its
long—run equilibrium value since, in that case, expectations are for an
appreciation of the currency (a decline in e). In the case of undershoot—
ing, the expectations for a further depreciation reinforce the interest
rate effect in deteriorating the capital account. The transition toward
the long run (the path between points B and D), is characterized by a rising price level and by a decline in the real exchange rate. The decline

in (e — p) results in a deterioration of the balance of trade and, there-

fore, equilibrium in the balance of payments implies that during the transition, the capital account improves.

The above analysis implies that the qualitative characteristics of
the dynamics of the price level, the trade balance, and the capital ac-

count are independent of whether there is overshooting or undershooting
of the exchange rate. These given qualitative paths may be associated

with a path along which the exchange rate is rising, as well as with a
path along which the exchange rate is falling. The ambiguous relationship
between the path of the exchange rate and the other paths should not be
taken to imply that the exchange rate does not exert a definite effect on
the trade balance, the capital account, and on the path of prices. Rather
it implies that one should not expect to observe, independent of the speed
of adjustment, a unique qualitative relationship between the equilibrium
paths of the exchange rate and those of prices and the international accounts. This lack of a unique general relationship between the exchange

rate and the various balance of payments accounts may be responsible for

— 12

the

—

view that in recent years exchange rates have shown erratic and unpre-

dictable movements. 1/

In this section we analyzed the effects of a once and for all unanticipated change in the money supply. The analysis can be easily extended
to examine the effects of other parametric changes like changes in output,

the foreign price level, and the foreign rate of interest. Similarly, the
analysis can be

extended

along the lines suggested by Wilson (1979)

and

Gray and Turnovsky (1979) to examine the effects of an anticipated future
change in the supply of money or in another parameter. For example, it
can be shown that an anticipated future rise in the money supply induces
an immediate adjustment of the exchange rate which jumps, for example, to
point E in Figures 1 and 2. The extent of the instantaneous jump in the
exchange rate is smaller than the change that would have taken place had
the money supply been expected to rise at the present (in which case the

rate would have adjusted to point B). Following the initial

exchange

jump in e, both the exchange rate and prices proceed to rise gradually

their

path converges to the new QQ schedule (corresponding to the new
quantity of money) at the point in time at which the rise in the money
and

supply

actually occurs.

Thereafter the convergence proceeds along the

(new) QQ schedule towards the new long—run equilibrium 2/

11.6.

Perfect Foresight and the Coefficient of Expectations

So far it was assumed (in equation (8) that the expected percentage
change in the exchange rate is proportional to the discrepancy ( — e)
with 8> 0 being the proportionality factor. Dornbusch (1976) showed that
in a model of perfect foresight, the coefficient 8 cannot be chosen arbitrarily but rather, it must be consistent with the structure of the entire
model. 7e turn now to an analysis of the determinants of the coefficient
of expectations in our model.

equation (12) in (6), we may express the rate of inflation as

Using
=

(16)
and

cz{(e

- ) - (p -

using equation (14), the rate of inflation can be written as:

1T

The

relatiTiTp betwen the exchange rate and the trade balance is

analyzed in detail in many recent contributions. See, for example, Kouri
(1976), Dornbusch and Fischer (1980), Mussa (1980), and Rodriguez (1980).

It follows that when capital is highly mobile so that the QQ sche2/
dule is negatively sloped, the path of prices will be monotonic while the
path of the exchange rate will exhibit a turning point, i.e. , e will initially rise and then decline; when capital is less mobile so that the QQ

schedule

is positively sloped, both prices and the exchange rate will

approach their new higher values monotonically.

- 12a -

Figure 2: Low Capital Mobility

p

O(T=O)

T>0
c<0

e1

I

=0

e

— 13 —

(17)

=

(1 -

(e -

The relationship between the equilibrium exchange rate and the price
level that is described by equation (14), must be always satisfied. Thereand p, changes in the exchange rate
fore, given the long—run values of
and in the price level must be related such that
(18) e =

Substituting
(19) é=ci(1— )

equation (17) for , we obtain

(—e).

Equation (19) describes the actual change in the exchange rate while equaIt is clear that, under perfect
tion (8) describes the expected changeS
foresight, consistency requires that the two are equal to each other and,
therefore,
(20) 0 =

c(1

—

E).

Substituting for c from (14) results in

—

(21) 0 =

from which it follows that the coefficient of expectations can be obtained
by solving the quadratic equation
-

(22) e2 + (7T

)6 -

= 0.

From (22) the solution for 8 (obtained by taking the positive root) is

(23) 8 =

- [() -

)2 4

b)h/2j> 0

which expresses the coefficient of expectations as a function of the various parameters of the r!odel.

As may be verified, the coefficient of expectations decreases with
1/b, the interest (semi) elasticity of the demand f or nney, while it increases with 71 and , the speeds of adjustment in goods and asset markets,
respectively. These propositions are independent of the degree of capital
tmbility. In contrast, however, it is noteworthy that the dependence of
the coefficient of expectations on the parameter 5 (the sensitivity of aggregate demand to relative prices) is ambiguous and depends on whether Tr0_

— 14

—

the product of the speeds of adjustment in goods and asset markets——is

smaller or larger than a critical value that is equal to 1/(1 + b/ 0).
For a given value of rr, a high value of
, such that r3 exceeds the critical value, yields a positive relationship between the coefficient of
On the other hand, when
is small,
expectations and the parameter 6 .
such that ir is smaller than the critical value, a high value of 6 reduces the size of the coefficient of expectations. Since the relationship
between the speed of adjustment of expectations and 6 is ambiguous, it
follows that the effect of a higher value of 6 on the extent of the overshooting or undershoot jag is also ambiguous. Finally, it might be noted
that in the extreme case for which asset markets clear instantaneously

equation

so that
(21')

0 =

ct(l

(21) becomes

+ b/e)

which corresponds to equation (14) in Dornbusch (1976, p. 1167) and, as
noted above, in that case 6 and 0 are positively related.

In this sect ion we analyzed the dynamics of exchange rates within a
rational expectations model in which commodity prices adjust slowly. The

analysis cas based on a modified version of a model due to Dornbusch
(1976). We modified the model so as to allow for a finite speed of adjustment in asset markets and we showed that the short—run effects of a
monetary expansion depend on the degree of capital mobility. When capital is highly mobile the exchange

but
its
the
not

rate must

overshoot its long—run value 1/

when capital is relatively immobile the exchange rate undershoots
long—run value. The key reason for the non—neutrality of money in
short run in this model arises from the assumption that prices are
fully flexible. In the next section we analyze the dynamics of ex-

change

rates in a portfolio—balance model in which all prices are assumed

to be fully flexible also in the short run.

III. Exchange Rate Dynamics and Portfolio Balance

In this section we analyze the dynamics of exchange rates and the
overshooting hypothesis within the context of a portfolio—balance model.
Developments of various varieties of the portfolio—balance model which
emphasize the effects of asset substitution on exchange rate determination are the subject of numerous recent articles [e.g. , Kouri (1976),
Branson (1979), Dornbusch (1978), Girton and Roper (1981), Frenkel and
Clements (1981), and the references therein]. Our purpose is to highlight the implications of alternative assumptions concerning the degree

1/ This conclusion is based on the assumption that output is fixed.
Dornbusch shows that when the monetary expansion induces a short—run rise
in output the exchange rate may undershoot its equilibrium level even if
the rise
capital

in output raises
is highly mobile. This will occur if
the demand for money sufficiently so as to result in a rise in the rate
of interest.

— 15 —

It will
substitution among assets on the dynamics of exchange rates.
be shown that the effects of a monetary expansion on the dynamics of exchange rates and in particular on whether exchange rates overshoot or undershoot their equilibrium path depend critically on the specification of
asset choice.
In order to contrast the analysis with the one in the previous section, we will assume that goods markets clear instantaneously and
that all prices are perfectly flexible. We start with a brief review of
the currency substitution model developed by Calvo and Rodriguez (1977).

of

The Currency Substitution Model

III. 1.

The Calvo—Rodriguez model of currency substitution analyzes a fully
employed small open economy in which residents are assumed to hold portfolios of domestic and foreign currencies. The key building blocks of the
model are the specifications of the markets for assets and goods.

111.1.1 The Assets Market
Asset holders are assumed to hold portfolios of domestic money, M,
The value of assets in terms of foreign currency
and foreign money, F.
is denoted by a:
a

(24)

M' + F

where M' denotes the value of domestic currency holdings in terms of forMIS.
eign exchange, i.e., M'
The desired ratio of domestic to foreign money holdings is assumed to
depend on the expected percentage change in the exchange rate which mea-

sures the expected difference between the rates of return on the two assets. The assumption of rational expectations (which in this model amounts to perfect foresight) permits us to identify the expected change in
the exchange rate with the actual change. Using a circumflex () to denote the percentage change in a variable, portfolio equilibrium can be
written as
L(S); L' <

(25)

0

which indicates that the desired ratio of domestic to foreign money declines when the domestic currency is expected to depreciate. It will

useful to express the portfolio—balance relationship in terms of
its inverse as in equation (25')
prove

(25')

S

(N'/F);

2'

0.

— 16 —

111.1.2 The Goods Market
The economy is assumed to produce two classes of goods: tradeable
and nontradeable goods. For a given state of technology and factor endowment, the rats of production of the two composite comtdities depend
on their relative price. Denoting the domestic currency price of traded
goods by T and of nontraded goods by N' the relative price that is relevant for production decisions is T'N The domestic price of traded
goods is linked to the foreign price of that good, P, through internaThe small country is assumed to face
=
tional arbitrage so that
is normala given foreign price of traded goods which, for convenience,
allocation
of
ized to unity. Thus, the relative price which governs the
rate"——
S/Pr——the
"real
exchange
productive resources can be written as s
and the output of the two goods can be specified as

S.

(26)

where

QT

= QT (s);
=

and

QT /s >
N' <

denote,

0

respectively,

the output of traded and nontraded

goods.

The demand for the two goods is assund to depend on their relative
price and on the value of assets according to
CT = CT (s,a); 3CT/S <
(27)

CN = CN (s,a); CN/s >

0, 3CT/a > 0
0,

CN/a >

0

where CT and CN denote, respectively, the demand for traded and nontraded
goods.

At each point in time the stock of domestic holdings of foreign assets, F, is given, and the assumption that the small country's currency
is not held by foreigners ensures that F cannot be adjusted instantaneously. Asset holders can, however, alter the stock of foreign assets
gradually by running a surplus or a deficit in the balance of trade. Thus,

(28)

—

CT(s,a)

=

dF/dt denotes the rate of change in F. Equilibrium in the market for nontraded goods requires that the rate of domestic production

where '

equals the domestic demand so that

(29)

QN(s) —

CN(s,a)

0.

- 17

Equation (29) implies that there is a specific relationship between the
real exchange rate and the value of assets that is consistent with equilibrium in the market for nontraded goods. A rise in the value of assets
must be accompanied by a decline in the real exchange rate since the for—
mer creates an excess demand for nontraded goods while the latter induces
an excess supply.
This relationship is summarized by equation (30)
(30)

s

s '

s(a);

< 0.

Since equation (30) must hold at each moment of time due to the assumed
flexibility of prices, it can be substituted into equation (28) in order
to yield a relationship between the rate of change in F and the value of
assets:

(31)

F =

f(a);

f'

Q —C—1)s'

3C
—

(_.I

-—- < 0.

The value of assets is related uniquely to the equilibrium real exchange rate and thereby to the rates of production and consumption of
goods and to the rate of accumulation of foreign currency. Therefore,
knowledge of the time path of assets is necessary for determining the
time path of these variables. We turn now to study the evolution of asset holdings.

111.1.3 Dynamics
Changes in asset holdings arise from changes in the domestic and the
foretgn asset components of the portfolio:
(32)

Recalling that M' — HIS, it follows that i' M'( ii— S) where 11 denotes
the percentage change in the nominal money supply, i.e., U E 111M. Since
(a — F)(p — S). Thus,
H' a — F, we can express the change in H' as t'
equation (32) can be written as
(33)

(a —

F){

—

(a

F)} +

f(a)

where, using equations (25 ') and (31), L(a_;_F) was substituted for S and
f(a) was substituted for F.

Equations (31) and (33) characterize the dynamics of the system. As
is clear, in the steady state when
0 (equation (31))
0, f(a)
and p = S (equation 33)). We denote the steady state values of a and F by
and F and, using equation (30), the implied steady state real exchange
rate is denoted by s. It is also noteworthy that the system satisfies
the homogeneity postulate: a once—and—for—all rise in the nominal quantity of money results in an instantaneous equiproportional rise in the

— 18

in the nominal exchange rate (and
money price of nontraded goods and
thereby in the money price of traded goods). These changes leave all
real variables (including the real exchange rate) unchanged. In contrast
with the discussion in section II where due to the assumed slow price

adjustment a once—and--for—all change in the nominal quantity of money
exerted real effects (by inducing, in the short run a rise in the real
quantity of money), the flexibility of prices which is assumed in the
present section rules out such effects. In the present model, however,
changes in the percentage rate of growth of the money supply are not
neutral in the long run and do result in a gradual transition period.
Figure 3 describes the dynamics of the system. In Panel I the F =
= 0 schedules describe combinations of a and F which satisfy
o and the
0 schedule
equations (31) and (33) respectively. The slope of the a =
aa/aa<0.
As is
is drawn on the assumption that (around the steady state)
and
the
motion
of
evident, the system exhibits a saddle—path stability,
the
signs
the variables is described by the arrows which are implied by
of the partial derivatives of (31) and (33) around the steady state. None
of the qualitative conclusions are altered in the case for which à/a >0.
In that case the a = 0 schedule is positively sloped and is steeper than
In general, along the perfect foresight path (which is
the saddle path.
the unique path that converges to the steady state and satisfies the laws
of motion and the initial conditions) a higher value of F is associated
with a higher value of a. Panel II in Figure 3 presents the combinations
of the value of assets and the real exchange rate which satisfy equation
(30). These are the combinations that are, consistent with equilibrium in
the nontraded goods market for which a rise in the value of assets must
be associated with a decline in's.

Consider a rise in the rate of monetary expansion. From equation
(33) it is seen that the higher value of i shifts the

= 0 schedule and

hence shifts the saddle path to the right, and results in new higher
In the new steady state the real
value of assets remains unchanged so as to ensure that F = 0 (equation
steady state holdings of foreign assets.

(31)). Since the equilibrium real exchange rate is uniquely related to
the value of assets, also the steady state real exchange rate remains unchanged and thus, production and consumption of both goods remain unchanged. Finally, since in the new steady state the new rate of monetary
expansion equals the rate of depreciation S, individuals will lower the
desired ratio of domestic to foreign currency holdings which, given the
M '
unchanged value of assets implies that F rises and

falls.

The dynamics of adjustment are shown in Figure 3 where it is assumed
and
that the initial steady state position was at point A with F0, ,
holdings, total as—'
as the initial equilibrium values, foreign currency
sets, and the real exchange rate, respectively. The schedules that are
drawn correspond to the new higher rate of monetary expansion. Upon the
rise in 3.1 the instantaneous equilibrium jumps to point B along the new
saddle path. Since F cannot change instantaneously, point B is the only
position of short—run equilibrium that is consistent with the perfect
foresight path that converges to the new steady state. At point B the

S

Si

-f
a1

a

41

F0

F1

Figure 3: Exchange Rate
Dynamics in the Currency Substitution Model

=0

F

=0

— 19

—

value of assets falls from a to a1. This decline in the value of assets
is necessary since the rise in the expected relative cost of holding domestic money induces a reduction in the desired ratio of domestic to for—
eign monies which, given the initial value of foreign currency holdings
F0, can be brought about only by a decline in M' and thus in a. Since
at the initial point in time the nominal stock of domestic money M is
MIS is brought about through a rise in the nomgiven, the decline in M'
inal exchange rate S (i.e., 'through a depreciation of the domestic currency). Finally, as indicated in panel II of Figure 3, equilibrium in
the nontraded goods marke\ implies that when the value of assets falls
to a1 the real exchange /ate rises to s1. Since the real exchange rate
is the ratio of the nominal exchange rate S to the price of nontraded
If the aggregate price level is a
follows that S > N•
goods N'
follows
that the exchange rate changes
weighted average of S and PN ,
by more than the overall price level. This is the overshooting phenomenon In the Calvo—Rodriguez model.

it

The transition toward the new steady state is characterized by the
path between B and C along which s declines (so that S < N' the value
of assets rises as does the value of foreign currency holdings. The model implies that during the transition period a higher depreciation of the
currency is associated with a trade balance surplus and an accumulation
of foreign assets. This characteristic is typical of the currency substitution model, reflecting the desired change in the composition of assets .1/

The key feature of the Calvo—Rodriguez model is the specification of
the portfolio of assets where it Is assumed that the two alternative assets are domestic and foreign currencies. Since the foreign currency
price of traded goods is assumed to be given, the accumulation of foreign
currency is equivalent to an accumulation of claims on stocks of traded
goods. With this perspective the currency substitution model can be specified in terms of choice and substitution between domestic money and
It Is intuitively clear therefore that following the rise
traded goods.
in the rate of monetary expansion asset holders wish to hedge against the
expected inflation by shifting the composition of portfolios toward the
inflation hedge (traded goods), a shift which results, in the short run,
in a rise in s——the relative price of traded goods.
This interpretation of the currency substitution model suggests that
when the inflation hedges are stocks of nontraded goods instead of traded
goods, the rise in the rate of monetary expansion might result in an un—
dershooting of the exchange rate as the relative price of nontraded goods
rises. We turn now to the formal analysis of this possibility.

1/ This characteristic may not be necessary in a model with intertenr
poral utility maximization; see Liviatan (1981).

— 20-

111.2. Nontraded Goods as the Inflation Hedge
The structure of the model in which nontraded goods are used as the
inflation hedge is very similar to the one described in section 111.1.
In what follows we introduce the minimal modifications.

111.2.1 The Asset Market
In order to sharpen the contrast with the currency substitution model we assume that the portfolios of assets are composed only of domestic
money and of stocks of nontraded goods which are denoted by N. The value
of assets in terms of foreign exchange is
(34)

a = M

'

+ N/s

where N/s = PNN/S. As before, the desired ratio of money to inventories
of goods is assumed to depend on the difference between their rates of
return, i.e., on the expected percentage change in the price of nontraded
goods. Assuming that expectations are always realized the desired portfolio composition depends on N' and analogously to equation (25') the
portfolio-balance relationship can be written as
(35)

P=g(9—); g'<O.
111.2.2 The Goods Market

The specification of production
same as in the previous section and
(27). In the present case, however,
ventories of nontraded goods which
over consumption of these goods.

(36)

—

C,,(s,a)

and consumption is assumed to be the
is summarized by equations (26) and
we allow for an accumulation of inmust equal the excess of production

N

where N denotes the rate of accumulation of nontraded goods.
Since in this case we do not allow for capital mobility, equilibrium
in the market for traded goods requires that

(37)

Q.(s) — C.1.(s,a)

0

Equation (37) implies that there is a specific relationship between the
real exchange rate and the value of assets which guarantees trade balance

S

v(a)

-a1

4t

N1

When Portfolios Contain Money and Non-Traded Goods

Figure 4: Exchange Rate Dynamics

N

â=0

0

0

F'.)

— 21

—

equilibrium.

A rise in the value of assets raises the demand for traded
goods and therefore, to eliminate the excess demand, it must be accompanied by a rise in the real exchange rate s. This relationship which must
be satisfied at all times can be written as

v(a);

=

(38)

v' < 0.

For later use we note that
=

(38!)

where 'y denotes the elasticity of the real exchange rate with respect to
the value of assets. Substituting equation (38) into (36) yields a rela-

tionship between the rate of accumulation of nontraded goods and the
value of assets:

(39)

h(a);

N =

h'

(—fl

— —)v'

—

<

0.

111.2.3 Dynamics

The rate of change in the value of assets can be written, using
equation (34),as
(40)

a = M'M' + (N/s) (N/s)

Noting that

N (M/S)(S/PN)

it follows that
=

(41)

= p — '— , and

-g

using equation (35) yields

(v(a)a - 1) -

where (v(a)a/N) — 1 was substituted for M'/(N/s) by using equations (34)
and (38) and where yâ was substituted for
by using equation (38').
Using equations (39) and (41) in (40) yields
(42)

=

{(a ) {p - (V(
-

l)} +

h(a)

Equations (39) and (42) characterize the dynamics of the system. In
the steady state N = a = 0, the value of assets is i0, the holdings of non—
traded goods are N0 , and the rate of monetary expansion P equals g(.)——the

rate of change of the price of nontraded goods N• Equilibrium in the
is associated with a specific steady
balance of trade implies that
Since in the steady state the percentage
state real exchange rate
change in the nominal price of nontraded goods equals the rate of monetary
expansion and since the real exchange rate is given at , the percentage
change in the nominal exchange rate S must also equal the rate of monetary
expansion.

— 22

The dynamics of the system are described in Figure 4.

tn

panel

I

the N = 0 and the a = 0 schedules show combinations of a and N which satisfy equations (39) and (42), respectively. The slope of the a = 0 sche-

dule is drawn on the assumption that around the steady state 3a/a < 0.
As in section 111.1 the system exhibits a saddle—path stabililty and the
motion of the variables is described by the arrows which reflect the signs
of the partial derivatives of (39) and (42) around the steady state. When
> 0the a = 0 schedule is positively sloped and is steeper than the
saddle path. As before, none of the qualitative conclusions are altered
in that case. The key difference between the analysis in Figure 4 and
that in Figure 3 lies in panel II which shows the equilibrium relationship
between the real exchange rate and the value of assets. In contrast with
the currency substitution model, here s and a must be positively related
so as to ensure trade balance equilibrium (equation (37)).
A rise in the rate of monetary expansion results (from equation (42))
= 0 schedule and hence of the saddle path.
in a rightward shift of the
The new steady state is associated with larger holdings of nontraded goods
whose attractiveness has risen with the accelerated inflation. Suppose
that the initial equilibrium is described in Figure 4 by point A and that
the schedules drawn correspond to the new higher rate of monetary expansion. Since at the initial point in time the stocks of nontraded goods
are given at N, the instantaneous equilibrium is reached at point B with
a lower value of assets a. The reduced value of assets lowers the demand
for traded goods and therefore, to restore trade balance equilibrium, the
real exchange rate must fall to s1 as indicated in panel II.

The higher expected rate of inflation lowers the desired ratio of
At the initial moment

N7 MIN.

money to inventories of nontraded goods M' =

the quantities of M and N are given, and the desired ratio is attained
.
therefore through a rise in
Since, however, the value of assets declined and since N/s rose, it follows that the nominal exchange rate S
must have risen (I.e., the domestic currency must have depreciated) so as
to yield a decline in M = MIS. The rise in S must be sufficiently large
so as to more than offset the effect of the rise in N/s on the value of
assets. 1hile both the nominal exchange rate S and the price of nontraded
goods N jump up upon the rise in the rate of monetary expansion, the fact
> S. Thus, in
that the real exchange rate falls to
implies that
this model the exchange rate undershoots the price level.
The transition toward the steady state is described by the path from
B to C along which the value of assets and the holdings of nontraded goods
increase and the real exchange rate rises toward its initial level. Since
along the path s rises, the nominal exchange rate must rise faster than
the price of nontraded goods.

The fact that the rise in the rate of monetary expansion results in
an instantaneous rise in the price level which exceeds the rise in the depreciation of the currency is consistent with the general principles that
were outlined at the end of the discussion of the currency substitution

— 23

model. In this class of the portfolio—balance model the key factor determining whether following a monetary disturbance the exchange rate overshoots or undershoots the domestic price level is the specification of the
inflation hedge. When the domestic rate of inflation accelerates asset
holders substitute away from domestic money into alternative assets. To
the extent that the alternative assets are traded goods, their relative
price will rise and the nominal exchange rate will overshoot the domestic
price level. To the extent that the alternative assets are domestic non
traded goods, their relative price will rise and the exchange rate will
undershoot the domestic price.
In this section we analyzed the two polar cases in which the substitutes for domestic money were either foreign currency (or equivalently
traded goods) or stocks of domestic nontraded goods. A more general model
would allow for portfolios which consist of domestic and foreign monies as
well as of domestic goods. The general principles, however, are likely to
be the same. Whether exchange rates overshoot or undershoot the domestic
price level will depend on the relative degree of substitution among domThe relative degrees of
estic money, traded goods, and nontraded goods.
substitution will reflect the degree of capital mobility and the qualities of the various assets as hedges against inflation.

IV. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we analyzed the determinants of the evolution of exchange rates within the context of alternative models of exchange rate
dynamics. We have examined the overshooting hypothesis in models which
emphasize differential speeds of adjustment in asset and goods markets as
well as in models which emphasize portfolio balance considerations. Rather
than repeating the various results we wish to highlight the main analytical conclusions. We have seen that exchange rate overshooting is not an
intrinsic characteristic of the foreign exchange market and that it depends on a set of specific assumptions. We have shown that the overshooting is not a characteristic of the assumption of perfect foresight
nor does it depend in general on the assumption that goods and asset
markets clear at different speeds. As long as the speeds of adjustment
in the various markets are less than infinite (which is obviously the
case), the key factor determining the short run effects of a monetary e'—
pansion is the degree of capital mobility. When capital is highly mobile, the exchange rate overshoots its long—run value and when capital is
relatively immobile the exchange rate undershoots its long—run value.
Within the context of the portfolio—balance model we have shown that
the effects of a monetary expansion on the dynamics of exchange rates and

in particular on whether exchange rates overshoot or undershoot their
equilibrium path depend critically on the specification of asset choice,
on the degree of substitution among assets, and on the quality of the
various assets in being an inflation hedge.

— 24 —

REFERENCE S

Bilson, John F. 0. , "The 'Vicious Circle' Hypothesis," IMF Staff Papers,
26 (March 1979): 1—37.

Boyer, Russel S. and Robert J. Hodrick, "Perfect Foresight, Financial Policies, and Exchange Rate Dynamics," unpublished manuscript, Carnegie—
Mellon University, 1980.
Branson, William H.
"Exchange Rate Dynamics and Monetary Policy," in A.
Lindbeck (ed.), Inflation and Employment in Open Economies, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1979.

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carlos A. Rodriguez, "A Model of Exchange Rate
Determination Under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations,"
Journal of Political Economy, 85, No. 3 (June 1977): 617—26.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
Political Economy, 84. No. 6 (December 1976): 1161—76.

_____________

"Monetary Policy Under Exchange Rate Flexibility,' in

Managed Exchange—Rate Flexibility: The Recent Experience, Federal
Bank of Boston Conference Series, No. 20, 1978.

and Stanley Fischer, "Exchange Rates and the Current
Account," American Economic Review, 70, No. 5 (December 1980), forthcoming.
Driskill, Robert, "Exchange Rate Dynamics, Asset—Market Equilibrium and
Stock/Flow Interactions," unpublished manuscript, Ohio State University, 1978.

Ethier, Wilfred, "Expectations and the Asset—Market Approach to the Exchange Rate," Journal of Monetary Economics, 5, No. 2 (April 1979):
259—82.

Flood, Robert P., "An Example of Exchange Rate Overshooting," Southern
Economic Journal, 46 (July 1979): 168—78.
Frenkel, Jacob A. (l981a), "Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices and the Role
of 'News': Lessons from the l970's," Journal of Political Economy,
89, No. 4 (August 1981): 665—705.
_________________ (l981b), "The Collapse of Purchasing Power Parities
During the 197Os," European Economic Review, 16, No. 1 (May 1981):
145—65.

_________________ and Michael L. Mussa, "The Efficiency of Foreign Exchange Markets and Measures of Turbulence," American Economic Review,
70, No. 2 (May 1980): 374—81.

— 25

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Kenneth W. Clements, "Exchange Rates in the 1920s:
A Monetary Approach" in M.J. Flanders and A. Razin (eds.),
ment in an Inflationary World, New York: Academic Press, 1981, pp.
283—318.

Girton, Lance and Don Roper, "Theory and Implications of Currency Substitution," Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 13, No. 1 (February

1981): 12—30.

Gray, M.R. and S.J. Turnovsky, 'The Stability of Exchange Rate Dynamics
Under Perfect Myopic Foresight," International Economic Review, 20,
No.

3 (October 1979): 643—60.

Henderson, Dale W. , "The Dynamic Effects of Exchange Market Intervention
Policy: Two extreme Views and a Synthesis," International Finance
Discussion Paper No. 142, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, Washington, D.C. , June 1979.
Kimbrough, Kent P. , "Real Aspects of the Monetary Approach to the Exchange
Rate," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1980.

Pentti J.K. , "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the
Short Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach," Scandinavian

Kouri,

Journal

of Economics, 78, No. 2 (May 1976): 280—304.

Levich, Richard M. , "Overshooting in the Foreign Exchange Market," Group
of Thirty, New York, N.Y. , Occasional Papers, No. 5, 1981.
Liviatan, Nissan, "Anti—Inflationary Monetary Policy and the Capital Import Tax," unpublished manuscript, The Hebrew University, 1979.

______________

"Monetary Expansion and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics,"

Journal of Political Economy, 89, No. 6 (December 1981):

1218—27.

McKinnon, Ronald I., "Floating Foreign Exchange Rates 1973—74: The Emperor's New Clothes," in K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer (eds.), Ensti—

tutional

Arrangements and the Inflation Problem, vol. 3 of the Carnegie—Rochester Conference series on Public Policy, a supplementary
series to the Journal of Monetary Economics, 1976, 79—114.

Mussa, Michael L. , A Study in Macroeconomics, New York: North—Holland,
1976.

"Sticky Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a Rational
Expectations Model of the Inflationary Process," Center for Mathematical Studies in Business and Economics, University of Chicago, report No. 7844, June 1978.

___________

"Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates
and Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," vol. 11 of the Carnegie Rochester Conference series on Public Policy, a supplementary
series to the Journal of Monetary Economics, 1979, 957.

_________

26 —

____________

"The Role of the Current Account in Exchange Rate Dyna-

mics," unpublished manuscript,

____

_____ (1982),

University

of Chicago, 1980.

"A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of

Political Economy, 90, No. 1 (February 1982): forthcoming.
Niehans, JUrg, "Exchange Rate Dynamics with Stock/Flow Interaction," Journal of Political Economy, 85, 6 (December 1977): 1245—57.

'The Role of Trade Flows in Exchange Rate Determination: A Rational Expectations Approach," Journal of Political

Rodriguez, Carlos A. ,

Economy 88, No. 6 (December 1980): 1148—58.

"Flexible Exchange Rates, Capital Flows and Current
Account Adjustnnt," unpublished manuscript, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. , 1980.

Shafer, Jeffrey R. ,

Wilson, Charles A., "Anticipated Shocks and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
nal of Political Economy 87, No. 3 (June 1979): 639—47.

