                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            TRANSITORY TERMS-OF-TRADE SHOCKS AND THE
                  CURRENT ACCOUNT: THE CASE OF
                    CONSTANT TIME PREFERENCE



                        Maurice Obstfeld



                      Working Paper No. 834




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          January 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #834
                                                January 1982



Transitory Terms—of—Trade Shocks and the Current Account: The Case of
                     Constant Time Preference


                           Abstract


The paper uses an intertemporal perfect—foresight optimizing model to

analyze the effect of transitory terms—of—trade shocks on a small open

economy's current—account and utility time profiles. An adverse

terms—of—trade shift known to be temporary induces the economy to run

down its stock of external assets in the period before the terms of

trade revert to their initial level. Subsequently, the assets consumed

during this period are reaccumulated. The current—account response is

due only in part to a desire to smooth out the future consumption

stream. In additi on, households know that the real value of any debt

incurred while the terms of trade are unfavorable will be reduced sharply

when the terms of trade improve. This opportunity for intertemporal

price speculation causes the time path of instantaneous utility to be

discontinuous•




                                         Maurice Obstfeld
                                         Department of Economics
                                         M.I.T.
                                         50 Memorial Drive
                                         Cambridge, MA 02139
                                          (January 1 - June 1, 1982)
      TRANSITORY TERNS-OF-TRADE SHOCKS AND THE CURRENT ACCOUNT: THE CASE OF

                                CONSTANT TIME PREFERENCE

                                           by
                                Maurice   Obstfeld*


Introduction

         This paper employs a simple intertemporal optimization model to

study the effects of transitory fluctuations in a small country's terms

of trade. The paper's analysis centers on the current—account and

utility paths induced by temporary terms—of—trade movements. An infinite

planning horizon is postulated so that the long—run dynamic consequences

of price disturbances may be pursued.

         The results of transitory and anticipated terms—of—trade shocks

have been analyzed in two—period models by Marion     (1981),   Sachs   (1981),
and   Svensson   and Razin (l981)..1 As is illustrated below, however,

extension of the analysis to an infinite—horizon setting leads to a

richer description of the induced current—account paths. Obstfeld

(1982) and Svensson and RAzin (1981) have analyzed the effects of

permanent   unanticipated terms—of—trade changes using infinite horizon
models that emphasize the role of subjective time preference in individual
saving decisions. In contrast, the model explored below makes the
simplifying   assumption that the representative household's subjective

time—preference rate is constant.L'

         In the paper's model, a transitory worsening of the terms

of   trade causes a small open economy to run a current deficit. The
current account moves into surplus when the terms of trade revert to
their initial level, and the economy returns, in the long run, to its
                                  —2—

original level of external indebtedness. In the face of a permanent un—

anticipated terms—of—trade deterioration, however, agents cut their con-

sumption by the full amount of the fall in their real income. No current

:imbalance ensues.

           Although the current deficit induced by a transitory terms—of—

trade setback is in part due to households' attempts to smooth their

utility streams, the induced time profile of utility is not continuous.

Because agents anticipate a decline in the real value of any external debt

incurred while the terms of trade are poor, there is an additional incentive

to shift consumption toward that period. The incentive disappears when the

expected terms—of—trade improvement occurs, and so instantaneous utility

falls discontinuously at that moment.

           The paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the

preferences and intertemporal substitution possibilities that form the

building blocks of the model. Section II derives the conditions necessary

for individual optimality ——   the model's demand side. In section III we
define the model's perfect—foresight equilibrium. Section IV studies

the economy's dynamic response to a temporary adverse terms—of—trade shift,

and section V contains a detailed analysis of the utility path arising

from this disturbance. Finally, section VI summarizes and concludes.
                                       —3—

I. The Model

          The analysis concerns a small open economy consisting of

identical, immortal households. Each of these planning units maximizes a

welfare functional of the form
                00

  v   =     fu(x,m)exp(—5t)dt.                         (1)
            0




The instantaneous utility function u(,) appearing in (1) is

defined over the household's consumption of a normal exportable good (x)

and a normal importable good (m). It is assumed that the utility

function is strictly concave in its two arguments.21         Is the

representative household's constant (positive) rate of time preference.

       Each household is en&owed with a flow of y units of the perishable

export good per unit time. The only available asset is an

internationally—traded bond which carries a fixed face value equal to one

unit of the importable good and entitles its owner to receive

units of the importable per unit time. The time path of the interest

rate r will be determined within the model, as explained below. If

bt denotes the number of bonds owned by a family at time t, saving

(measured in terms of imports) is governed by the differential

         4/
equat ion—

           =         +
                         r bt —   (x/p)   —
                                              inn.     (2)

In (2), Pt S the         price of imports in terms of exports at time t, the

terms of trade. The representative household's bond stock at time t =          0,
b0, is a predetermined variable given by the past history of asset
                                         —4—
accumulation. Any feasible consumption path must obey the intertemporal

budget constraint


  f [(x/p)+ mt] exp[-( I rds)] dt <b0 + (y/p)exp[(1 r5ds)] dt.                     (3)



Of course, bt may assume negative values.

       The   time path of the terms of   trade is parameterically given to the

small   country. In contrast, it is assumed that the interest rate at      which

the country can borrow in the world capital market Is an increasing
function     of its aggregate net indebtedness. If the number of households

is taken to be 1 for convenience, the equilibrium interest rate may be

written as

             =                                                               (4)
                 r(bt),
where r'(b) < 0.

        Equation (4) embodies a departure from the customary assumption of a

frictionless world capital market. The formulation reflects the difficulty

many    small countries   encounter in obtaining foreign financing for external

deficits.-' Stability will require that interest income grow as net bond

holdings grow. Accordingly, we assume that        —b   r'(b )Ir < 1 for all b.

II. Individual Optimality

        The optimal plan of a household facing given time paths of the interest

rate rt and terms of trade Pt may be characterized by the maximum

To apply that tool, we introduce the costate variable X, which may be

interpreted as the shadow price of bonds, in utility terms, at time t.

According to the maximum principle, there is associated with an optimal

consumption path {.x, m} a costate variable path A such

that: (I) the Hamiltonian
                                                  —5—


          {u(xt,mt) + [(y/p) + r1;b_ (x1;/p1;)— m1;]}exp(—5t) is maximized with
      =
H1;

                                                            =           and (ii) X1; evolves according to
respect to x and ni at x= x                                         ;

the intertemporal arbitrage condition

          A


              t =—r
                                                                                    (5)


which         states that the subjective time—preference rate S must at each instant
equal the physical return on bonds, r, plus the rate of "capital gain."
          The necessary conditions for maximization of Ht (at an interior maximum)
are: —
      7/
                                           = 0
          u(x1;, mt) — At/Pt                                                        (6)



          u(xt,mt)
                          —
                              A1
                                       0                                            (7)

Together, (6) and (7) imply the familiar condition um(xt,mt)/ux(xt,mt) = Pt'
which allows us to write consumption of the importable as xn = p (x1;,p).

Because both commodities are normal, xp =                               [(uxxrn
                                                                            u       -   u u )/(  - u u )]
                                                                                         IUXX mxm xmm
> 0 and p = [u 2/(u U - u
              x p  xinm mxin                     u )]   <0.
          From (6), (7), and the definition of the function                                       an optimal

consumption program has the form

          x = x(A1;,                                                                (8)

               =   p[x                                                              (9)
                         (As,              p] m(A, p1;),
where P1
                                u
                                   x
                                                        uu
                                                         xmm—uu
                                                             mcu
               =
                                                   =                                       < 0,
                    u (u + u p )                        U       u          (u )
                     m xx xin x                         m xx mm              xiii



                         u2+uu
                          x
                                p
                             mxxnp
                                                            -u2u
                                                              x mm
                                                                                          >0,
                     u(u
                      m xx+uxmx
                             p)                         u[u u —(u xm
                                                         m xxmm    )2)
                                            -6-
                        uu
                         mxx-uu
                              xxm
     =          =   _____________________
mA                                                     <
                    u[uXXl
                     Dl
                        u —(u XIfl
                               )2]

                                                                •
                                   2
Dl   = u,x+         =          UxUxm
                                                           ><
                          u    u. - (u )
                           Dl xxmm    xm
                                              2
                                               ]
Given an initial value A0 of the costate variable, A is given, according

to (5), by A = X0e,cp[                 (6—r5)ds], while bt may be written

                               +                   —
         bt =   b0exp(fr5ds)                               [xGk5,p5)/p5]— m(A,p)}exp(TdT)]ds.

Thus, given b 0 , an initial choice of A determines the subsequent paths
                                                           o

of   consumption and bond holdings.

         Although   an optimal lifetime program must be determined in              the foregoing

manner,     not every choice of A results in an optimal plan. Conditions (5),
(8), and (9), while necessary for optlmality, are not, in general, sufficient.
We return to this point in the next section.
III. Perfect—Foresight Equilibrium
         The previous section described how the household must plan its con—
sumption given an arbitrary path {r} of the real interest rate. By (4),

however, r is affected by household choices. To close the model, we

assume that the path lr} is a perfect—foresight equilibrium path. This

means that when households formulate their preferred consumption plan in

 thebelief that r will prevail at date t, the implied optimal path of
bond holdings, {b} satisfies the relation r = r(b), for all

         The paths of         and bt satisfying both the necessary conditions for

 individual optimality and the perfect—foresight requiruent are described

 by the differential equations

         X Xt16 -         r(b)],                                            (10)

         = (y/p)+ r(bt)bt_[X(Xt,Pt)/pt]_m(At,pt).                           (11)
                                        —7—

Equations (10) and (11) are derived from (2) and (5) by substituting (4),

(8), and (9). Equation (10) describes the necessary arbitrage relation-

ship linking the equilibrium real interest rate, the time preference rate,

and the rate of shadow capital gain. Equation (11) describes the equili-

brium current—account balance. The sole forcing variable in (11) is the

contemporaneous terms of tradep. This fact will prove useful below.

     The temporary assumption that Pt is expected to be constant at p at all

dates leads to a useful diagrammatic representation of the dynamic system

described by (10) and (11). Figure 1 displays this representation. The

  = 0 locus is vertical at the unique level of external assets b

bringing the interest rate into equality with the subjective discount rate

5. To the right of the X=0 locus, r(b) <      = r()   by (4), and X is in-

creasing; to theleft of this locus, X is decreasing. Current—account

balance obtains along the b=0 locus. Its slope is negative under the

earlier stability assumption, and is given by


     dX       =   rt(br'(b)/r)   + 1]
     db
                   (x)/)   + mA —
To the right of the external—balance locus, the current account is in

surplus, while to its left, the current account is in deficit.

     The phase portrait indicates that the system is saddlepoint—stable,

with a unique path SS converging to its stationary position

Moreover, for any initial bond stock b0, the saddlepath SS describes the

unique initial costate value A0 associated with an equilibrium path.

Thus, when no future changes in the terms of trade are expected, the

equilibrium of the economy will always be on the saddlepath.
0




               1)




    Figure 1
                                       —8—

              We can demonstrate the existence and uniqueness of perfect—

foresight equilibrium as follows. Let b0 be the predetermined

initial bond stock and consider the convergent trajectory originating at

 the costate value            To show that the latter is an equilibrium path

(thereby establishing existence), we must show that when the household

expects the associated interest—rate path, the optimal path of bond

holdings generates those interest rates. However, this follows from the

transversality condition


        urn
        t_+       Xbexp(_t)=0,
which   is sufficient for individual optimality (see Arrow and Kurz (1970),

p. 49).!!! To show uniqueness, we argue that no other choice of

produces an equilibrium path. Paths originating below SS are infeasible,

for they lead to unbounded external indebtedness and therefore violate

the budget constraint (3). Because x, mA <0, paths originating above SS

lead to ever—falling consumption coupled with ever—rising income. These

"over—accumulation" paths are clearly nonoptimal from the household's

point of view, and, like the infeasible paths, may be ruled out as

possible equilibria.

              It is now assumed that along the economy's equilibrium path,

                         >
                             r(b)b.                           (12)

Inequality (12) ensures that the economy always remains a net importer of

the importable good.
                                      —9—

IV. Transitory Terms—of—Trade Shocks

            Before turning to the analysis of temporary terms—of—trade movements,

it is convenient to use the previous section's diagrammatic apparatus to

analyze a permanent and unanticipated increase in the relative price of

imports from p to p'. The economy is assumed to be initially at the

long—run equilibrium (, 5).
            The long—run bond level remains atb in the face of this shock, for

long—run equilibrium requires that       =    r().     However, because

                  [m—r(b)b] —
       dA     —                 xAu
                                                       (13)

is positive by (12), the long—run shadow price of external assets, A, rises to

A' as shown in Figure 2. Thus, while the A=O locus is unaltered, the external—

balance locus shifts to b' = 0.       Because the economy's bond holdings are

already at their new stationary level, A jumps on impact to X' and no current—

account disequilibrium ensues. Under the assumption that the subjective

time—preference rate is constant, a permanent fall in real income elicits

an equal cut in spending)-'

            Consider now the consequences of a transitory worsening in the terms

of   trade (from p   to p'), one which agents expect to be reversed at time T in

the   future.--' The current—account path occasioned by this disturbance can
be visualized     with the aid of Figure 2.

            Equations (10) and (11) imply that between times t = 0 and t =    T,
the economy must be on a path of the system associated with terms of trade p'.

They also imply that after time T, the economy must be on a path of the

system associated with terms of trade j.       Indeed, because the terms of
                                      — 10 —


trade    are expected to remain at   after time T and the household's plan

must be optimal from time T onward (by Bellman's principle), the economy

must be on the convergent path SS for t > T.     This follows from the previous

section's result that SS defines the unique equilibrium for the economy when

the terms of trade are expected to remain at p forever.

          Since the level b of the stock of external assets is predetermined

at t =    0, one additional initial condition is needed to identify the
economy's path. The required condition comes from observing that the

shadow price       cannot take a discrete jump at time T, but must instead

follow a continuous path. This type of asset—price continuity condition

Is familiar from the monetary rational—expectations literature (see Calvo

1977) and is applicable in the present setting as well. A discrete anticipated

jump in       would violate the intertemporal arbitrage condition

                    and is therefore inadmissible along a perfect—foresight

equilibrium path.---1

          The implied path of the economy is depicted in Figure 2. When the

terms of trade initially deteriorate to p', the economy moves to      and the

current account swings into deficit. Households continue to borrow until

time T, when the terms of trade return to p. At ET, the current account goes

into surplus as the economy begins to repay the debt incurred during the

temporary fall in real income. Asymptotically, the initial equilibrium

(,   5) is   regained.

          Although a permanent adverse terms—of—trade shift evokes no current—

account response, an adverse shift known to be temporary induces the house-

hold to rearrange its utility stream. By running down external assets
Figure 2
                                         — 11 —



while    times are bad and reaccumulating these assets after the terms of trade

have improved, the household softens the immediate iinpact of the shock

at the cost of reducing consumption after T below the level that would have

been feasible if no current deficit had been run. In this sense, the house-

hold smooths its consumption path.

           A transitory terms—of—trade shift from p to p' may be viewed alter-

natively as a permanent shift to '        together     with an anticipated future

shift to j.      In    response to a permanent terms—of—trade deterioration, the

economy would, as we have seen, jump to (b', X'). But the anticipation of

a    relative—price improvnent induces the economy to raise its expenditure
beyond its income immediately and thus run a deficit until the expected
event occurs at time T.
           The longer the duration of the terms—of—trade shock, the closer
it is to being permanent. Thus, as T --°°,        E0   moves monotonically upward
toward the point (s', X').
V.    The Time Profile of Utility

          A detailed discussion of the time path of instantaneousutility

throws   additional light on the equilibrium response to a transitory terms—
of—trade movement. In particular, we learn that            individual optimality

involves   an element of intertemporal price speculation which causes a
discontinuity in the time profile of utility.
          From   (8)   and (9), time—t utility is given by
          u = u[x(X,p), nl(Xt, t1                                  (14)


Expression (14) may be used in conjunction with Figure 2 to determine the

rate of change of utility along the economy's equilibrium path. Between

t0 and t=T, A1<O, and because XA m <0 and Pt is constant at ' until
                                      — 12 —



time T, u must be rising. For the same reason u grows forever after time
t=T. Since the economy regains its pre—disturbance utility level u in

the long run, u <u for t > T.

         What happens to utility at time T? The terms of trade return to p

from p", but the costate does not jump. Because, by (14),


                        =   u x + u in = —(uX)2 xX >   0,         (15)
         dp                 Xp     inp
               AAT
utility falls abruptly when the terms of trade improve at time T. There is

therefore a discontinuity in the instantaneous utility path at that point.

Figure 3 displays one possible utility time path.

       This discontinuity in the utility time profile requires comment. If

relative prices were unalterably fixed but domestic output y were to fall

temporarily, the economy's current—account path would be qualitacively similar

to the one shown in Figure 2. But with constant terms of trade, the continuity

of    would imply a continuous path for u as well: Utility would therefore

fall initially, and then rise continuously toward its asymptotic level. In

the present context of price variability, however, continuity of u(x,m)

 (cf.equation (7)) does not imply continuity of u.

         As was suggested in section IV, the economy's reaction to a temporary

terms—of—trade deterioration arises in part from a desire to smooth the

feasible utility stream. But because a relative price change is anticipated,

an element    of   intertemporal price speculation enters the household's calcula-

tions as well. This explains the discontinuity in the utility profile. The

fall in permanent income caused by the temporary price setback induces

households to cut their absorption. But they know, in addition, that the

 real value of any debt they incur between t=0 and tT will decline abruptly

when '    falls    to        This expectation induces them to increase their consumption
    U
        t


U




                           t
            0       T




                Figure 3
                                      — 13 —




while   the terms of trade are unfavorable and reduce consumption sharply the

moment the anticipated capital gains have been realized.




VI. Conclusion

          This paper has   studied   the effects of transitory terms—of—trade

fluctuations on a small open economy. Using a simple intertemporal optimizing

model of individual behavior, the paper showed that a temporary worsening

in the terms—of--trade occasions a current—account deficit which lasts until

the terms of trade return to their initial level. Subsequently, the economy

travels back to its original position.

        While this current—account path is explicable in part by households'

desire to smooth their utility streams, the economy's utility time profile

is in fact discontinuous. What lies behind this result is the anticipated

reduction in the real value of any foreign debt incurred while the terms of

trade are unfavorable.

         Two directions for further study are apparent. First, the assumption

of a constant subjective time—preference rate should be relaxed along lines

suggested by Obstfeld (1982) and Svensson and Razin (1981). Second, the

connections between the terms of trade and domestic profitability and

capital accumulation should be explored. Only by synthesizing the theories

of investment and saving in an open—economy setting can we obtain a complete

and convincing theory of the current account.
                                              — 14 —




     Notes
     * This paper was written while the author was a visitor in the International

       Finance Division of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

      Partial financial support from the National Science Foundation is

      acknowledged with thanks. This paper represents the views of its author

      and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of

      Governors of the Federal Reserve Systn or members of its staff.



1. Dornbusch and Krugman (1976) emphasize the distinction between permanent

      and transitory changes in an informal discussion of the current—account

      effects of relative—price shocks.



2. Dornbusch (1981) uses a similar model of the household to analyze the

      response to output and real interest rate fluctuations of a small open

      economy producing tradable and non—traded goods.



                                             c 0, and u 11 — (u )2> o.
3. The concavity condition is that u < 0 ' umm
                                   xx                  xx mm   an

      Normality of x implies that u u —        ii u < 0.
                                          x mm 'mxm           Normality of m implies

       that   Uu
              xxm
                    — U U > 0.
                       mxx           It is assumed in addition that the utility

       function obeys the regularity conditions:

       his    u(x,m)   =   , his u(x,m) = 0,
                              x+oo
                                                   him
                                                  inO    u(x,m)
                                                                  =   , him u(x,in)   = 0.



4.    While b is a continuous function of time, it need not be differentiable——

       the current—account balance bt can change sharply. At points where bt has

       no derivative, equation (2) below is interpreted as giving the right—hand

       derivative of bt.
                                   — 15 —



5.   Hamada (1969) uses a similar formulation in a model with domestic investment.

     It is plausible that the schedule r(b) will be relatively steep when

     b< 0 and relatively flat when b > 0. The technical convenience afforded

     by the assumption of a variable bond rate is that it ensures the

     existence of a stationary long—run equilibrium for the economy.



6. See Arrow and Kurz (1970).



7. Below, subscripts, with the exception of time subscripts (t, s, T), denote

     partial derivatives. Thus, u E u/x, etc.



8. The inequalities below follow from the assumptions of concavity and

     normality (cf. note 3, above).



9. Because households behave competitively, the interest rate r they per-

     ceive differs from the economy's true marginal borrowing cost. This

     type of distortion is familiar from the optimal tariff literature.



10. Here and below, overbars denote stationary—state values.



11. strictly speaking, the theorem cited here requires that b>0 for all

     t. However, b is certainly bounded below, for it must be the case

     that y +pr(bt)bt> 0 for all t if the intertemporal budget constraint (3)

     is to be satisfied at the household level. As shown in Obstfeld (1981),

     the transversality condition remains sufficient for optitnality when the

     state variable is bounded below.
                                    — 16 —




12. This result would not necessarily hold if the time—preference rate were

    endogenous. In the setup of Obstfeld (1982), where the time preference

    rate is an increasing function of current instantaneous utility, a

    permanent unanticipated fall in real income occasions a current—account

    surplus.



13. By assumption, the transitory terms—of—trade change is itself

    unanticipated.



14. Hall (1978) makes use of the stochastic discrete—time analogue of this

    condition to test the permanent income hypothesis in a one—good setting.

    The proposition he tests is that the marginal utility of consumption

   follows a random walk with trend. Abel and Blanchard (1980), in a

    closed—economy saving—investment model, also use the continuity condition

    invoked in the text. While the path      must be continuous, it need not

    be differentiable. The time derivative A. appearing in the interteruporal

    arbitrage relationship should be interpreted as the right—hand derivative

    of At.



15. Recall that bonds have a face value fixed in terms of the importable.

    Thus, an improvement in the home country's terms of trade lowers the

    value of a. bond when this is expressed in terms of a basket including

    both importables and exportables.
                                   — 17 —



References


Abel, Andrew B., and Blanchard, Olivier 3. "An Intertemporal Equilibrium
       Model of Saving and Investment." Mimeo, Department of Economics,

       Harvard University, 1980.

Arrow, Kenneth J., and Kurz, Mordecai. Public Investment, the Rate of

       Return, and Optimal Fiscal Policy. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins

       Press, 1970.

Calvo, Guillermo A. "The Stability of Models of Money and Perfect Foresight:

       A Note," Econometrica 45 (October 1977): 1737—9.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. "Real Interest Rates, Home Goods and Optimal External

         Borrowing." Mimeo, Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute

         of Technology, 1981.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Kruginan, Paul. "Flexible Exchange Rates in the Short

         Run," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 7 (1976): 537—75.

Hall, Robert E. "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income

         Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy 86

         (December 1978): 971—87.

Hamada, Koichi. "Optimal Capital Accumulation by an Economy Facing an

         International Capital Market," Journal of Political Economy 77

         (July/Angust 1969): 684—97.

Marion, Nancy P. "Anticipated and Unanticipated Oil Price Increases and the

        Current Account." Working Paper no. 759, National Bureau of Economic

        Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1981.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "Macroeconomic Policy, Exchange—Rate Dynamics, and Optimal

        Asset Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy 89 (December 1981):

         1142-61.
                                   — 18 —




Obstfeld,   Maurice. "Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is there a

       Laursen—Metzler Effect?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 97   (1982),
       in press.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in

       the 1970s," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 12 (1981): 201—68.

Svensson, Lars E. 0., and Razin, Assaf. "The Terms of Trade, Spending and

       the Current Account: The Harberger—Laursen—Metzler Effect." Seminar

       Paper no. 170, Institute for International Economic Studies, University

       of Stockholm, 1981.
