                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE NON-ADJUSTMENT OF NOMINAL INTEREST RATES:
                  A STUDY OF THE FISHER EFFECT



                       Lawrence H. Summers


                     Working Paper No. 836




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA. 02138

                         January 1982




This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on Inflation and
Financial Markets, Cambridge, Massachusetts, May 15—16, 1981. It
was also presented at the Arthur Okun Memorial Conference at
Columbia University on September 25, 1981. I am indebted to George
Fenn and Robert Barsky for extremely capable research assistance
and many useful discussions. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #836
                                                        January 1982



                       The Non—Adjustment of Nominal Interest Rates:
                               A Study of the Fisher Effect



                                        ABSTRACT



        This paper critically re—examines theory and evidence on the relation-

ship between interest rates and inflation. It concludes that there is no

evidence that interest rates respond to inflation in the way that classical

or Keynesian theories suggest. For the period 1860—1940, it does not appear

that inflationary expectations had any significant impact on rates of

inflation in the short or long run. During the post—war period interest

rates do appear to be affected by inflation. However, the effect is much

smaller than any theory which recognizes tax effects would predict. Further-

more,    all the power in the inflation interest rate relationship comes
from the 1965—1971 period. Within the 1950's or 1970's, the relationship
is both statistically and substantively insignificant.
        Various   explanations for the failure of the theoretically predicted

relationship to hold are considered. The relationship between inflation

and interest rates remains weak at the even low frequencies. This is taken

as evidence that cyclical factors or errors in measuring inflation expec-

tations cannot account for the failure of the results to bear out Fisher's

theoretical prediction. Rather, comparison of real interest rates and stock

market yields suggests that Fisher was correct in pointing to money illusion

as the cause of the imperfect adjustment of interest rates to expected

inflation.
                                            Lawrence H. Summers
                                            Assistant Professor, Economics
                                            Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                            (amhridge, NA 02139

                                            NBER   (617)   868—3909
                                NBER CONFERENCE

                    Papers Available from the Conference on

                        INFLATION AND FINANCIAL MARKETS

                           Cambridge, Massachusetts

                               May 15 & 16, 1981


    Paper
    Number

    CP 119      "Effects of Nominal Contracting on Stock Returns," by Kenneth
                R. French, Richard S. Ruback and G. William Schwert

    CP 120      "Welfare Implications of Interest Rates, Inflation, and
                Unemployment from Common Stock Returns," by Mark L. Gertler
                and Earl L. Grinols

    CP 121      "Interest Rates, Expected Inflation, and Supply Shocks or Why
                Real Interest Rates were So Low in the 1970s," by James
                A. Wilcox

    CP 122      "Empirical Comparisons of Divisia and Simple Sum Monetary
                Aggregates," by William A. Barnett, Paul A. Spindt and Edward
                K. Offenbacher

    CP 123      "Real and Nominal Factors in the Cyclical Behavior of Interest
                Rates, Output, and Money," by Kenneth J. Singleton

    WP 588      "Inflation, Taxation and Corporate Behavior," by Roger H. Gordon

    WI' 760     "Anticipated Money, Inflation Uncertainty and Real Economic
                Activity," by John H. Makin

    WP 836      "The Non—Adjustment of Nominal Interest Rates: A Study of the
                Fisher Effect," by Lawrence Summers




Copies of these papers may be obtained by sending $1 .50 per copy to Conference
Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138. Please make
checks payable to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Advance payment is
required on orders totaling less than $10.00
                              CONFERENCE

                                  ON

                    INFLATION AND FINANCIAL MARKETS

                             HOTEL SONESTA

                    CAMBRIDGE, MAY 15 and 16, 1981


                          List of Participants


Andrew Abel                            Harvard University and NBER
Yakov Amihud                           New York University
David Backus                           Queen's University
William   Barnett                      Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System
Douglas Bendt                          Chase Manhattan Bank
Fischer Black                          Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                       and NBER
Olivier Blanchard                      Harvard University and NBER
Alan S. Blinder                        Princeton University and NBER
Zvi Bodie                              Boston University and NBER
Clive Bull                             New York University
John Burbidge                          McMast er University
Thomas Cargill                         University of Nevada, Reno
Jacob Cohen                            University of Pittsburg
Albert DePrince,    Jr.                Marine Midland Bank
Pierre Duguay                          Bank of Canada
Liam Ebrill                            Cornell University
Martin Feldstein                       Harvard  University and NBER
Stanley Fischer                        Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                       and NBER
Kenneth French                         University of Rochester
Benjamin Friedman                      Harvard University and NBER
Joanna Frodin                          Wellesley College
Robert J. Gordon                       Northwest em Univ ersity and NBER
Roger Gordon                           Bell Laboratories and NBER
Orlin Grabbe                           Harvard University
Earl Grinols                           Cornell University
William Haraf                          Brown University
Jon Harkness                           Queen's University
David Hartman                          Harvard  University and NBER
Jerry Hausman                          Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                       and NBER
Patric H. Hendershott                  Purdue University and NEER
Alex Kane                              Boston University
Edward Kane                            Ohio State University and NBER
Laurence Kantor                        Lehigh University
Levis Kochin                           University of Washington
Stanley Kon                            New York University
                         —2—




Herman Liebling                Lafayette College
John Li ntner                  Harvard University
Robert Litternian              Massachusetts Institute of Technolo
                               and NBER
Raymond Lombra                 Pennsylvania State University
John Makin                     University of Washington and NBER
Charles Makin                  Tufts University
Joyce Manchester               Harvard University
Bennett McCallum               University of Virginia and BER
Lawrence McFaddin              NBER
Charles E. McLure, Jr.         NBER
Thomas Mead                    Allendale Insurance Company
Robert Merton                  Massachusetts Institute of Technolo
                               and NBER
William Mime                   University of Toronto
Donald   Nichols               University of Wisconsin
Edward Offenbacher             Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System
Lucas Papademos                Columbia University
James Pesando                  University of Toronto and NEER
Christopher Piros              Harvard University
Richard Ruback                 Massachusetts  Instituteof Technolor
Julio Rotemberg                Massachusetts Institute of Technolor
Robin Rowley                   McGill University
Myron Scholes                  University   of Chicago and NBER
William Schwert                University   of Rochester
Robert Shiller                 University   of Pennsylvania and
                               NBER
Jereirr Siegel                 University   of Pennsylvania
Christopher   A. Sims          University of Minnesota and NBER
Kenneth Singleton              Carnegie-Mellon University
Dennis Starleaf                Iowa State University
Mary Stupnik                   U.S. Department of Enerr
Lawrence Summers               Massachusetts Institute of TechnolOt
                               and NBER
Irwin                          Harvard University and NBER
      Tepper
Kazuo Ueda                     University of British Columbia
James Wilcox                   University of California, Berkeley
Michelle White                 New York University
Naoyuki Yoshino                State University of New York, Buffalo
                                  -1—

       The impact of protracted inflation on the economic
                                                           system
  was one of Arthur Okun's
                           central concerns, lie rejected the
  classical paradigm in which expected inflation was neutral
                                                              and
  had only minor effects.
                           Rather, he emphasized the many non—
 neutralities which are associated
                                    with expected inflation in a
 price tag economy. He stressed the very long
                                                lags necessary for
 the economy to adapt to expected inflation and the
                                                     infeasibiljty
 even in the very long run, of full adaptation. As
                                                     one example of
 his skepticism about the predictions of classical
                                                    models, he de—
votes several pages in Prices and Quantities to
                                                a discussion of
his doubts about the
                     Fisher proposition that nominal interest
rates should adjust so that real interest rates
                                                are unaffected by
inflation.

     This paper studies the long run relationship between
                                                          interest
rates and inflation
                    during the previous one—hundred and twenty
years of American experience.
                                it concludes that there is little
evidence that interest
                       rates respond to inflation in the way the
classical theories would suggest. Rather the relationship
                                                           between
interest rates and inflation
                             was accurately characterized by
Irving Fisher himself when he wrote that:

    The money rate and the real rate are normally
                                                  identical;
    that is they will be the same when the purchasing
    of the dollar in terms of the cost of             power
    or stable. When the cost of living is living is constant
                                           not stable the
    rate of interest takes the appreciation and depreciation
    into account to some extent but only
                                         slightly and in
    general indirectly. That is, when prices
    the rate of interest tends to be low, but are falling,
    it Should be to compensate for the fall. not so low as

                                (1930, p. 43)
                                    —2—



    After   considering a variety of possible explanations for the
    anamolous behavior of interest rates, I am forced to conclude
 with Fisher that:

        Men are unable or unwilling to adjust at all accurately
        and promptly the many interest rates to changing prices
        levels.. .The erratic behavior of real interest rates
        is evidently a trick played on the money market by
        money illusion. The money rate of interest and still
        more the real rate are attacked more by the instability of
        money than by those more fundamental and more normal
        causes connected with income impatience and opportunity.
 It appears to be difficult to reconcile the data with standard
economic models of fully informed and rational agents.
        The first section of this paper examines the theoretical

relationship between rates of interest and inflation in both

the short- and long—run. The analysis shows that almost any re-
lationship is possible in the short—run, depending on the sources
of shocks to the economy. However, theory issues strong predic-

tions about the long-run relationship. In the absence of tax
effects, interest rates should rise by about one point for each
one point increase in the expected rate of inflation, The Tobin-
Mundell effect which is often used to explain the failure of interest

rates fully to adjust for expected inflation should, for plausible
estimates of the relevant parameters, be of little empirical sig-
nificance. The section also demonstrates that in th3 presence of
a tax system anything like that prevailing in the post-war United
States, the rea) pre-tax interest rate should rise significantly

with inflation in the long run.
                                  -.3—



      The second section examines historical data on the re1aton-
ship between interest rates and inflation, Most previous empirical
work in this area has focused on the correlation between short-term

interest rates and various measures of expected inflation. The
theory developed in the first section suggests that this emphasis

is misplaced. The empirical analysis here focuses on the deter-
minants of low frequency movements in the rate of interest. The
use of band spectral regression techniques makes it possible to
filter out the effects of transitory shocks and focus on long run

factors. The results suggest that prior to World War II inflation
had only a negligible impact on interest rates. While there is
evidence of a significant response of interest rates to inflation
during the Post-War period, there is no evidence that they have
risen by as much as theory would predict in the presence of high

marginal tax rates. Furthermore almost all of the significant
association between interest rates and inflation during the post-
war period can be traced to the 1965-71 period. Sample periods ex-

cluding this interval reveal only quite small effects of inflation
on interest rates.

     Various explanations have been put forward for the failure
of interest rates to respond fully to inflation.   Many of these
explanations stress correlations associated with business cycle

fluctuations. The statistical procedures used in this paper which
focus on low frequency movements filter out the effects of these

shocks. A remaining possibility is that low frequency movements
                                —4—


in the rate of inflation are associated with other factors which
also impact on real interest rates. The third section examines
this possibility by focusinq on the effect of fluctuations in the
real rate of return on capital and the level of economic risk on
interest rates. While both of these variables have significant
effects on rates of interest, their inclusion does not alter the
results regarding the effect of inflation.
     The relationship between inflation and stock prices is exa-

mined in the fourth section. If inflation is systematically cor-
related with reductions in real interest rates, it should also be
associated with declines in dividend yields and earnings price
ratios. This prediction is not born out during any interval. If
anything, inflation is positively related to stock yields. Joint
analysis for the post—war period of the stock and bond markets
suggests that the paradoxical response of the stock market to in-

flation is the mirror image of the puzzling behavior of the bond
market. While bond prices have been anomalously high and stock
prices surprisingly low, the market value of the corporate sector
has borne a quite consistent relation to the stream of total after—

tax earnings. These results provide some support for the Modigliani—
Cohn hypothesis that financial markets exhibit inflation illusion.
     The fifth and final section of the paper discusses some impli-
cations of the inflation illusion hypothesis. A body of existing
work suggesting the prevalence of inflation illusion is discussed.
Several reasons for the failure of market forces to overcome this
illusion are then examined. An interpretation of recent economic
                                — 5-.



history in terns of changing degrees of inflation illusion is then
offered. Current high interest rates may reflect the delayed recognition
by the market of the joint impact of inflation and taxation.

     An appendix to the paper documents the failure of interest
rates fully to incorporate inflation premiums using more standard

techniques for modelling inflationary expectations.
                                              —6—


I. Interest Rates and Inflation in a General Equilibrium
    economic Model

     This section describes a simple general equilibrium macro-
economic model in which the relationship between interest rates
and inflation can be studied under a variety of assumptions. The
model can be used to study the relationship between inflation and

interest rates across long run steady states, and to study the

short run relation between interest rates and inflation under
Keynesian and classical assumptions. It incorporates a stylized but
realistic depiction of the U.S. tax system. In this way it extends
previous work on taxes and interest rates, Feldstein (1976),

Feldstein and Summers (1978) and Darby (1975), by considering taxes
in a dynamic general equilibrium context.
     The model considered here is close to that described in
Sargent (1979). It has the form:
     C = C(YD, r(1—e)— fle) +                       (la)
        = Y-T                                       (ib)

     I =    I(q)K                  1(1) = 0         (ic)

    G=G                                             (ld)

    Y=C+I+G                                         (le)

    L(r(l—E),y) =             +                     (lf)
                                   c2
    L5L -1w                                         (ig)



        —        LD — 1) +
    w        (             11e                      (ii)
                  S
    Y   =   F(K,L)    (1 +                          (1k)
                             C3)

    q=              e                               (1k)
            r(l—O)—ri +

     ge =    X(jr     11e)                          (lm)
                                —7—


     Equation (la) is a standard life cycle consumption function

where consumption depends on disposable income, and the real after
tax rate of return. For simplicity, real balance effects are

ne1ected. Disposable income is defined as GNP less taxes,
where it is implicitly assumed that labor taxes, which are lump

sum since labor supply is inelastic, are adjusted to offset any
endogenous changes in revenues from levies on capital income.

     The investment equation (ic) relates the level of investment
to the divergence between the after-tax marginal product of capital
and the after tax interest rate, as reflected in Tobin's q. Equiva-

lently investment can be thought of as depending on the ratio of
the market value of the capital stock to its replacement costs.

This theory, developed by Tobin (1969), can be rigorously justified
in the context of a model with adjustment costs as shown by Abel

(1978) and Hayashi (1981). The role of taxes is discussed in detah
in Summers (198la).

     The value of q, the market price of existing capital goods,

depends on the expected present value of their stream of profits.
In this paper it is assumed that investors have static expectations

about the marginal product of capital, FK, interest rates and tax

parameters. The more appealing rational expectations assumption
is examined in Summers (1981 a,d). With static expectations, q is
given by (II). The term reflects the risk premium required to
induce investors to hold equity claims. The tax system is summarized
by three parameters; T, e, and A. The parameter T represents the
effective tax rate on real capital income arising from the combina-
                               —8—


tion of corporate, dividend and capital gains taxes. The tax
rate on interest income is given by 0. The effect of inflation

on the tax system is captured by X, which represents the effects
of historic cost discrepancies, FIFO inventory accounting and the
taxation of nominal capital gains. These interactions of inflation
and taxes are discussed in detail in Feldstein and Summers (1979)

and Summers (1981a).
     The remainder of the model is quite standard. Equation (le)
provides the income expenditure identity. A normal LM curve is
specified in (if). The workings of the labor market are generated

by an inelastic supply of labor, (lg), a neo-classical labor demand
curve holding that the real wage is equated to labor's marginal
product, (lh) and a natural rate Phillips curve (ii). The terms

   and    reflect respectively shocks to liquidity preference and

aggregate Supply. Equation (lrn) holds that expectations about
future inflation are formed adaptively.
     The evolution of the economy described by (la-rn) will depend

on the paths of the exogenous forcing variables g and m, along with

the shocks         and c3. At any point in time, the money and
capital stocks along with the price level and inflationary expec-
tation are predetermined. The equilibrium level of output and the
interest rate can then be determined from equations (la,c,e,l)
along the lines of familiar IS-LM analysis.


     The relationship between movements in inflation and interest
rates will depend on the nature of the causal shocks. It is clear
from (ii) and (im) thatthe only shocks which can change the level
                                 —9-


of inflation or expected inflation will be those which also impact

on the level of output. Barring unlikely coincidence, Figure 1
illustrates that such shocks will affect interest rates as well.

Both variables are endogenous being jointly determined by G, in
and the random shocks
                          £j C2 and C3 The correlation between
them will depend on the sources of the shocks.

     Consider first an aggregate demand shock as represented by
an increase in Cl or G. The IS curve shifts right raising interest
rates and output. This leads to increasing prices and rising in-

flationary expectations. The resulting reduction in real money
balances raises interest rates still further. This continues until

output is restored to its equilibrium level. However at this point
the system is not in equilibrium because inflationary expectations

are positive. Hence it overshoots and output, interest rates, and
the rate of inflation all fall. The system oscillates towards

an ultimate equilibrium with no inflation, a higher price level and
interest rate, and a reduced capital stock. Note that during this
adjustment process there is no reason to assume that real short term
interest rates as measured on either an ex-ante or ex—post basis
should remain constant.

     An even more dramatic example is provided by a liquidity pre-
ference shock caused by either an increase in in   or C2 Initially
the LM curve moves right, and nominal interest rates fall as prices
start to rise. Subsequently as prices rise reducing real money
balances the rate of inflation declines and the interest rate rises.
                                   —10—



Ultimately equilibrium is re-established at the initial interest

rate and output level, with higher prices. Again, the path in-
volves oscillations. Note that an observer following the response
of the economy following such a shock would observe a negative
Fisher effect as interest rates and inflation moved inversely.
     These examples could be discussed in more detail and multi-
plied but they are sufficient to make the point at issue here. In
any reasonable short run macro—economic model, the rate of inflation
and the short run interest rate are determined simultaneously. The
correlations between these variables will depend on the paths of
the variables forcing the system. As a first approximation,
demand shocks will tend to lead to a positive relation between
interest rates and inflation while liquidity shocks lead to nega-
tive covariation. This suggests that there is little reason to
expect any stable relation between short term movements in interest
rates and inflation. The tendency, documented below, for the
association to be weak suggests the relative importance of liqui-

dity shocks.
     The preceding discussion suggests that any sort of analysis
of the movements of inflation and short term interest rates and
inflation is not likely to be fruitful since both variables are

endogenous. However, the model yields more explicit long run
predictions. In any long run steady state inflation will always
equal its expected value, and the capital stock will also remain
constant so that the model reduces to:


     C(F(K,L)-T,qK,r(l-®)— 11) +    =   F(K,L)           (3a)
          F' (K,L) (l-T)—ATI   = (1—e)r —   11   + 8                          (3b)

          fl—rn
                                                                          (3c)

      Equations (3a) and (3b) determine the steady state capital stock
  -
      and interest rate. Differentiating yields expressions for the
      long run effect of a change in the rate of expected inflation.




            dr —    (1— A)   CYFk +              —F" (K) (1-t ) C
                                      CwFk]                         r   (4a)
                                   — F )—F"(k)(1--t)C
                    (l_O)fyFk + Cw    k               r



            dk —
                  — (e_A)Cr                                             (4b)

                    (18) (CFk +     Cw_Fk)"Uo) (l-t)C

      Consider the special case where consumption is interest inelastic

      so Cr = 0.     In this case, t4b) implies that inflation has no effect on
      steady state capital intensity so that (4a) reduces to
             dr —
                — (1—A)
                   (1—8)                                                (5)
              This condition is easily interpreted.' If the only non-

         neutrality in the tax system were the taxation of nominal interest

         rates, the rate of interest would rise by 1 for eacy point of
                                                               1e
         inflation so as to keep the real aftertax rate of interest constant.

         However, inflation also increases the taxation of equity income

1Note that this result is fundamentally different from that of
                                                                Feldstein,
Green and Sheshjnski (1978). The crucial tax rate here is the marginal
personal tax rate on interest iflcom?, rather than the corporate rate. The
difference arises because of the gei€ral equilibrium character of the
model.
                                  —12—
 which drives down the required real interest rate. This accounts
 for the (1-A) term in the numerator of (5). Whether increases in
 inflation raise or reduce the pre—tax real interest rate depends
 on the relative size of 8 and A, measures of the extra taxes imposed

 on debt and equity income.
       It is useful to consider briefly plausible magnitudes for
  these parameters. The value ofO can be inferred in either
  of two ways. Feldstein and Suniiners (1979) present an explicit

  calculation of the average marginal tax rate faced by the holders
  of interest bearing corporate assets concluding that it
  is about 40 percent. The somewhat lower tax rate faced by

  individuals is offset by the high rates imposed on life insurance
  companies and other intermediaries. The alternative method is to
  compare the yield on interest bearing taxable and non-taxable

  assets. Long term municipal bonds yields appear to be about one
  third less than those of otherwise comparable co]porate issues.

  Gordon and Malkie]. (1979) arrive at a somewhat smaller estimate
  of the tax rate on the basis of a comparison of otherwise identical

  taxable and tax—free corporate bonds. On balance it seems reasonable
  to assume that 8        .33.

       The value of X which reflects the extra tax imposed on

 equity income due to inflation is more difficult to estimate.

  Its four components attributable to historical cost depreciation,
 FIFO inventory accounting, taxation of nominal capital gains and
 an offset of the deductibility of nanimal interest at the cor-
 porate level can    be   estimated from the data in Feldstein and
2Note that the variable X here included the effect of inflation on corp-
orate interest deductions for tax purposes. It is therefore conceptually
different from the concept employed in Feldstein (1980). In his notation
A here corresponds to A+Tc7T.
                                 —13-.



 Summers (1979). According to the figures presented there,
 extra taxes due to historic cost depreciation and inventory account-

 ing totalled $26.1 billion in 1979, while taxes on nominal capital
 gains were placed at $5.3 billion and the deductibility of nominal
 interest reduced taxes by $15.1 billion. Assuming a 6 percent rate
 of inflation, and the 1977 capital stock of $1684.4 billion this
 implies a value for X of .14.

      These parameter values imply that if savings are interest

 inelastic, -e= l.3,significantly in excess of one. If savings
 are interest elastic, even this figure will understate the impact
of inflation on interest rates. The real after tax return to savings
will decline, reducing the capital stock, raising the marginal product
of capital,leading to further increases in real interest rates. In

the limiting case where savings are infinitely elastic with respect

to the real after tax interest rate, -e= --- =   1.5.   This case
corresponds to the frequently assumed "infinite horizon" model of
consumption decisions. Summers (l981c) argues that realistically
formulated life cycle models also imply a very substantial interest
elasticity of savings.

     The theoretically predicted value of -is surprisingly insensi-
tive to the assumed interest sensitivity of savings. In terms of
the loanable funds model of Feldstejn and Summers (1978), this is

because the supply and demand curves for funds are shifted upwards by
approximately equal amounts.
3me an1yi hero rehes a different conclusion from the earl.er one,
because it recognizes the effects of the interactions of inflation and
taxation on the suDoly as well as the demand for loanable funds.
                                 —14—


      Several features of this analysis require discussion. The
 formulation adopted here implies that there is no I"lundell-Tobjn

 effect. In the absence of taxes, inflation has no effect on the
 level of capital accumulation. This is because the consumption
 function does not include either real money balances, or govern-

ment transfers of money as an argument. This omission is of no
empirical significance. Outside money holdings in the United States
represent less than two percent of the value of the capital stock.
Even if inflation increased enough to eliminate all money holding,
and wealth holding was unchanged, so that the capital stock in-

creased by an equal amount, the real interest rate would fall by
only 6 basis points.

     The model presented here ignores government indebtedness. This
may be justifies in several ways. Barro (1974) shows that if agents have
operative bequest motives, government bonds will not be net worth. In
Summers (l98lc), I show that as long as there are any families which meet
this condition, Barro's result will continue to hold in the long rune

Alternatively even if bonds are treated as net worth, the results here
will contine to hold as long as they are perfect substitutes for private

debt. Only in the special and unlikely case where bonds and money are
perfect substitutes, does the analysis here require important modifications.

this type are misleading as government debt should be treated as
a form of outside money. This is mistaken since the interest rate
will adjust to prevent portfolio substitution.
     It is important to clarify the reason why the model cannot

be manipulated to yield predictions about the short run relation-
                                —15—
 Ship between interest rates and inflation but does have implications
 for the long run relation. The reason is that the model
                                                          implies
 that in the long run the level of inflation is etermined
                                                            only
by the rate of money growth. This is an implication of virtually
all macro-economic models.
                             Unless the long run rate of money growth
1S determined by the same real factors which
                                              impact on output and
the interest rate, this implies that inflation is in effect
                                                              deter-
mined exogenously in the long run. In the next section,
                                                          we turn to
an empirical analysis of the long run relationship between inflation
and interest rates.

     There does not seem to be any obvious reason for expecting a

correlation between the rate of money growth and any real factors.
If there were any systematic factor, equation (3b) implies that
it must involve either effects on the real marginal product of

capital or on the risk premium. Both these possibilities are con-
sidered in the empirical work reported in Section 3 below.
                            —16—



II. Interest Rates and Inflation: The Historical Record

     At the outset it is useful to examine some simple averages

of inflation and interest rates over a long period. Table 1
records decadal averages of the rates of inflation, along with
nominal and real interest rates. No clear relationship between
inflation and nominal interest rates emerges. In five of the
twelve decades considered, the real interest rate was actually
negative. These decades were the periods with the most rapid
rates of inflation. Conversely, the real interest rate is
highest in the deflationary decades. The lack of a relationship

is confirmed by the regression using decadal data reported at
the bottom of the table. Over the long term less than one eighth
of changes in the rate of inflation are incorporated into inter-

est rates. Changes in the decadal rates of inflation explain
none of the variance in observed interest rates. A similar

conclusion emerges using a test suggested by Fisher himself.
The variance of the real return far exceeds that of the nominal

return. If nominal rates incorporated expected inflation, they
should vary, while real rates should remain fairly constant.

     It might be objected that breaking up the passage of time
into decades is arbitrary. Furthermore the results might be
distorted by aberrant wartime experiences. Table 2 displays
average rates of inflation and interest rates over the course
of business cycles as defined by the NBER. Wartime cycles are
omitted. Averages are taken from troughtotrough, Very similar
results emerge when the averages are calculated on a peak to
                                   —17—




                                Table 1

               Trends in Inflation and Interest Rates*


               Average Yields          Average Inflation   Average Real
 Period     on Commercial Papera             Rate              Rate
 1860—69              7.1                   5.5                1.5
 1970—79              6.5                  —3.4                9.8
 1880—89              5,1                  —2. 1               7,2
 1890—99              4.6                   0.3                4,2
 1900—09              4.8                   2.5                2,3
1910—19               7,7                   8,3               —3 .6

1920—29               5.1                  —0.9                6.0
1930—39               1.5                  —2.0                3.6
194 0—4 9             0.9                   5.5               —4 .6

1950—59               2.6                   2.2                0.4
196 0—6 9             4.6                   2.5                2.1
1970—79               7.2                   7,4               —0.22
Regression of 12 Decadal Averages:
         Rt= 4.43 +
            t.69)
                       •05
                        (.16)
                                            2_     —.09

      *All figures are computed as arithmetic averages of
monthly data.

     a
       For the period
1860 through 1918, the data corresponds to the 2-3 month rate
 in MacCauley. From 1919 to 1979 we use the 4-6 month commercial
paper rates from the Federal Reserve.
     b
      From 1860 to 1918, the figures are derived from the Warren-
                                   .




Pearson Wholesale Price Index. From 1919 to 1979, we used the
non-seasonally adjusted CPI from BLS.
                                                 —18—
                                            Table 2

             Cyclical Averages of Inflation and Interest Rates*

                              Average Yields            Average Rate of Average Real
    Period                 on Commercial Paper             Inflation        Rate
    1867:12—1870:11                      8.02              —5.52           13.54
     70:12 — 79:2                        6. 51             —4.53           11.04
     79:3 —       85:4                   5.31              —0.00           5.32
     85:5     —   88:3                   4.93              0.11            4.82
     88:4 — 91:4                         5.13              —0.64           5,77
     91:5 —       94:5                   5.12              —6.34          11.46
     94:6 — 97:5                        4.19               —1.33          5.51
     97:6 — 00:11                       4.02               6.28           —2,26
1900:12 — 04:7                          4.77               1.49           3,28
     04:8 — 08:5                        5.29               1.90           3,39
     08:6 — 11:12                       4.25               1.32           2,93
     12:1 — 14:11                       5.05               1.51           3.54
     19:3 — 21:6                        6.72               3.98           2.75
     21:7 —       24:6                  4q94               —1.13          6.07
     24:7 — 27:10                       4.04               0.61           3.42
     27:11 —      33:2                  3.84               —3.69          9.53
     33:3 — 38:5                        1.02               2.04           —1.02
     45:10 — 49:9                       1.15               7.30           —6.15
     49:10 — 54:4                       2.06               2.58           —0.52
     54:5 — 58:3                        2.79               1.89           0.90
     58:4 — 61:1                        3.46              1.17            2.29
     61:2         70:10                 5. 0.1            2.91            2.10
     70:11 — 75:2                       6.89              6.83            0.06


          Rt = 4.66        —.15rr           2=•Q7
                                    t
                   (.35)
*   All figures are computed as arithmetic averages of monthly data.
    Each period represents an NBER cycle measured from trough to trough.
 peak basis.       Once again no strong relation between inflation
 and nominal interest rates and inflation emerges. The regression

 using cyclical units as observations suggests that interest rates

 fall by 11 basis points with each one point increase in the rate
of inflation,

         These results cannot be attributed to the effects of the
zero floor on nominal interest rates in conjunction with defla-
tion. If all the years where prices fell are removed from the

sample and cyclical averages are taken using the remaining data,
very similar results emerge.

         The traditional approach to the study of the relationship
between interest rates and inflation involves estimation of
equations of the form:

                                                               (6)


where the principal empirical difficulty is the measurement
of 11e     Investigators have employed a wide variety of proxies
for 11e based on autorepressive expectations, survey evidence,

and rational expectations. The analysis in the preceding sec-
tion suggests that estimation of (6) may not be meaningful'even if

inflationary expectations could be properly measured. The cru-
cial issue is the error term u. in equation (6). Since expected

nflation responds to the same underlying economic forces which
impact on short term interest rates, there is every reason to
                                    e
suppose that u. is correlated with    .  The simultaneity in (6)
cannot be avoided by the mechanical application of instrumental
variables. Any     variable   which is correlated with inflationary
                              —20—




expectations will also be correlated with real activity and
therefore with interest rates. The problem with equation (6)
is logical rather than statistical. One cannot usefully ask
about the causal influence of one simultaneous determined vari-
able on another.

     In light of these considerations, it may not be surprising

that equations like (6) yield results which do not appear to
bear out the Fisher relationship. Nor is it surprising that
the results are highly unstable through time. The estimated

parameter    does not bear any consistent relationship to the
taste and technological parameters which are usually assumed
to be stable through time.

     Some recent work on the Fisher Effect has avoided specifi-

cations like (6). Fama (1975) estimates equations of the form
in monthly data, using the one month treasury bill rate:

              11t+l =   +
                             ir + Ut                         (7)


He shows that if one is willing to accept the assumption that
the required expected real interest rate p is constant, then
rational expectations implies that a0 =   —p   and   =   1     He

finds evidence consistent with these assumptions for the 1954-
71 period. In the appendix to this paper, I show that Farna's
results are an artifact of his choice of sample period. This
should not be surprising. It is well known that output fluctu-
ates. In any model like the one presented in the first section
of the paper, it is impossible to generate serially correlated
fluctuations in output without also generating serially
                              —21—




 correlated movements in the ex—ante real rate of interest, except

by assuming arbitrary and unlikely correlations between the
shocks, The success of Famats tests for the 1954-71 period is

probably closely related to the unprecedentedly low amplitude of
business cycle fluctuations during this interval.
     More recent work by Fama and Gibbons (1979) has applied

the random coefficients technique to (7) and allowed       to

evolve according to a random walk. This procedure, which
amounts to imposing a particular serial correlation structure
on the residuals u., does not avoid the logical problems just

discussed. The procedure imposes the highly implausible restric-
tion that variations in u and a0 are uncorrelated,, In fact, the

same shocks which lead to changes in inflation also affect interest
rates.

     Yet another approach to studying the relationship between
inflation and interest rates is suggested by the work of Mishkin
(1981) who studies the relationship between lagged inflation
and the real ex—post return on treasury bills. He is careful,
however, to stress that no causal interpretation can be placed
on his results.

     The analysis in Section I suggested that while the short
run relationship between inflation and interest rates was quite

arbitrary, theory yielded quite precise predictions about the
relationship between interest rates and inflation across dif-

ferent steady states. The essential reason for this difference
is that the model implies that steady state inflation is deter-
mined only by the rate of money growth. The model like most
                                —22—



well specified macro—economic models exhibits approximate
superneutrality in the absence of taxes. Hence real interest
rates should be essentially unaffected by changes in the rate
of inflation. This suggests that if each observation represented
a steady •state corresponding to some level of money growth,

equation (6) should hold with          1 in the absence of taxes.
Of course in time series data on a single country observations

corresponding to steady states under different monetary regimes
cannot be isolated. However statistical techniques are avail-
able which filter out the high frequency movements in the

variables. The band spectral regression procedure developed
in Engle (1974) allows the user to estimate regression coef-

ficients at different frequencies. The hypothesis implied by
the preceding discussion is that the long run (low frequency)
relationship between interest rates and inflation is stronger
than the high frequency relationships which dominate movements
over the course of the business cycle. Robert Lucas (1980)
makes a similar argument to justify the testing of the quantity

theory using filtered data.
     The central advantage of using band spectral techniques
to study the relation between interest rates and inflation is
that it makes it possible to filter out the high frequency
variance in the variables which is not explicable in terms of
the underlying theory. Just as it is common to exclude some
periods (i.e. wars and strikes) because one's theory is not
expected to hold, it is reasonable to exclude frequencies where
the underlying theory is inapplicable. There are several other
                            —23.-




advantages as well. Because the variance in the right hand side
variables in (6) comes only from low frequency movements the

problem of modelling inflationary expectations vanishes. Low
frequency variations in the rate of inflation are almost com-

pletely forecastable, so that the assumption that expected
inflation can be proxied by actual inflation is warranted. In-
deed, when the equations reported below were re-estimated with

various proxies for expected inflation, the results were not
significantly affected. A further virtue of the band spectral
technique is that the results are insensitive to problems of
data alignment and errors in variables. The former problem
leads Fama (1975) to despair of the possibility of testing the
Fisher effect using pre—WWII data.
     This discussion has so far been somewhat vague as to the
choice of interest rates. The argument that any high frequency
relation between interest rates and inflation is possible, is
best understood in terms of the short rate. The long rate which
reflects expected short rates over a long horizon should be
largely free of high frequency fluctuations. It therefore seems
surprising that more of the empirical work on interest rates
and inflation has not used long rates. Probably the reason is

the difficulty of measuring long term inflationary expectations.
At low frequencies one would expect long and short rates to

exhibit similar movements. Both are exhibited in the empirical
work represented below.
                                —24—




The 1860—1940 period

        Most discussions of interest rates and inflation during the

pre—WWII period focus on the Gibson paradox. The paradox is the
observation that for this period in both the U.S. and Britain

there appears to be a strong positive correlation between the
price level and interest rates. Such a relationship is incon—
sistent with monetary theory which holds that the units in which
money is measured should have no real effects.

        One potential resolution of the Gibson paradox is the
Fisher effect discussed in this paper. If, as Fisher argues,

inflation expectations are formed with very long lags, there
will be a strong positive correlation between the price level
and the expected rate of inflation. To see this observe that:

        Pt =
               10titli                                          (8)



where Pt is the log of the price level. Equivalently


                                                             (9)


It follows immediately that the price level will be highly

correlated with any long term average of past rates of infla—
tion.

        This explanation for the Gibson paradox has been considered

by several investigators, Sargent (1973a), Shiller and Siegel
(1977) and Friedman and Schwartz (1980). These authors have
tended to reject the Fisher explanation because the lag lengths
                              —25—




which are required are regarded as implausible. Other explana-
tions have been sought in terms of the Keynes-Wicksell effect

and distributional effects. However, the logically separate
question of the relationship or lack thereof between interest

rates and inflation during this period has received much less

attention. The relationship is of particular interest for this
early period because the economy was relatively free of insti—
tutional interferences. Taxes were negligible, countercyclical

stabilization policy had notyet been attempted, and there were

fewer interferences with wage and price flexibility. The con-
ditions of classical macro—models were much closer to being
satisfied than they are today.

     Before examining the data, it is instructive to review

the results presentedbyFisher (1930). Fisherbeganby examin-
ing the contemporaneous correlation between inflation and
nominal interest rates. He found it to be negligible but

that it could be improved substantially by taking a long run
weighted average of past rates of inflation. Fisher however
reported only on the correlation coefficient between his mea-
sure of expected inflation and the interest rate. Hemadeno
effort to estimate     .   Replication   of Fisher's work using
his data and his procedure for estimating inflation expecta—

tions (essentially a first degree Almon lag with an endpoint
constraint at zero at 20 years) yields estimates of

which range from .03 for short term interest rates to .18 for
                             —26—




long term rates. Thus, there is no sense in which his results
can be said to demonstrate the empirical validity of the theory

that bears his name. As the quotations in this paper's intro-
duction attest, Fisherdid not overstate his conclusions. It is

later authors who have exaggerated the power of his evidence.

     In Tables 3 and 4 the relationship between inflation and
short and long term interest rates at various frequencies is
examined for the entire 1860-1940 period, and various subper-
iods. Data onthe rate of inflation for the period 1860—1918
are based on the Warren-Pearson wholesalepriceindex. This is
the only price index available which goes back this far on a

monthly basis. For the more recent parts of the interval,
1919—1940, the CPI is used to estimate the rate of inflation.
Data on short term interest rates are the rates on commercial

paper reported in MacCauley (1937) for the period 1968-1918,
and the Federal Reserve series for the 1918-1939 period. Long
term yields come from MacCauley's series on railroad bonds for

the 1860-1918 period and the Federal Reserve series for the
1918-1939 interval. The results were all obtained using
monthly data. Only negligible changes were observed when the
equations were re—estimated using quarterly or annual data.
     The equations are estimated, filtering out movements

above various frequencies. As Engle (1974) shows, if the data
interval is of length p, OLS estimates reflect the variance at
all cycle lengths greater than 2p. Here the OLS estimates are
                                      —27--




                                   Table 3
       Commercial Paper Yield and Inflation, 1860-1939

 Interval     Cycle Length           Constant Term   Slope Coeff.
1860—1939          OLS                    4.92            00
                                                                     .00
                                                        (.00)
                   >   1 year             4.92              .00
                                                                     .00
                                                        (.01)
                   > 3 years              4.90            01
                                                                     .00
                                                        (.02)
                   >   5   years          4.88              6   01
                                                                      01
                                                        (.03)
               >       10 years           4.83           .03
                                                                     .02
                                                        (.05)
               > 20 years                 4.49                  12
                                                                     .23
                                                        (.10)
1870—1900      OLS                        5.36         —.00
                                                                     .00
                                                        (.00)
               > 1 year                   5.37         —.02
                                                                      01
                                                        (.02)
               >       3 years            5.31         —.03
                                                                     .02
                                                       (.05)
               >       5   years          5.37         —.03
                                                                     .02
                                                       (.07)
               > 10 years                              — .25
                                          5.41                       .33
                                                       (.15)
1900—1939      OLS                        3.97          .00
                                                                     .00
(excluding                                             (.01)
1914—1918)     >       1 year             3.98         -.    00
                                                                     .00
                                                       (03)
               >       3 years                          • 05
                                                                     .02
                                                       (.08)
               >       5 years           3.91            08
                                                                     .03
                                                       (.14)
               >       10 years          3.90           • 11
                                                                     .03
                                                       (.30)
               >       20 years          3.72           .34
                                                                     .22
                                                       (57)

Note: Repression results are obtained using the band spectral
       procedure in the Troll Program. Data are described in
       the text.
                                    —28—



                                   TABLE 4

        Long—Term Bond Yields and Inflation, 1860—1939


Interval        Cycle Length        Constant Term   Slope Coef.
                                                       —.00
1860—1939         OLS                      4.48                   .00
                                                       (.00)
                                                       —.00
                  >    1 year              4.48                   .00
                                                       (.00)
                                                       —.00       .00
                  >    3   years           4.49
                                                       (.01)
                                                       —.00
                  >    5 years             4.48                   .00
                                                       (.02)
                                                        .01
                  >    10 years            4.43                   .01
                                                       (.03)
                                                         05
                  >    20 years            4,31                   009
                                                       (.06)

                  OLS                      4.35
                                                       —000        01
1870—1900
                                                       (.00)
                  > 1 year                 4.36
                                                       —.02       .03
                                                       (.01)
                                                       —.05
                  >    3 years             437         (.04)
                                                                   09

                  > 5 years                            —006       .10
                                           4.37
                                                        (.06)
                                                       — .19
                  >    10 years            4.39                   .33
                                                       (.14)
                                                       —.01
1900—1939         OLS                      4.16                   .01
                                                        (.00)
(excluding                                             —. 02
1914—1918)        > 1 year                 4.17                   .03
                                                       (01)
                  > 3 years                            —.04
                                           4.19                   • 06
                                                       (.03)
                  > 5 years                            —.09       .17
                                           4,23
                                                       (.06)
                  > 10 years
                                                       —.19
                                           4.30                   • 36
                                                       (.12)
                  > 20 years                           —.17
                                           4.28                   .26
                                                       (.25)

Note:    Repression results are obtained using the band spectral
         procedure in the Troll Program. Data are described in
           the text.
    reported along with the results for cycle lengths of greater
    than 1, 3, 5, 10 and 20 years. The frequency of business

    cycles is about 5 years, so the results should provide a good
    reflection of the long run effects discussed in Section I.

         No strong association between inflation and interest

    rates emerges at any frequency. While there is some tendency
    for the coefficient on inflation to increase as the cycle

    length rises, the differences are not
                                            statistically significant.
    For the entire 1860—1939 period, the highest estimate of the

    effect of inflation is in the low frequency commercial paper

   equations where the estimated coefficient is only .12. For
   the 1870—1900 period, the relationship is actually negative,
   using either the commercial paper rate or the long term bond

   rate. In all the equations, the R2 is low, indicating that
   low frequency movements in inflation explain only a small part
   of variations in interest rates.

        In tests not reported here, a variety of other sample per-
   iods were chosen. While the results changed somewhat depending
   on the inclusion of the WWi years, there was no evidence in any

   of the equations of a strong Fisher effect. As a further check,
   some of the equations were re-estimated using long distributed

   lags on inflation,It is sometimes argued that the failure of interest
rates to adjust for inflation reflects the effects of deflation in conjunc..
tion with the zero floor on nominal interest rates. Dropping all
                                                                 years in
which prices fell from the sample raised standard errors but had

essentially no impact on the estimated coefficients.
                                                        This had only a
negligible effect on the results. The failure of interest to adjust to

changes in inflationary expectations is confirmed in the Appendix using
more standard techniques.
                           —30.--




     It is frequently argued that the failure of interest rates

to adjust and incorporate inflation premia during the 1860—1940
period is the consequence of the different monetary standard
which prevailed during that interval. The argument as ex-
pressed, for example, by Gordon (1973) is that under the Gold

Standard, a stable level of prices, rather than of inflation,

was anticipated. Hence, the argument continues, inflation led if
anything, to expectations of future deflation. This argument
provides a rationalization for the failure of regressions of

interest rates on distributed lags of past inflation to yield
estimates which imply significant Fisher effects. It does not

apply to the results reported here which consider low frequency
movements in the rate of inflation. Such movements were an im-
portant feature of the period. The decadal average of the rate
of inflation varied between 5.5 percent during the 1860's and

—2 percent during the 1880's. Far larger variations existed at
cyclical frequencies. These fluctuations are usually traced

to monetary forces, arising indirectly from the gold standard.
Such variations represent exactly the sort of exogenous dis-
turbance which should give rise to the Fisher effect.

     There are two subsidiary difficulties with the "monetary
standard" explanation of the failure of the Fisher effect.

The argument implies a negative correlation between the ex-
pected rate of inflation and the price level. Yet the Gibson
paradox is the observation that the price level and interest are
 positively associated. The "monetary standard" explanation
 also fails to take account of
                                agents changing perceptions
 of the trend rate of growth of
                                 prices. As Barsky and Summers
 (1982) argue, a rational observer's inflation forecast would in
 fact have varied as much or more in the gold standard era

 as in recent times. it is difficult to understand why these
 variations were not reflected in movements in interest rates.

      There are of course a number of problems with the data
 used here. The interest rates may include default premia and
 the inflation rate is unlikely to be measured accurately.

 However, it is unlikely that these factors are important in low
 frequency movements. The
                           strong evidence against the Fisher
 proposition presented here for the pre-War period is particulary
 striking because of the ;aissez faire character of the economy.
Nominal rigidities due to deposit ceilings, wage contracts,

pension arrangements, or long term wage contracts were virtually
non—existent. Taxes also were
                                negligible. This suggest that failure
of interest rates to fully
                             incorporate inflation premia reflect
something more fundamental then the effect of institutional non-
neutral! tites

The Post War Period

     The analysis in the first section of the paper suggests
that it is reasonable to expect that      =   1.3 in the Post War
period. Estimates of this parameter for various intervals
after WWII using both short and long term interest rates are
                            —32—

 reported in Tables 5 and 6. The short term interest rate is
 the treasury bill yield as reported by Ibbotsen and
                                                     Sincuefield
 (1980), while the long term interest rate is measured by the

 government bond yield. Inflation is measured using the CPI.
 Variation in the choice of interest rate and inflation mea-

 sures had only a negligible effect on the results.

      The results for both short and long rates are broadly
                                                            con-
 sistent. There is no evidence that interest rates have risen

 more than the rate of inflation. In almost every case the
 data reject the hypothesis that    =1 quite decisively, it
appears that almost all the power in the Fisher
                                                  relationship
comes from the acceleration of inflation during the 1960's.

When the equation is estimated for the 1970's or for the

pre-1965 period (not shown) only a very weak relationship be-
tween interest rates and inflation emerges. Eliminating the

controls period has little effect on the results.

     It is noteworthy that the estimated impact of inflation
on interest rates increases as the length of the cycle in-

creases. For example, the coefficient on inflation in the long
term interest rate regressions rises from .24 to .73 for the

1948-79 period. The hypothesis that the relation between in-
terest rates and inflation is the same at all frequencies is

decisively rejected by the data. However even at 10 year
cycle lengths the full Fisher effect is not observed, much
less the effect that is predicted in the presence of high taxes.
                                —33—


      One issue which has not yet been addressed is the question of
 Simultaneity even at the low frequencies considered here. If interest
rates and inflation are jointly determined, inflation and the error term

may be correlated in the regressions reported here, leading to biased
estimates of the effects of steady inflation on interest rates. For

such bias to explain, the anomalously low estimated effect of inflation

on interest rates, it is necessary that inflation and the error term
be negatively sorrelated. In this case, the extent of simulaneity
bias can be banded by running the regression in the opposite direction.

However, Griliches and Rings5and (1971) show that the"reverse regression"
coefficient a =        An upper bound on the effect of inflation of
interest rates is given by l/a=/R2. In almost all cases, even this
cound is less than unity. This suggests that simultaneous equations
bias cannot account for the results obtained here.

     It is natural to conjecture that the introduction of taxes
has increased the value of e, explaining the difference be-
tween the pre— and post-war periods.   However, until an explana-
tion of its surprisingly low value is available, this conjecture
remains speculative. The next sections examine some potential

explanations of the paradoxical behavior of interest rates,
                                  —34-.




                                Table 5

           Inflation and Treasury Bill Yields

Interval       Cycle Length        Constant       Coef. of II

1948 to 1979                                             .29
                OLS                       2.71                  .34
                                                     (.02)
                 >   1 year                           .47
                                          2.01                  .57
                                                     (.05)
                > 3 years                             .57
                                          1.62                  • 71
                                                     (.08)
                > 5 years                             .62
                                          1.46                  .75
                                                     t   .11)
                > 10 years                               .68
                                          1.22                  .80
                                                     (.17)
                > 20 years                1.22        .68       .90
                                                     (.33)
                                                      .41
1954 to 1979    OLS                       2. 70                 .55
                                                     (.02)
                                                      .57
                >    1 year               2.00                  .82
                                                     (.04)
                                                      .60
                >    3 years              1.88                  .89
                                                     (.05)
                > 5 years                                .59
                                          1.92                  .89
                                                     (.07
                > 10 years                            .60
                                          1,90                  .89
                                                     (.12)
                                                       38
1970 to 1980    OLS                   3.71                      .43
                                                     (.04)
                > 1 year                              .58
                                      2.21                      .75
                                                     (.08)
                > 3 years                             .64
                                      1.71                      .89
                                                     (.10)
                > 5 years             1.64               .65
                                                                .89
                                                     (.16)

1954 to 1971    OLS                                      .31
                                      2.68                      .29
                                                     (.03)
                     1 year                              .68
                >                     1.80                      .64
                                                     (.09)
                     3 years                          .79
                >                     i.53                      .81
                                                     (.12)
                                                      .81
                >    5 years          1,49                       81
                                                     (.18)
                >    10 years                            86
                                      1.38                      .86
                                                     (.30)
Note: Band spectral repressions are performed using the Troll
       computer program. Data are described in the text.
                                      —35—




                                   Table     6

   Inflation and the Yield on Long-Term Government Bonds

 Interval      Length              Constant      Coef. of fl   R2
               of Cycle
1948 to 1979    OLS                                   .24
                                     3.97                      .30
                                                     (.003)
                    >   1 year       3.36             .40
                                                               .50
                                                     (.05)
                > 3 years            2.98             .50
                                                               .63
                                                     (.09)
                > 5 years            2.65             .59
                                                               .70
                                                     (.12)
                        10 years 2.13                 .73
                >
                                                     (.14)
                                                               .87
1954 to 1979    OLS                   4.03            .34
                                                               .52
                                                     (.02)
                > 1 year                              .49
                                     3.44
                                                     (.04)
                                                               .76
                > 3 years                             • 52
                                     3.29                      .80
                                                     (.07)
                                                      • 56
                >       5 years      3.10                      .84
                                                     (.09)
                >       10 years 2.76                 .65
                                                                97
                                                     (.07)

1970 to 1979                                          .15
                OLS                  6.57
                                                     (.02)
                                                               .29
                >       1 year                        .23
                                                               .52
                                                     (.05)
                >       3 years                       .26
                                     5.74                      .56
                                                     (.12)
                                                      • 26
                >       5 years      5.68                      .61
                                                     (.16)
1954 to 1971    OLS                  3.88             .21
                                                               .25
                                                     (.03)
                >       1            3.27             .47
                            year                               .56
                                                     (.07)
                > 3 years            3.10             .53
                                                               .65
                                                     (.12)
                >       5 years      2.96             .59
                                                               .70
                                                     (.18)
                >       10 years 2.82                 .65
                                                               .79
                                                     (.29)
Note:   Band spectral regressions are performed using the
        Troll computer program. Data are described in the text.
                            —36—



Section III Inflation and Other Determinants of the Interest
             Rate
     The results in the preceding section demonstrate that
there is only a very weak relationship between long swings in the
rate of inflation and nominal interest rates. This result contra-
dicts the prediction of the standard macro-economic model de-
veloped in Section I. That model holds that the long run rate
of inflation is determined by the rate of money growth, which
is exogenous. It implicitly assumes that fluctuations in the

long run rate of growth of the money stock are independent of
movements in the other forcing variables. This supposition may
be warranted.
     Equation (3.6) implies that the rate of interest in steady

state is proximately determined by the risk premium , and the
marginal product of capital. If inflation is correlated with
real shocks these should work through these two variables. When
they are held constant, the Fisher effect should hold. This
proposition is tested in the results reported in Table 7.

     The major difficulty is finding proxies for the real return
on capital and the levelof risk. The top half of Table 7 re-
ports results which use the variance of real stock market returns

as a measure of risk. The variance of the returns, NARVAR, is
calculated using the procedure suggested by Merton (1980). It
is the mean squared real return for the 12 months bracketing each
                                 —37—


                                Table 7

      Inflation and Other Determinants of Interest Rates

Interval     Cycle Length      Constant      II   MARVAR
1926—1979       OLS               2.68     .06    —.05
                                                               .08
                                          (.01)   (.01)
                > 1   year        2.43     .13    —.03
                                                               • 12
                                          (.05)   (.03)
                > 3   years       2.32     .16    —.02         .13
                                          (.09)   (.06)
                >   5 years       2.34     .16    —.03
                                                               .13
                                          (.15)   (.09)
                >   10 years      2.38     .18    —.05
                                                               .15
                                          (.28)   (.09)

1954—19 79      OLS               2.46     .39     .15
                                                               • 56
                                          (.02)   (.06)
                > 1   year        2.10     .59    —.07         • 82
                                          (.04)   (.10)
                > 3   years       2.02     .63    —.13         .90
                                          (.06)   (.15)
                > 5   years       2.29     .63    —.26
                                          (.09)   (.26)        :90
                >   10 years      2.82     .71    —.67
                                                               .93
                                          (.17)   (.69)

Interval     Cycle Length      Constant     II    BTRR VarGNP
1954—1979      OL S              —2.03     .72      35      • 40
                                                                      .81
                                          (.10)   (.18)    (.42)
                > 3   years      —2.65     .75     • 39    -.34
                                                                      .85
                                          (.12)   (.23)    (.51)
                >   5 years       1.44     .65     • 12   —1.01
                                                                      .94
                                          (.12    (.23)    (.55)
                >   10 years      3.20     .63     .00    —1.48
                                                                      .97
                                          (.25)   (.59)   (1.75)

                               Constant     II    ATRR     VarGNP
1954—1979      OLS               0.85      .68     .00   —.51
                                                                      .80
                                          (.09)   (.00)  (.42
               > 3    years      0.60      .70     .00   —.49
                                                                      .84
                                          (.12)   (.00)  (.51)
               > 5    years       1.64     .67     .00   — .90
                                                                      .91
                                          (.10)   (.00)  (.47)
               > 10   years      2.00      .67     .00  —1.10
                                                                      .97
                                          (.19)   (.01) (1.43)

Note: Regressions estimated using the band spectral
      procedure. Data are described in the text.
                           —38—


observation. The notion here is that the attractiveness of debt
securities should increase as the equity risks rise. If infla-
tion is associated with greater real variability, this could lead
to the negative association between inflation and real interest
rates demonstrated in the preceding section.
     The results do not bear out this hypothesis. The data do
    tend to suggest that increases in risk depress nominal
interest rates. However this correlation cannot account for the
non-adjustment of interest rates to inflation. The estimates of
the effects of inflation are very close to those in preceding

section.

     The second half of the table reports the results of including
proxies for the real rate of return on capital and an alternative
risk measure. This necessitated the use of annual data. The

marginal product of capital is alternatively proxied by the
real pre—tax marginal product, BTRR and post—tax marginal product
ATRR reported in Feldstein, Poterba, and Dicks-Niraeux (1980).
These estimates are based only on the non—financial corporate
sector. The risk measure is a moving 8 quarter variance of real
GNP growth rates. The results suggest some impact of real returns
and risk measure on interest rates. However, inclusion of these
variables also has little impact on estimates of the effect of

inflation on interest rates.
     The results reported here are a very small sample of a
large number of equations which were estimated in an effort to

rescue the Fisher effect by including additional variables. All
                            —39--




were unsuccessful. Perhaps there is some unmeasurable variable
which is correlated with inflation, and which affects required
real returns. This possibility is examined in the next section.
                                 —4 O-




IV.   Interest   Rates and Equity Values

      The empirical analysis in the previous section suggests that
poriods of high inflation are associated with low real interest
rates. One line of explanation for this phenomenon holds that
inflation is associated with the more fundamental factors that

impact on real interest rates. The previous section which exa-
mined proxies for the real rate of profit and level of economic

risk, showed that they do not account for the anomalous relation
between inflation and interest rates. A more indirect approach
to this question is through a study of the relation between in-
flation and alternative indicators of the real interest rate.

The stock market provides a natural alternative indicator.

      There are three possible ways to measure the real interest
rate using stock market data. The most obvious and standard
approach is through the use of holding period returns. The ex-
post return on stocks should equal the required ex-ante rate plus
a risk premium. The difficulty is that the enormous volatility of

stock prices imply that ex-post returns are very noisy indicators.
An alternative is the use of the earnings or dividend price ratio.
The basic difficulty with both these measures is that they will be
misleading if there are transitory movements in dividends or
earnings. This difficulty should be less important in the low
frequency range studied here. The choice between dividends and

earnings is somewhat unclear. Earnings would seem preferable since
the value of a firm!s assets is the present value of their earn-
ings stream. The dividend price ratio is also considered because
                           —42—

                           Table 58

                Inflation and Equity Yields

                  Earnings Price Ratio

Sample Period     Constant            Slope
  1871—1914        7.21                .06     .03
                                      (.08)

  1871—1940        7.58               —.10     .12
                                      (.06)
  1919—1940        6.97               —.02     .01
                                      (. 11)

  1948—1979        6.91                .36     .12
                                      (.30)

  1954—1979        5.31                .49     .54
                                      (.16)

  1871—1979        7.66                .12     .11
                                      (.05)



                  Dividend Price Ratio
Sample Period     Constant                         2
                                      Slope    R
 1871—1914          4.74              —.13     .38
                                      (.04)

 1871—1940          4.98              —.03     .05
                                      (.02)
 1919—1940          5.03              —.03     .11
                                      (.03)

 1948—1979          4.03               .03     .01
                                      (.13)

 1954—1979          3.24               .10     .30
                                      (.06)
 1871—1979         4.82               —.03     .04
                                      (.02)
                             —41—



it can be measured more accurately, and because there is some
evidence that dividends are set on the basis of "permanent earn-

ings".
     Evidence on the relationship between low frequency move-
ments in these variables and inflation is presented in Table 8.
All the regressions are estimated filtering out cycles of length
less than 5 years. The results indicate that for all the sample
periods, there is no strong relation between inflation and dividend
price ratios or earnings price ratios. During the Post-War
period the relationship is positive and in some cases statisti-
cally significant. The failure of dividend and earnings price
ratios to decline with inflation is surprising in light of the
failure of nominal interest rates to adjust. This is especially
true in the Post—War period when increases in inflation have been
associated with sharp decreases in after tax real interest rates.
     The lower part of the table examines the relation between
the holding return on stocks and inflation. For all of the pre-
War period it appears that the relationship was positive and

statistically insignificant. Surprisingly it is negative during
the Post-War period. This is largely a reflection of the disas-
trous performance of the market during the high inflation decade
of the 1970's. These results provide some weak support for the
view that something has depressed real rates of return during the
1970's. The behavior of earnings and dividend price ratios,

however, suggests the opposite.
                                —43—


Table 8, cont.

                      Holding Period Returns

Sample Period         Constant          Slope         R2
  1871—1914             7.44             1.33          .41
                                         (.41)
  1871—1940             8.83              .82         .20
                                         (.33)
  1919—1940            14. 65             .78         .13
                                         (.81)
  1948—1979            18. 72          —1.61          .44
                                         (.57)
  1954—1979            17. 65          —1.48          .36
                                        (.71)
  1871—1979             8. 93            .55          .09
                                        (.27)

Notes: All regressions are estimated using a band spectral
        technique which filters out all cycles of length
        less than 5 years. Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                 —44—



       The results raise the question of whether the puzzling behavior
of the interest rates and the stock market are related. This question
is examined in Table 9. The first column displays a crude proxy
for the real after tax interest rate. Its value has declined sharply
in recent years. The second and third columns present estimates of
the earnings—price ratio on an inflation adjusted and unadjusted
basis. The adjusted earnings—price ratio is derived from the S&P

500 ratio, after makinq adjustment for historic cost depreciation,
FIFO   inventory accounting, and the deduction of nominal interest
payments in calculating profits. Details of the calculation are
provided in Summers (1981d)    Both display significant increases in

the recent high inflation years.
       The increasing value of the earnings—price ratio, coupled with
the declining real interest rate, has substantially widened the
spread between the expected return on debt and equity. It is
interesting to ask whether the relationship of the total market
value of the corporation to the stream of returns generated for
investors has changed. This question is answered in the fourth
column of the table. It shows that this ratio has not risen in
recent years. The decline in real stock prices has offset the
rise in bond prices associated with lower interest rates leaving
the valuation of the corporate sector relative to the income it

generates unchanged.
                              Table 9

                   Real Interest and Equity Returns
                                        Inflation
           After Taxa
                           Earnings-
                                        Ad j us ted       Post Taxd
           Real Interest   Price        Earnings_PriceC   Market Value-
Year           Rate        Ratio        Ratio             Income Ratio

1955             .83        .079             .060             .047
1956           1.30         .073             .053             .034
1957           1.24         .076             .058             .035
1958           1.00         .059             .043             .030
1959           1.38         .056             .046             .035
1960           1.38         .057             .046             .034
1961           1.70         .046             .036             .030
1962           1.57         .058             .053             .041
1963           1.68         .055             .051              041
1964           1.78         .053             .048             • 045
1965           1.73         .056'            .053             .048
1966           1.81         .066             .065             .053
1967           1.71         .056             .054             .047
1968           1.15         .055             .057             .039
1969           2.16         .059             .059             .034
1970           2.27          062             .059             .031
1971           1. 14        .052             .047             .032
1972           1.10         • 052            .044             .038
1973            .650        .068             .064             .031
1974           —.4          .109              094              010
1975           —.36         .088             .069             .032
1976           —.42         .086             .059             .036
1977          —1.02         .104             .087             .040
1978           — .58        • 115            .092             .039




a)
     Estimated as the municipal, bond rate minus a weighted average
     of the five previous years consumer price inflation rate.
b)
     Annual average of the S&P earnings-price ratio.

c)
     The S&P earnings-price ratio adjusted to calculate profits on
     an inflation adjusted basis as described in Summers (1980c).
d)
     Ratio of post corporate and individual tax earnings, as calculated
     by Feldstein and Poterba (1980), to market value of corporate
     debt and equity claims.
                                —46—



     This phenomenon can be described in another way. The constancy
of the income-value ratios in column four suggests that by historical
standards the corporate sector is not mis—valued. Rather, the
puzzle lies in the relative valuation of the two types of claims on
corporate income. The spread between them has widened very substan-
tially from 3.1 percent in 1965 to 9.8 percent in 1978. The
entire puzzle lies in the increase in this spread. If the spread
had remained constant at its 1965 values, the nominal municipal bond
interest rate would have been 12.7 percent in 1978 rather than

6.9 percent. Since expected inflation rose by 5.5 percent between
1965 and 1978, an the interest rate was 3.3 in 1965, this figure
would imply a very significant impact of inflation on interest rates.

     The finding that inflation increases the spread between
debt and equity yields strongly supports the view of Fisher (1930)

and Modigliani and Cohn (1979) that investors suffer from money
illusion. If, as the latter suggest, they confuse nominal and
real interest rates in valuing stock, we would expect to see stock
prices undervalued. Likewise bonds would be overvalued as their
apparent attractiveness is overstated. An alternative explanation
might hold that the risk premium required to get investors to hold
equities increases with the rate of inflation. Efforts to explain
earnings and dividend price ratios using the measures of risk

discussed in the preceding section proved unsuccessful, casting

some doubt on this conjecture. In any event, it is not clear that
 this hypothesis is operationally distinguishable from the inflation
illusion hypothesis.
                              —47—


V. Conclusions


     The empirical analysis in this paper demonstrates that US
interest rates do not appear to systematically incorporate in—

flation premiums in the way that classical monetary theories
suggest. The data for the 860-1940 period indicate no tendency
for interest rates to increase with movements in expected inflation.

For the Post-War period theory suggests that interest rates should
have increased much more than point for point with inflation in

the presence of taxes. The data suggests some tendency for interest
rates to adjust to changes in expected inflation, but far less than
is predicted by the theory. These conclusions hold at low fre-

quencies and thus primarily reflect the effects of changes in infla-
tion caused by movements in the long run rate of money growth. The

implied strong negative relationship between inflation and real
interest rates is not explicable in terms of changes in either

proxies for the marginal product of capital    the risk premium.

Furthermore, it appears that increases in the rate of inflation
are associated with a widening of the spread between the real
ex-ante return on bonds and stocks.

     These facts taken together at least raise the possibility
that some form of money illusion infects financial markets. All

are explicable by the hypothesis that for the Pre-War period agents
ignored inflation in making financial calculations. As the average
inflation rate increased during the Post-War period, investor

sophistication increased and the market partially but not fully
reflected the impact of changes in inflation. This hypothesis
                             —47—


V. Conclusions


     The empirical analysis in this paper demonstrates that US

interest rat.es do not appear to systematically incorporate in-

flation premiums in the way that classical monetary theories
suggest. The data for the 860-1940 period indicate no tendency
for interest rates to increase with movements in expected inflation.

For the Post-War period theory suggests that interest rates should
have increased much more than point for point with inflation in
the presence of taxes. The data suggests some tendency for interest
rates to adjust to changes in expected inflation, but far less than
is predicted by the theory. These conclusions hold at low fre-

quencies and thus primarily reflect the effects of changes in infla-
tion caused by movements in the long run rate of money growth. The
implied strong negative relationship between inflation and real
interest rates is not explicable in terms of changes in either

proxies for the marginal product of capital    the risk premium.

Furthermore, it appears that increases in the rate of inflation

are associated with a widening of the spread between the real
ex—ante return on bonds and stocks.
     These facts taken together at least raise the possibility
that some form of money illusion infects financial markets. All
are explicable by the hypothesis that for the Pre—War period agents
ignored inflation in making financial calculations. As the average
inflation rate increased during the Post-War period, investor
sophistication increased and the market partially but not fully
reflected the impact of changes in inflation. This hypothesis
 also accounts for several other puzzles. Efforts to estimate

 Phillips curves on any data generated prior to 1965 consistently
 generate the conclusion that long run inflation is not neutral.
 More generally, the failure of market participants to understand
 the effects of inflation is the most plausible explanation for

 the abundance of nominally rigid institutions. Do purchasers of
 annuities wish less insurance when the rate of inflation increases?
Did borrowers and lenders in the mortgage market desire the

effective shortening of maturities which has resulted from in-

creasing inflation? These are just prominent examples of the
general failure to adopt contractual provision which are neutral
to inflation. The absence of private indexing arrangements has
not been satisfactorily explained.

     How unlikely is it that market participants should be unaware
of the distinction between nominal and real interest rates? It is

noteworthy that it was not until the 20th centruy that the dis-
tinction was even introduced into economic analysis. There is
little evidence in mainstream economic writings in the l950's and

1960's of an awareness of this distinction. Almost universally,
it was believed that low interest rates were both the short and

long run consequence of easy money policies. The distinction be-
tween nominal and real interest rates is constantly confused in

investors' sources of information. Modigliani and Cohn (1979)
described an informal survey of brokerage letters supporting
this proposition.
                            —49—


     These considerations suggest the plausibility of some form
of inflation illusion infecting financial markets. One major
piece of evidence which casts doubt on the inflation illusion
hypothesis is the behavior of house prices in recent years.

James Poterba (1980) and I (1981) have suggested that the inter-
action of inflation and taxes can account for the boom in house
prices in recent years. If home buyers displayed substantial
inflation illusion, high nominal interest rates should have choked
of f housing demand, and led to a decline in real prices. One
would expect inflation illusion to be much more prevalent among

the relatively unsophisticated, liquidity constrained purchasers
of homes, than among the investors in the stock and bond markets.

The failure of housing construction to increase as predicted by
models which emphasize tax effects may imply that increasing
construction costs are the real reason for house price appreci-
ation. It is also possible that the boom in home prices represents
a speculative bubble. Furthermore, it is possible that investors form
expectations about real interest rates on an asset from its past
price behavior. This would imply a low real rate on housing and
a high real rate on stocks at the present time.
     In considering the suggestion that financial markets are
inefficient because of inflation illusion, it is important to
examine what market forces should be pushing towards the restor-

ation of efficiency. The fundamental implication of the view
developed in Modigliani and Cohn (1979) and supported here, is
                             —50—


is the myriad constraints the capital market imposes on borrowing.

By artificially limiting the demand for funds, these restrictions
which bite more sharply when inflation is high, tend to reduce
interest rates below the level they would otherwise attain.

     This analysis may help illuminate the reasons for the current
high level of interest rates. In 1965, the AAA. bond rate was
4 percent. The long run model developed in the first section
implies that the increase of 8 points in the inflation rate which
has taken place in the interim should have raised bond rates by
about 11 points. This yields a 15 percent rate which is close to
what is observed in the market as this is written.   It is just
possible that current high interest rates reflect investors finally
shedding their inflation illusion. The dismal performance of the
stock market in recent months, remains inexplicable on this view.
                            —51—


that as the rate of inflation increases the expected real return
on stocks relative to bonds should rise. This inefficiency would
be corrected if increases in inflation led sophisticated investors
to borrow and buy stock, or shift some of their portfolio to equity.

Both of these strategies involve taking on additional risk. In-
deed, it seems impossible to devise a strategy for profitting
from inflation illusion which does not involve taking an additional
risk. This is because of the absence of safe real assets or
nominal assets with risk characteristics similar to common stock.
This factor places limits on the extent to which any individual
will be willing to invest to take advantage of the inefficiency.
If investors are fairly inflexible about the amount of risk they

are willing to bear, it may require a very large number to eli-
minate the tendency of market prices to reflect inflation illusion.
     Several other factors suggest that inflation illusion is not
readily succeptible to elimination by market forces. The very
set of financially sophisticated investors who could most profit
from its presence are trained to believe in its non-existence.

More seriously, focusing on nominal yields may be individually
rational, if collectively undesirable. The holder of a nominal
mortgage should not purchase an indexed bond. For any individual
it may be rational to compare nominal yields. This is particularly
true where constraints expressed in nominal terms are present.
Examples include institutions or individuals who are permitted to
spend "income" but not to "dip into capital". A thirdfactor
limiting the ability of market forces to overcome inflation illusion
                                     —52—

                                   Appendix


        A number of authors using data on the Post World War II
 period have estimated equations which they have interpreted as

 providing evidence in favor of the Fisher hypothesis. From the

 perspective of this paper, these equations are not well specified.
 and are not likely to be stable. This appendix verifies this

conjecture using two standard procedures for modelling expecta-
tions. It also demonstrates that the anomalous results obtained
in the paper are not the consequence of the use of the band

spectral technique.


       The basic equation to be estimated is of the form:

       Rt =
                                                        (A-l)




where the principal empirical difficulty is. the measure-
ment of

       The Keynesian model holds that inflationary expectations at
a point in time are predominantly a function of past rates of
inflation. This implies that:

             T
         =
             0    it-i
                 w.fl                                  (A—2)



Under this assumption the relationship between interest rates
and   inflation    can be inferred from the distributed lag relation:



      r =ol                                            (A-3)
                                       —53—


if the additional identifying restriction:

        T

        0 •1
        E
                =                                           (A—4)

is imposed. This restriction is necessary if a constant rate
of inflation maintained for T periods is to lead to an equal ex-

pected rate of inflation. However as Sargent (1971), (1973)
and others have pointed out, it may not be appropriate if inflation

follows any other stationary stochastic process, e.g.         ,   if inflation
rates follow the process:


                =
                    D11tl   + Ut                              (A-5)


then the optimal autoregressive predictor of inflation will have

Ew = p.             Since the assumption here is that inflation expectations
are based on arbitrary rules rather than rational forecasts, this
point is neglected here. Rational expectations are considered below.
In estimating (A-3) many investigators constrain the w. to lie
on some simple curve. This approach is undesirable if the goal
is just to estimate the sum of the lag coefficients as is the case

here.

        The second assumption about expectations examined in the

empirical work below is that inflationary expectations are
rational. This case can be treated easily using a procedure due
to McCallum (1976). The assumption of rationality implies that:
            =                                                (A-6)
                11t—1,t + Ut
                                          —54—

    where
                u      uncorrelated
                            with any information available at time t—l.
    If u were correlated with any information available at time t
    such information could be used to        improve the formation of 1T. Consider
    the regression equation where the realized rate of inflation             is
    used as a proxy for the expected rate.        That is:
            Rt =     o8l11tut                                  (A-7)
    Equation (A—6) implied that (A—7) meets the conditions of the classical

    errors in variables problem. Consistent estimates are obtainable
    if there exist instruments correlated with the expected rate of
    inflation, but uncorrelated with any expectational errors.

The assumption of rationality implies that any information avail-
able at time t-l meets these criteria. In particular, lagged
values of inflation are suitable instruments. Thus the rational

expeôtations assumption is implemented below by estimating

    equation (A-7) using lagged values of inflation as instruments.
          Fama (1975) has developed an alternative approach to studying

the relationship between interest rates and inflation.               He begins
by postulating that the expected real interest rate is constant.
In this case:
                =
                                                             (A-8)
where p         is   the expected real interest rate. The assumption that
p    is   constant enables us to write:
          e =
                re-p                                         (A-9)
The assumption of rational expectations embodied in (12) allows
us to estimate the relation.
            =
      'It       a+a1rt+u                                     (A-b)
                                 —55—


The joint assumptions of a constant real rate and rational

expectations imply that      = 1 and that U is serially Uncorrelated.

Farna (1975) reports that he obtains results consistent with these

assumptions for the 1954-71 Period. The robustness of this con-
clusion is examined below by extending his tests to other sample

periods.
     In Table A-i, the relationship between inflation and short
and long term interest rates isexarnined for the 1860-1940 period,

using the techniques described above for measuring expectations.
     Neither the results using the Keynesian nor the classical
assumptions provide support for the view that interest rates

adjust fully to incorporate inflation premiums. In no decade does
the estimate of        for commercial paper exceed .34. The estimate
                  an
for the entire period is only .04 based on the Keynesian assumption,
all eight decadal estimates of         are negative. The longer period
                                 dii
results are almost as unfavorable. The results are not substantially
altered when longer lags are assumed in the formation of inflation
expectations. The long rate results are equally unfavorable to the
Fisher effect. The rational expectations estimates are again

consistently negative while the Keynesian expectations estimates
are always statistically insignificant. Every equation for either
the short or long rate rejects the conclusion that dr = 1     with

t statistics in excess of 10. Thus the data overwhelmingly refute
the hypothesis that nominal interest rates adjusted to insure the
neutrality of inflation.
                              -5 &-



                             Table A-i
          Decadal Estimates of dr/d Prior to World War II
                 (Standard errors in parentheses)

                   Commercial Paper                Long RateC
 Period      Xevnesiana      Rationaib      Keynesian       Rational
1860—69         —0.01          —0.01           —0.02          —0.01
                (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.01)         (0.03)
1870—79          0.34          —0.05            0.11          —0.23
                (0.07)         (0.05)          (0.06)         (0.10)
1880—89          0.04          —0.02            0.10          —0.26
                (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.01)         (0.06)
1890—99          0.01          —0.03            0.02          —0.14
                (0.07)         (0.04)          (0.02)         (0.02)
1900—09          0.03          —0.02           —0.12         —0.08
                (0.08)         (0.03)          (0,02)         (0.02)
1910—19          0.02          —0.01            0.06         —0.11
                (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.02)
1920—29          0.04          —0.16           —0.14         —0.86
                (0.05)         (0.03)          (0.03)         (0.27)
1930—39         —0.17          —0.10           —0.23         —0.30
                (0.03)         (0.02)          (0.03)         (0.05)

1860—1913        0.03           0.03            0.03         —0.31
                (0.01)         (0.02)          (0.01)         (0.08)
1914—1939        0.07           0.02            0.05         —0.38
                (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.01)         (0.05)
1860—1939        0.04           0.04            0.04         —0.36
                (0.01)         (0.02)          (0.01)         (0.06)



     alndicates the sum of the coefficients in the ordinary least
squares regression of the CP rate on 8 lagged quarters of inflation.

     bCoefficient yielded by regression of CP on current inflation
where 8 lagged rates of inflation are used as instruments. This
two—stage procedure, relevant to estimating an equation with an
unobservable but rationally formed expectations variable is de-
scribed in the text.

     CLong rate used is represented by the Railroad Bond yield in
MacCaulay from 1860-1918, and the Federal Reserve AAA bond yield
from 1919—1979. In the OLS regression, 20 lagged quarters of in-
flation were used. In the two—stage procedure, the realized 10
year inflation rate (annualized), starting at time t, was instru-
inented using 20 1agge values of quarterly inflation.
                                    —57—


     Similar conclusions emerge from an extension of Fama's

tests to the pre-war period. Results of this exercise are reported
in Table A-2. In seven of the eiht decades the coefficient on the
interest rate is negative. Only the weakness of the statistical
tests precludes fejection of the Fisher hypothesis. The pre-
dictive power of interest rates in explaining inflation is

negligible. The estimadvalues of the ex-ante real interest
rate are ludicrous, ranging from -1.1 during the 1870's to 51.9

during t1e 1910—19 period.

The Post-War Period

     The analysis in the first section of the paper suggests that
one could expect         >1 in the post—war period. Estimates of this
                   dTI
parameter for intervals after WWII are presented in Table A-3. The
regression procedures are the same as those in the pre—war analysis.
The short rate is proxied by the rate on Treasury bills while the
AAA bond rate is used as a measure of the long rate. Re-estimating

the equations using alternative interest rates had no important
effect on the results, nor did the use of monthly or annual data.

     The results for both the short and long rates are broadly
consistent. There is no evidence that interest rates have risen more
than the rate of inflation. In only a few instances, the data is
unable to reject the hypothesis that dr = 1, and in no case is it
                                      e
impossible to reject dr = 1.3 at a very high level of confidence.
The results differ substantially across subperiods. It appears that
almost all of the power in the interest rate-inflation relation
comes from the acceleration of inflation during the 1960's. The
data for the 1940's and 1950's reveal no statistically significant
                             —58—


                            Table A-2
            Regressions of the Inflation Rate,
              on the Short-Term Rate of Interesta
               (Standard errors in parentheses)

Period       Constants                    R2         DW
                              Rt
1860—69        71.50       —8.66         0.13       1.57
                            (3.34)
1870—79        —1.11        0.02        —0.02       1.82
                            (1.32)
1880—89         5.17       —1.47        —0.01       1.76
                            (2.27)
1890—99         7.31       —1.25        —0.01       1.95
                           (1.54)
1900—09        14.40       —2.35        0.04        2.31
                           (1.49)
1910—19        51.90       —8.80        0.17        1.22
                           (2.96)
1920—29        13.80       —3.03        0.50        1.03
                           (0.47)
1930—39        .3.20       —3.22        0.30        1.06
                           (0.75)
1860—1913       9.30       —1.30        0.01        1.55
                           (0.80)
1914—1939       3.60       —0.25        —0.01       0.87
                           (0.68)



     aAll regressions were run OLS. The relevant inflation rate
for 1860 through 1918 is the realized 3 month rate of change in
prices. For 1919 to 1939, it is the realized 6 month rate of
change.
                                —59—



                                Table   A-3

                     Post-War Estimates of di/di e
                   (Standard errors in parentheses)

                     3-Month T_BIllSa                         AAA Rate
-.

     Period Autoregressive Rational Period Autoregressive Rational
     1947—79      0.35         0.38     1946—69       —0.26              0.72
                  (0.05)      (0.05)                  (0.05)         (0.08)
                  0.33         0.35
     Omitting
     Controls     (0.05)      (0.06)
     1947—55      —0.04       —0.03     1946—55       —0.08          —0.32
                  (0.02)      (0.02)                  (0.01)         (0.05)
     1956—65      —0.16        0.05     1956—65       0.07            0.22
                  (0.17)      (0.15)                  (0.25)         (0.06)
     1966—75      0.35         0.47
                  (0.66)      (0.07)
                  0.38         0.51
     Omitting
     Controls     (0.08)      (0.13)
     1950—59      0.00         0.00     1950—59       —0.07              0.55
                  (0.10)      (0.08)                  (0.07)         (0.37)
     1960—69      0.85         0.77     1960—69       0.82               0.58
                  (0.08)      (0.10)                  (0.05)         (0.06)
     1970—79      0.47         0.51
                  (0.08)      (0.06)
                  0.49         0.55
     Omitting
     Controls                 (0.09)
                  (0.13)


          aSee Table 2 for explanation of regression procedures. Three
     month bills were used here in order to be consistent with Table 5
     (see footnote a, Table 5). The difference between these results
     and those obtained using the commercial paper rate are statistic-
     ally insignificant.
          bFor these regressions, we omitted the 12 observations
     1971:3 through 1974:2.
                                —60—

inflation effects. The regressions for the 1970's also exhibit
effects of inflation which are significantly smaller than those

found for the entire period. Farna (1975) argues that the price
level is mismeasured during the controls period. Omission of this
interval has no significant effect on the results. Hence the
inflation-interest rate nexus appears to be very weak during the
1970's. It seems difficult to escape the conclusion that even

viewed from a purely post—war perspective the strong inflation-
interest rate relationship during the 1960's was an aberration.

     Somewhat more favorable results (Table A-4) were obtained using
the Fama procedure. The results for the whole period are consistent
with dr =  1 although the low Durbin-Watson statistic is troublesome.
     dne
The hypothesis that dr = 1.3 as predicted by theory is again
refuted. The failure of the Fisher relationship in the 1950's

and 1970's again emerges clearly. These results do not exactly
parallel Fama's because of the use of quarterly data. However, the
results for sample periods comparable to this   closely parallel
those he reports. It seems reasonable therefore to conclude that the
failure of these tests outside his sample period casts doubt on
the robustness of his conclusion.
                               —61—



                              Table A-4

 Regressions of Quarterly Inflation Rate on 3-Month T—Bills P.ates
                (Standard errors in parentheses)

Period          Constant                                 DW

1947—79           —0 .   31       1.14       0.37       1.18
                                 (0.12)
Omit tin          —0.06           1.04       0.31       1.19
Controls                         (0.14)
194 7—55           6.33          —2.94       0.04       1.37
                                 (1.82)
1956—65            0.85           0.32       0. 00      1.80
                                 (0.33)
1966—75           —3.32           1.59       0.51       1.53
                                 (0.24)
Orni tt in       —0.43            0.96       0.30       1.74
Controls                         (0.26)
1950—5 9           2.06          —0.18      —0.02       1.06

1960—69          —1.82            1.12       0.61       2.07
                                 (0.14)
1970—79           —2.78           1.66       0.65       1.87
                                 (0.19)
                  —2 .   31       1.56       0.61       1.85
Ornitting
Controls                         (0.23)




       aAll regressions are estimated OLS using quarterly data.


     bFor these regressions, we omitted the 12 observations
1971:3 through 1974:2.
                                 —62—


                            Ref erences



 Abel, Andrew. "Empirical Investment and Equations: An Integrative
                Framework," in Karl Brunner and Allan H. Metzler,
                eds., On the State of Macro-Economics, Carnegie-
                Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
                12 (Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1980), PP. 39—91.
 Cargill, T.F. and Meyer, R.A. "Intertemporal Stability of the
                Inflation Interest Rate Relationship." 3. Finance
               32   (September 1977).
 Carison, John A. "Expected Inflation and Interest Rates."
               Economic Inquiry 17 (October 1979): 597—608.
Cowles, Alfred. Commons Stock Indexes, Cowles Foundation Monogra-
               phy 1939.

Darby, Michael R. "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary
               Policy on Interest Rates." Economic Inquiry 13
               (June 1975): 266—276.
Engle, Robert F. "Band Spectrum Regression." mt. Econ. Rev.
               15 (February 1974) : 1—11.
Fama, Eugene F. "Short Term Interest Rates as Predictors of
               Inflation." AER 65 (June 1975) : 269—282.
Fama, Eugene F., and Michael R. Gibbons, "Inflation Real Returns
               and Capital Investment," unpublished, Graduate
               School of Business, University of Chicago, May 1980.
Feldstein, Martin. "Inflation, Income Taxes, and theRate of
               Interest: A Theoretical Analysis." AER 66 (December
               1976): 809—830.

_______________     "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Stock Market."
               JME, July 1980, pp. 309—331.
Feldstein, N., Poterba, J. "State and Local Taxes and the Rate of
               Return on Nonfinancial Corporate Capital," NBER
               working paper 508, July 1980.
Feldstejn, Martin and Summers, Lawrence. "Inflation, Tax Rules and
               the Long-Term Interest Rate." BPEA 1: 1978, 61-109.
_________________• "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital Income
               in the Corporate Sector." National Tax Journal 32
               (December 1979) : 445—470.
                                —63—


 Fisher, Irving. The Rate of Interest: Its Nature, Determination,
                and Relation to Economic Phenomena. New York:
                Macmillan, 1907.

_________________       The Theory of Interest. New York: Macmillan,
                1930.

Friedman, Milton, and Schwartz, Anna J. Monetary Trends in the
               United States and the United Kingdom: Their Relation
               to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates l867—l9757
               NBER draft, 1980.

Gibson, William E. "Interest Rates and Inflation Expectations."
               AER 62 (December 1970) : 854—65.

Gordon, Robert J. Comment on Sargent, JMCB 4, Feb. 1973.

Gordon, Roger. "Inflation, Taxation, and Corporate Behavior."
               mimeo, 1980.

Gordon, Roger and Malkiel, Burton. "Taxation and Bankruptcy Costs."
               mimeo, 1979.

Hayashi, Furnio. "The q Theory of Investment: A Neoclassical
               Interpretation." forthcoming in Econometrica, 1981.
Hendershott, P. "The Decline of Aggregate Share Values: Inflation
               and Taxation of the Returns from Equities and Owner
               Occupied Housing." NBER Working Paper #370, 1977.
Ibbotson, Roger G. and Sinquefield, Rex A. "Stocks, Bonds, Bills,
               and Inflation: Year-by-Year Historical Returns
               (1926—1974)." Journal of Business, vol. 49
               (January 1976), pp. 11—47.
MacCauley, Frederick. Some Theoretical Problems Suggested by the
               Movements of Interest Rates, Bond Yields and Stock
               Prices in the United States Since 1856. New York:
               NBER, 1938.

McCallum, B.T. "Rational Expectations and the Estimation of
               Econometric Models: An Alternative Procedure."
               mt. Econ. Rev. 17 (June 1976) : 484—490.
Mishkin, F. The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation
               NBER Working Paper #622, 1981.
Modigliani, Franco, and Cohn, Richard A. "Inflation, Rational
               Valuation, and the Market," Financial Analysts
               Journal, vol. 35 (March—April 1979) , pp. 24—44.
Poterba, James. "Inflation, Income Taxes, and Owner—Occupied
               Housing," NBER Working Paper #553, 1980
Sargent, Thomas J. "A Note on the. 'Accelerationist' Controversy."
               JMCB 3 (August 1971) : 50—60.
                                  —64—


 Sargent, Thomas J. "Interest Rates and Prices in the Long Run:
                A Study of the Gibson Paradox." JMCB 4 (February
                   1973) : 385—449.

________________      "What Do Regressions of Interest on Inflation
                  Show?" Ann. Econ. Soc. Measure 2 (July 1973):
               289—301.

_______________   "Interest Rates and Expected Inflation: A Selective
               Summary of Recent Research." Explorations in
               Economic Research 3 (Summer 1976): 303-325.
_______________      Macroeconomic Theory. New York: Academic Press,
               1979.

Shiller, Robert J., and Siegel, Jeremy 7. "The Gibson Paradox
               and Historical Movements in Real Interest Rates."
               JPE 85 (October 1977) : 891—90 7.

Summers, Lawrence."Inflatjon, Taxation and Corporate Investment:
               A Q Theory Approach", BPEA 1981:1. (a)
_______________• "Inflation, the Stock Market, and Owner Occupied
               Housing", AER 71 (May l981):492—434. (b)
_______________• "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life
               Cycle Growth Model." AER (September 1981).  (c)

______________•   "Inflation and the Valuation of Corporate Equities."
               forthcoming, 1981.  (d)

Tanzi, Vito. "Inflationary Expectations, Economic Activity, Taxes,
               and Interest Rates." AER 70 (March 1980): 12-21.
Tobin, James. "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory."
               JMCB 1 (1969): 15—29.

Yohe, William and Karnofsky, Denis S. "Interest Rates Price Level
               Changes, 1952—1969." St. Louis FRB Review 51
               (December 1969): 19—36.
