                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE IMPACT OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING:
                 CAN THE NEW FACTS BE EXPLAINED
                      BY MONOPOLY iJNIONISr?


                       Richard B. Freeman

                         James L. Medoff


                      Working Paper No. 837




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge    02138

                           January 1 982




This paper is a revised version of an earlier study; see Freeman
and Medoff (1981h). The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #837
                                                      January 1982



               The Impact of Collective Bargaining: Can the New Facts
                    Be Explained by Monopoly Unionism?


                                      ABSTRACT

         In this paper we focus our attention on the question of whether

union/nonunion differences in nonwage outcomes can, in fact, be explained in

terms   of   standard price—theoretic responses to real wage effects, as opposed to

the real effect of unionism on economic behavior.

         We reach three basic conclusions. First, unions and collective

bargaining have real economic effects on diverse nonwage variables which cannot

be explained either in terms of price—theoretic responses to union wage effects

or be attributed to the poor quality of our econometric "experiments". Second,

we find that while sensitivity analyses of single—equation results and longitu-

dinal experiments provide valuable checks on cross—sectional findings, multiple—

equations approaches produced results which are too sensitive to small changes

in models or samples to help resolve the questions of concern. Finally, on the

basis of these findings we conclude that the search for an understanding of what

unions do requires more than the standard price theoretic "monopoly" model of

unionism. New (and/or old) perspectives based on institutional or industrial

relations realities, contractarian or property rights theories, or other poten-

tial sources of creative views are also needed.




                                             Richard B. Freeman
                                             National Bureau of Economic Research
                                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             (617) 868—3915

                                             James L. Medoff
                                             Harvard University
                                             Littauer Center Room 116
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             (617) 495—4209
        The recent outpouring of empirical studies on the impact of collective

bargaining on the econonbr has provided us   with   a large body of new evidence

regarding differences between union and nonunion workers and union and nonunion

enterprises along many dimensions other than rates of pay.

        Can the observed union/nonunion differences in non—wage outcomes be

explained primarily in terms of preunion characteristics of firms or

individuals? Can the observed differences be explained as a response to the

erfect of unions on wages? Or does the new evidence suggest that unions have an

important impact on economic performance through routes ignored in the standard

monopoly model of the institution?

        The need for and value of new theories of trade unionism depends on the

answers to these questions.

        In our initial review of recent literature 1/ we focused largely on the

question of whether union/nonunion differences obtained in cross—section studies

were illusions, which primarily reflected the poor quality of our econometric

Uexperimentstt. In this paper we wish to focus greater attention on the question

of whether union/nonunion differences in nonwage outcomes can, in fact, be

explained in terms of standard price—theoretic responses to real wage effects, as

opposed to the real effect of unionism on economic behavior.

        The paper is divided into four sections. Section I summarizes the

recent empirical findings about union/nonunion differences in non—wage outcomes

on which the interpretative debate focuses. The second section examines the

results of econometric probes designed to assess whether the effects set out in
                                      —2—

Section I are best interpreted as illusory due to innate differences between

union/nonunion workers or firms, as real for price theoretic reasons or real for

reasons that go beyond standard price theory and thus require new theoretical

perspectives. The final section lays out our conclusions regarding the implica-

tions of the evidence for the standard price theoretic or monopoly model of

unionism as opposed to other perspectives, both old and new.

        We reach three basic conclusions:

        1) Unions and collective bargaining have real economic effects on

diverse non—wage variables which cannot be explained either in terms of price—

theoretic responses to union wage effects or as illusions, attributable to the

poor quality of our econometric "experimentstt.

        2) Some econometric techniques for probing union/nonunion differences

provide useful insights into the real effects of unions while others do not. In

particular, we find that sensitivity analyses of single—equation results and

longitudinal experiments provide valuable checks on cross—sectional findings

while multiple—equations approaches produce results which are much too sensitive

to small changes in models or samples to help resolve the questions of concern.

        3) On the basis of these findings we conclude that the search for an

understanding of what unions do requires more than the standard price theoretic

"monopoly" model of unionism. New (and/or old) perspectives based on institu-

tional or industrial relations realities, contractarian or property rights

theories, or other potential sources of creative views are also needed.
                                            —3—


 I.     The Evidence in Question

            It   is important at the outset to lay out the union/nonunion differences

 in economic variables on which modern work has focused.        Accordingly this sec-

 tion briefly sumniarizes the central findings of recent research, including for

 purposes of comparison and ensuing analysis results on wages as well as non—wage

outcomes. As a guide to the discussion, Table 1 gives the central findings of

these studies categorized by the following substantive issues: the level and

structure of compensation; internal and external mobility; work rules,

 (management) flexibility and (employee) satisfaction; and inputs, productivity

and profits. The reader will notice that our set of issues is not exhaustive.

We have, in particular, neglected such important topics as the internal opera-

tion of unions, strikes, and the survival of the organization itself, in part

because these topics do not lend themselves to the Union/nonunion comparisons

which form the bulk of the research on the topics in the table. In addition, we

concentrate exclusively on the private sector. While, as noted, we have no pre-

tence that our set of issues is all—encompassing and while our listing of rele-

vant references is undoubtedly incomplete, we believe that the table provides a

reasonably accurate picture of the empirical results in question.

 The Level and Structure of Corn ensation

           The first and probably still the most widely studied issue is the dif-

ferential between union and nonunion wages. The early literature on this dif-

ferential was summarized in Lewis's influential 1963 book, Unionism and Relative

WageJn the United_States. Since         the publication of Lewis's book, a number of

new sources of individual—level data (such as     the   May Current Population Survey)
which   permit estimation of the wage effect have become available. With micro—
                                        ——


data of this kind, it is possible to compare the wages of union and nonunion

workers with similar demographic characteristics who are also in the same

detailed industry and/or occupation. As Johnson (1915) has reviewed some of

this work, our summary will be brief. The post—Lewis micro—data estimates

(derived with Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)) have generally found wage differen-

tials noticeably above the 10 to 15 percent range given in Lewiss book.

However, the analyses that have looked within more detailed cells, especially

those with industry as a dimension, have tended to yield estimated differentials

near the top end of the 10 to 15 percent range. This makes very good sense

given that the studies summarized by Lewis normally examined a very narrowly

defined group of workers. Another form of data which has been used in recent

studies pertains to individual establishments. These data (from surveys such as

the Employer Expenditures for Ernplree Comnpensation Survey (EEC)) permit the

estimation of wage effects for production or nonproduction workers among firms

of the same size within the same 3—digit Standard Industrial Classification

(SIC) industry. Estimates using these data are quantitatively closer to those

of Lewis, yielding union/nonunion differences of 10 percent or so. All told,

with rare exception, recent studies confirm the existence of a sizeable

union/nonunion wage differential.

       Another important aspect of the union wage effect which has been exa-

mined is the difference between union and nonunion wage adjustments to varying

economic   conditions.   The recent work on the cyclical variation in wage rates

has confirmed the earlier finding of Lewis that the union/nonunion wage dif-

ferential has tended to be greater during economic downturns, which suggests

that the reduction in (the growth of) real wage rates in response to a reductior

in product demand is smaller under trade unions. Interestingly, the work of
                                        —5--

                                    TABLE 1

      1: Recent Evidence on Union/Nonunion Differences Based on
          Cross—Sectional Data

        Variable                                         Partial Listing of
(Price Theoretic Control)   Finding                      Relevant References

Level and Structure of
Compensation
   Wage Rates               All else    (measureable)    Ashenfelter (1916),
                            the same, union/nonunion     Freeman & Medoff (1981a)
                            hourly wage differential     Lewis (1980), Mellow
                            is between 10% and 20%.      (1981a), Oaxaca (1975),
                                                         Welch (1980).

  Cyclical Responsiveness   Union wages are less res- Ashenfelter (1976),
  of Wage Rates             ponsive to cyclical varia- Hamerrnesh (1912), John-
                            tion in market conditions son (1981) , Lewis
                            than are nonunion wages.    (1963), Medoff (1979),
                                                       Medoff and Mitchel
                                                       (l980a, 1980b), Fay (in
                                                       process) Parson (1968),
                                                       Raisian (1979).

  Determinants of Corn—     Other things equal, the      Dalton & Ford (1971),
  pensation Differential    union compensation advan-    Donsimoni (1978), Ehren—
                            tage is higher the greater   berg (1979), Freeman &
                            the percentage of a mar-     Medoff (198la), Hayden
                            ket's workers who are         (1977), Hendricks
                            organized. The effects of     (1975), Kahn (1978),
                            market concentration on      Kochan (1980), Lee
                            wage differentials is        (1978), Mellow (198lb),
                            unclear. The differen-       Weiss (1966).
                            tials appear to be very
                            large in some regulated
                            markets. They appear to
                            decline as firm size in-
                            creases.

  Fringes                   All else the same, union!    Duncan (1976), Freeman
                            nonunion hourly fringe       (1981), Goldstein &
  (Wages(or total compen-   differential is between      Pauly (1916), Leigh
  sation) held fixed)       20% and 30%. The  fringe     (1979), Solnick (1978),
                            share of compensation is     Viscusi (1980).
                            higher at a given level
                            of compensation.

  Wage Dispersion           Wage inequality is mach    Free man
                            lower among union members (1980c,forthcoming,)
                            than among comparable non— Hyclak (1919—1980)
                            members and total wage     Plotnick (1981).
                            dispersion appears to be
                            lowered by unionism.
                                       —6--


                                TABLE 1 (cont.)

        Variable                                         Partial Listing of
(Price Theoretic Control)    Finding                     Relevant References

  Wage Structure            Wage differentials           Ashenfelter (1976),
                            between workers who are      Bloch & Kuskin (1918),
                            different in terms of        Johnson & Youmans (1911),
                            race, age, service, skill    Kiefer & Smith (1977),
                            level, and education         Leigh (1975), Pfeffer &
                            appear to be lower under     Ross (1980), Schoeplein
                            collective bargaining.       (1911), Shapiro (1918).

Internal & External Mobility
   Promotions                Seniority independent of    Halasz (1980), Medoff &
                             productivity is rewarded    Abraham (1980b, 1981b),
   (Wages and "labor         substantially more in       Yanker (1980).
   quality't held fixed)     promotion decisions among
                             union members than among
                             otherwise comparable non-
                            union employees.
  Quits                     The quit rate is much      Blau & Kahn (1981),
                            lower for unionized wor-   Block (1978a), Farber
  (Wages and "labor         kers than for similar wor- (OLS Results 1979),
  quality" held fixed)      kers who are nonunion.     Freeman (1976, 1980a,
                                                       1950b), Kahn (1911),
                                                       Leigh (1979).

  Temporary layoffs         There is much more cyc-    Blau & Kahn (1981),
                            lical labor adjustment     Medoff (1979).
  (Wages and "labor         through temporary lay-
  quality" held fixed)      offs in unionized rnanu—
                            facturing firms than in
                            otherwise comparable firms
                            that are nonunion.
  Terminations              Terminations are more        Blau & Kahn (1981),
                            likely to be on a last—      Medoff & Abraham
  (Wages and "labor         in—first—out basis among     (l981a, l981b).
  quality" held fixed)      union employees, ceteris
                            paribus.
                                     —1—


Work Rules, Flexibility
and Satisfaction
   Rules                   There are important dif-     Freeman (1980a), Kochan
                           ferences in the prevalence   & Bloch (1977), Kochan
   (Wages held fixed)      and nature of various        & Heifman (1917),
                           rules in union and non-      Medoff & Abraham (1981b).
                           union settings, such as
                           those stipulating the
                           role of company service
                           and the way grievances are
                           to be handled. Union work
                           places appear to be run
                           more by rules, with more
                           rigidity in the scheduling
                           of hours and less worker
                           flexibility.

  Management Practices     anagement in unionized     Clark (1980a).
                           cement firms appears to be
                           more professional (less
                           paternalistic or authori-
                           tarian), more standards
                           orient;ed, and more in touch
                           with work performance than
                           management in similar non-
                           union firms.
  Management Flexibility   Management in unionized     Freeman &    Medoff (forth—
                           manufacturing firms         coming b).
  (Factor prices held      appears less able to sub-
  fixed)                   stitute nonproduction worker
                           hours for production worker
                           hours but seems no less able to
                           substitute capital for pro-
                           duction labor than similarly
                           situated nonunion management.

  Satisfaction with        The stated level of over—    Borjas (1919), Freeman
  Jobs Overall             au job satisfaction is       (1976, 1975a), Kochan
                           lower, but the wage gain     & Helfman (1919),
  (Wages held fixed)       required to induce a job     Mandelbaum (1980).
                           change is higher for union
                           members than for otherwise
                           uomiiparabLe employees who are
                           not members.
                                      —8—


                               TABLE 1 (cont.)

        Variable                                         Partial Listing of
(Price Theoretic Control)   Finding                      Relevant References

   Evaluation of Rules      Unionized workers state    Duncan & Stafford
   and Conditions           that they are more satis- (1980), Freeman &
                            fied with their wages and Medoff (1982), Kochan
  (Wages held fixed,        fringes, less satisfied    & Helfman (1919),
  where appropriate)        with their supervision,    Viscusi (1980).
                            and less satisfied with
                            their working conditions
                            than nonunion workers.
                            The extent to which stated
                            job security grows with
                            tenure is substantially
                            greater under unionism.
                            While the probability of
                            viewing promotions as fair
                            declines with service among
                            nonunion employees, it in-
                            creases among union members.

Inputs, Productivity,
and Profits
   Pre—firm Quality of      Other things equal,          Allen (1979), Brown &
   Work Force               workers in unionized firms   Medoff (1918), Farber
                            tend to have more "human     (1979), Frantz (1916),
                            capital".                    Kahn (1979), Kalachek
                                                         & Raines (1980).

  Capital Intensity         Unionized firms in manu-     Allen (1979), Brown &
                            facturing, construction,     Medoff (1978), Clark
   (Wages held fixed)       and underground bituminous   (1980b), Connerton,
                            coal appear to have higher   Freeman & Medoff (1979),
                            capital—labor ratios than    Frantz (1976).
                            similar nonunion enter-
                            prises.

  Productivity              In manufacturing and con-    Allen (1979), Brown &
                            struction and in the un-     Medoff (1918), Conner—
   (Capital intensity and   derground bituminous coal    ton, Freeman & Medoff
   "labor quality" hel.d    industry in nonturbulent     (1979), Frantz (1976).
  fixed)                    times, unionized enter-
                            prises appear to have
                            greater productivity
                            than those that are non-
                            union, all else equal. In
                            underground coal, produc-
                            tivity appeared to be lower
                            under unionism in the tur-
                            bulent years around 1975.
                                      —9—

                                TABLE i (cont.)


        Variable                                      Partial Listing of
(Price Theoretic Control)   Finding                   Relevant References

Input, Productivit
Profits Tcontinued)
  Profitability             The rate of profit per    Brown & Medoff (1918)
                            unit of capital appears   Clark (forthcoming),
  (Industry, type of        to be lower under         Frantz, (1976), Freeman
  business held fixed)      unionism.                 & Medoff (forthcoming,
                                                      b), Hayden.
                                       —10—

Johnson (1981) and Mitchell (1981a) and an analysis of Current Wage Developments

establishment—level data suggest that the union wage effect grew substantially

during the 1910s to a point where it is roughly comparable to its level in the

1930s.

          One key question to ask about the union/nonunion wage differentials is,

"how do they vary across settings?" Recent empirical work on this subject has

been based on the notion that union wage gains will be high where the elasticity

of demand for labor, and hence the cost of increased relative wages in terms of

lost members, is low. The evidence that, at least in the manufacturing and

construction sectors of our econorrr, union wages but not nonunion wages grow

with the fraction organized in the relevant product market is consistent with

this claim; this is because a high percentage organized is likely to be asso—

ciated with a low demand elasticity for union products and thus a low demand

elasticity for union members. Other work has concentrated on the effect of

market regulation on the union wage effect. Ehrenberg (1919) presents evidence

consistent with the claim that union wages are raised by the regulation of

public utilities. Hayden (1911) argues that the sizeable impact of unionism on

trucker wages 4O percent or so) is attributable both to ICC regulation of the

sector and to the National Master Freight Agreement, which created industry—wide

bargaining.

          A significant piece of the new work on union effects has been concerned

with the composition and distribution of compensation. With regard to fringe

benefits, recent analyses have demonstrated that the "union fringe effect" is

bigger, in percentage terms, than the "union wage effect". Ita from the 1968,

1970,    and 1972 EEC indicate, for example, that holding constant the charac—

teristics in employees' establishments, blue—collar workers covered by collec—
                                         —11-

tive bargaining received fringe benefits that were about 28     to   36   percent higher
than those of blue—collar workers who were not covered (compared to a union wage

advantage of 8   to   15 percent ).   For workers receiving the same total compen-

sation per hour, the fringe share of labor cost was markedly     higher    in the union

setting (Freeman, 1981). Looking at separate fringes, the largest

union/nonunion percentage differentials on a per hour basis are for pensions,

life, accident and health insurance, and vacation pay.

        Since their inception, unions in our country have been concerned with

wage inequality as well as the level of wage rates. The practice which most

exemplifies unions' efforts on this front is the long standing policy of pushing

for "standard rates", that is, uniform rates for comparable workers across

establishments and for given occupational classes within establishments.

        Estimates presented in Freeman (1980c) show that, for blue—collar

workers, wage inequality is substantially lower among union membeis than among

similar nonmembers. Consistent with this, estimates of separate wage equations

for union and nonunion workers have found that virtually all standard wage—

determining variables are associated with smaller earnings differentials under

unionism. Moreover, union wage policies appear to contribute to the equaliza-

tion of wages by decreasing the differential between covered blue—collar workers

and noncovered white—collar workers. If we add the apparent decrease in ine-

quality due to wage standardization and the apparent decrease due to reduction

in the white—collar/blue_collar differential to the apparent increase due to the

greater wages of blue—collar union workers, we find that the apparent net effect

of unionism is to reduce total wage inequality. Evidence on inequality of ear-

nings across standard metropolitan statistical areas (SMSAs) and states and over

time also shows a negative relationship between unionism and dispersion in pay.
                                      —12—


In   short, it appears that the structure of wages in the United States has been

compressed by the wage policies of organized labor. Finally in related work,

several studies show union wage impacts to be larger for blue—collar as opposed

to white—collar workers, for younger as opposed to older employees, and for the

less as opposed to the more educated; some studies indicate a greater wage

effect for blacks than for whites, but others do not.



Internal and external mobility

         The new work on unionism has, as noted earlier, turned attention to out-

comes other than the wage level. One of the most important set of issues

receiving this attention involves the impact of unionism on the internal and

external mobility of employees. To evaluate the effects of unionism on firms'

employment policies (the awarding of promotions, the ordering of layoffs, etc.)

it is necessary to have knowledge of what is actually happening inside both

union and nonunion firms. Survey evidence collected by and discussed in Medoff

and Abraham (l980b, 1981a, 198lb) and recent case studies have provided relevant

information concerning the role of seniority independent of performance in

firms' promotion and termination decisions. With respect to promotions, the

survey data reveal that whereas 68 percent of private sector unionized employees

outside of agriculture and construction work in settings where senior employees

are favored substantially when promotion decisions are made   only   4O   percent   of

the nonunion work force is employed in such settings. When the analysis is

restricted to hourly employees, the estimates of concern are 68 percent for

union members and 53   percent for the nonunion labor force. Regressions with the
survey dat which include controls for firm size, industrial sector, and

geographic region yield differences similar to those just given. rvbreover, case
                                     —13—

studies of a number of U.S. firms tell the same story: company service counts

more in promotion decisions in union settings.

        One of the central tenets of the collective voice/institutional

response model is that among workers receiving the same pay, unions reduce

employee turnover and associated costs by offering "voice" as an alternative to

"exit". Recent evidence using newly available information on the job changes of

thousands of individuals and on industry—level turnover rates shows that with

wages and diverse other factors held constant, unionized workers do have

substantially lower quit rates than nonunion workers who are comparable in other

respects. The reduction in quits and the accompanying increase in tenure appear

to be as substantial for blacks as for whites and greater for older than for

younger workers.

        With less ability to reduce (the growth of) real wage rates and with

lower quit rates, unionized firms can be expected to make greater use of other

adjustment mechanisms, such as average hour reductions and layoffs. Both

establishment—level and individual—level data sets demonstrate that, holding

fixed wages, worker characteristics, and industry conditions, temporary layoffs

and recalls are a more important form of labor adjustment in unionized manufac-

turing firms than in otherwise comparable firms that are nonunion. Moreover,

the use of temporary layoffs relative to the use of average hours reductions

appears to be greater under unionism. Hence, it seems that the layoff/recall

syndrome which has received much recent attention is, for the most part, a

unionized manufacturing (in particular, durables) phenomenon.

       With respect to the order of layoffs, evidence from the seniority survey

just cited reveals that among those who had witnessed work force reductions

rules protecting senior workers against being permanently laid off before their
                                             —l4 —


junior   coworkers are more prevalent and stronger under trade unions. For

hourly employees, 95 percent of the responses pertaining to groups covered by

collective bargaining indicated that seniority in and of itself receives

substantial weight in       termination   decisions, compared to 70   percent   of the

responses   pertaining to noncovered groups. As for "strength", 68 percent of the
survey responses pertaining to unionized hourly employees stated that a senior
worker   would never be involuntarily terminated before a junior worker, whereas

only   28 percent of the responses pertaining to nonunion hourly employees stated
that this is so. These survey results could not be explained in terms of conk-.
pany characteristics and are consistent with the findings of Blau and Kahn
(1981) who used individual—level data.

Work Rules, Flexibility and Satisfaction

         Other personnel practices and procedures also appear to be affected by

the presence of unionism. In Clark's (1980a, 1980b) study of six cement firms

which were recently unionized, management practices appear to have changed

significantly with the coming of a union, in directions which can be labelled

"productivity oriented". These observations gain credence from the fact that

they are similar to those of Sumner Slichter, James Healy, and E. Robert

Livernash, who conducted a myriad of case studies concerning the relationship

between unionism and management behavior for their classic 1960 opus, The

Imtactof Collective Bargaining on Management. It should be noted that, with

evidence   of   the type   which has been collected, it is difficult to infer whether

managers were moved from non cost—minimizing behavior to cost—minimizing beha-

vior or whether the type of behavior which is cost—minimizing is different in

union and in nonunion environments. Nevertheless, a key tenet of our collective
                                           —15—

 voice/institutional response view of trade unions is:      management responds to

 the shock and sustained pressure of unionism in ways which cannot be fully

 understood with a standard price theoretic model.

            It would seem reasonable, given what is believed about the objective

 function of the typical union, to find less management flexibility in unionized

 establishments than in otherwise comparable establishments that are nonunion.

 Consistent with this view, evidence drawn primarily from the 1912 Census of

Manufactures and the EEC show that within U.S. manufacturing the ease of substi-

tution for production labor, particularly substitution of nonproduction for pro-.

duction labor, is lower under trade unionism. However, it should be mentioned

that the limited evidence does not indicate that unionism is associated with a

lower elasticity of substitution between labor and capital and thus with wha-

tever technological change is embodied in new capital.

            Several recent studies examining the impact of unionism on the stated

job satisfaction of workers have found union workers expressing less

satisfaction, or in some instances no more satisfaction, with their jobs than

similar nonunion workers, when compensation is held fixed, and even when compen-

sation is not held constant. t the same time, however, union members are also

more likely to state that they are "unwilling to change jobs under any

circumstance" or "would never consider moving to a new job" than are their "more

satisfied" nonunion counterparts, even when the wage is fixed. One      interpreta—
tion   of   these results is that the collective voice of unionism provides workers

with a channel for expressing their preferences to management and that this
increases their willingness to complain about undesirable conditions.
            Evidence has also been accumulated concerning workers' stated satisfac-

tion with particular aspects of'   their   jobs. Some of the findings most relevant
to the discussion at hand are:       (1) union members are such more likely to state

that they are happy with their wages and fringes than are otherwise comparable

nonunion employees; (2) there appears to be a strong tendency for unionized

workers to state they are less happy with their supervisors and have worse rela-

tions with them; (3) there is a tendency for unionized workers to report their

physical work conditions are less desirable than those reprted by unionized

workers ()4)   the   extent to which stated job security grows with tenure is

substantially greater under unionism; and (5) while the probability of viewing

promotions as fair is negatively related to seniority in nonunion settings, it

is positively related to seniority under unionism.


Inputs, Productivity, and Profits

        When unions raise wages or otherwise alter labor costs, enterprises can

be expected to change factor inputs and modes of organization in such ways as to

raise the marginal revenue product of labor up to the point where it equals the

new marginal cost of labor. Two of the most important ways in which firms could

potentially do this are to hire "higher quality" workers and to increase their

capital/labor ratios. Evidence has been offered showing that blue—collar union

workers do in fact have somewhat more "human capital" than similar nonunion

workers. With May CPS data for 1913—1915, blue—collar union members are found

to be three to four years older than otherwise comparable nonunion blue—collar

workers, and to have slightly more education. Separate wage equations for males

and females, which differentiate workers by schooling, age, and region, lead to

the conclusion that unionized production labor has about 6 percent rire "human

capital" within 2—digit manufacturing industries (Brown and Medoff, 1918). It

should be noted, however, that an index of labor quality based on weights from
                                       -11-
wage regressions is at best only a crude approximation to an index based on

 "true" productivity weights, as is implied by evidence that a substantial frac-

tion of seniority/earnings differentials cannot he explained by

seniority/productivity differentials (Medoff (1977) and Medoff and Abraham

 (1980a, l9Bla)). Moreover, it should be recognized that indices of the sort

being discussed ignore potentially very important, but not measured, worker

characteristics.

          With respect to capital/labor ratios, evidence from the 1912 Census of

Manufactures suggests that, as expected, capital—labor ratios are higher in

unionized settings within two digit manufacturing industries. What is perhaps

more surprising is that the substantially higher capital/labor ratio under trade

unions cannot be fully explained by the union wage effect (nor by the union

effect   on total compensation). Thus, even one of the major price—theoretic
response variables seems to be affected by unionism in ways that possibly go
beyond the standard compensation—level path.
         A number of studies conducted during the past few years have sought to

isolate "as well as is possible with existing data" the effect of trade unionism

on the productivity of otherwise comparable workers utilizing the same amount of

capital. The Brown and Medoff (1978) study, based on 1972 state—by—industry

data for U.S. manufacturing, found that unionized enterprises had higher produc-

tivity than otherwise comparable nonunion establishments within the same 2—digit

SIC industries. The magnitude of the effect varied from .2t in points (when

they allowed the regression to determine the elasticity of output with respect

to capital) to .07 in points (when they imposed an estimate of the

output/capital elasticity which was viewed as an upper—bound to the true

value). Studies of particular manufacturing industries——wooden household fur—
                                      —18—


niture   and cement——have also found a positive productivity differential. Allen

reports a sizeable positive differential in construction, using a value output

measure. His result is supported by the findings of Mandeistamin (1965), who

avoided the potential problems of measuring output in dollar terms by having

union and nonunion contractors cost out an identical project.

         That unionism can be associated with lower as well as higher produc-

tivity has been documented for the U.S. underground bituminous coal sector,

where unionized mines were estiriated to be about .25 in points more productive

than comparable nonunion mines in 1965, but about .20 points less productive a

decade later. One potential explanation for the observed change in

union/nonunion productivity differentials is that the "quality" of industrial

relations in that sector appeared to change over time.

         Note that in all of these studies the relationship between unionism and

productivity is estimated with the price—theoretic responses to higher wages

held fixed. Thus, the higher productivity is not due to employers substituting

higher quality labor or capital for the more expensive uncovered workers, at

least to the extent that can be discerned with the existing measures of those

variables. As a result, some effort has been devoted to determining the

nonstandard routes which may underly the apparent union impact on productivity.

One relevant finding is that roughly 25 percent of the union/nonunion produc-

tivity differential in the manufacturing sector can be explained by the

union/nonunion differential in quit rates. Other evidence suggests that a

significant piece of the union productivity effect can be explained by the

union/nonunion differential in the quality of management practices.
                                          —19—

             The association of unionism and profitabiity has been examined only

recently, in part because, like labor quality and capital, profits are an extre-

mely difficult variable to measure. While there is undoubtedly considerable

variation across data sets, the available evidence suggests that in general

unionism is associated with a lower return to capital. In some cases, the gross

profit margin (profit as a percent of value added) is not noticeably different

in union than nonunion sectors, but the capital—labor ratio is higher under

trade unions, producing a lower return to capital. In other cases, the gross

profit margin as well as the return to capital appears lower. That unionism

does not always reduce profitability, however, is also apparent:        Hayden found

profits as well as wages in trucking rising after the Teamsters negotiated the

first National Master Freight Agreement in 1964. All told, on the basis of

existing and ongoing studies, it does appear that productivity under unionism is

not sufficiently greater than productivity in nonunion settings to offset the

higher compensation plus the higher capital intensity, which would be necessary

if profits per unit of capital were to be left unaffected.



II. Econometric Probes into the Reality of the Non—wage Effects of Unions

         As noted in Table 1, most studies of the union impact on factors other

than   the   wage level try to control for the wage effect and potential price—

theoretic responses to higher union wages, and have found that the bulk of the

union/nonunion differences under     discussion   cannot be explained in terms of

measurable     price—theoretic variables. For instance, the substantial
union/nonunion     differential in quit probabilities exists even when individuals'

wages and fringes are held constant. Or to choose another example, the

union/nonunion productivity differentials discussed above were estimated with
                                         —20—

models which controlled for labor quality and capital intensity.

          Analysts in the industrial relations tradition interpret the existence

of significant union efrects above and beyond measured price—theoretic routes

as real——reflecting the nature of the econorr's basic institutions. These indi-

viduals believe that the key task for research on trade unions involves gaining

a better understanding of the origins, operations, and interactions of the

institutions, since the non price—theoretic actions of firms and unions matter

greatly in determining economic performance.

          Devotees   of the standard price—theoretic rrDdel perceive the
union/nonunion differences in nonwage variables quite differently; they see
these results as illusory, due in part perhaps to inability to control ade-
quately for preunion characteristics of workers or firms and/or to a failure to

capturethe relevant price theoretic routes due to the poor quality of the
empirical experiment conducted. This point of view leads to the search for
observed or unobserved differences which existed between individuals or firms
before they were unionized or for important price—theoretic stimuli or responses
which had not been captured by the models or with the data of concern and which
could   be causing the estimated union/nonunion differences. Since these alter-

native views, and a third view that even union wage effects are illusory, have

been discussed in our earlier work,2/we concentrate here only on the econometric

efforts to evaluate the hypotheses.

          At the outset, it is important to recognize that the econometric

probLems of concern occur because the observed union/nonunion differences do not

come from the "ideal" experiment needed to estimate the effects of unions on

economic outcomes. This experiment would involve unionizing a randomly chosen

nonunion individual or firm, while holding all else of relevance in the world
                                            —21—

 fixed, and observing the resultant changes. Unfortunately, all of the sta-

 tistical      "experiments" conducted depart from the   ideal, at least to some extent,
 for    two reasons. First, all the relevant factors cannot be held perfectly fixed
when we compare unionized individuals or firms to nonunion individuals or firms
 or even to themselves when they were nonunion. Second, it is unlikely that
 individuals or firms with similar measured characteristics became unionized on        a

 random basis.

             The absence of a series of ideal experiments sets the stage for the eco-

nometric efforts at probing the reality of the observed union/nonunion differen-

ces in nonwage variables, on which we focus next.


Potential Econometric Explanations and Assessments of Their Validity

             The real reason you have obtained those union/nonunion differences is
             that you have omitted (mismeasured, not observed) a key variable which
             is correlated with unionization, and that variable is...

             But you have the wrong causality. It is not that unionism causes...; it
             is that ...causes unionism.

             It seems obvious that your results are due to selectivity; there is an
             unobserved factor out there which affects whether or not workers are
             unionized and the market outcome of concern.

                                                   —Frequently heard assertions at
                                                    seminars throughout the country.

             There   are three key econometric problems than can arise in doing empiri-

cal work on the impact of unionism (or any factor) on economic outcomes:

omitted, mismeasured, or unobserved variable bias; simultaneous equations bias;

and sample selection bias. Fach of these potential reasons why estimated

union/nonunion  differences mi ght be spurious arises because of the aforemen-
tioned lack of an ideal experiment. These potential problems have been appealed
to   in attempts to explain the observed union/nonunion differentials depicted in
Table   1.    Those whose priors come from the price theoretic nnopoly view have
                                         —22--.



used   the three potentiaL forms   of bias   to argue that the observed differentials

in Table 1 are illusions.

          There   are various methods for dealing with each of the potential bias
problthns which arise Lo analyses of cross—sectional data. Heuristically, these
methods can be divided into three broad categories:        (1)   Approaches which probe
the    cross—sectional results through various forms of "sensitivity" analysis

designed to see how results might be "driven" by the poor quality of the

experiment. In this category we include such techniques as: expanding the list

of controls; using the omitted variable bias formula; imposing coefficients on

mismeasured variables; and using the variance/covariance matrix of coefficients

to examine the sensitivity of results to alleged experimental problems. Given

outside information on, for example, the relationship between the omitted

variable and included variables or on the degree of measurement error in the

variables of concern or on the likely magnitude of selected coefficients, esti-

mates can be made of the likely impact of omitted, mismeasured, or unobserved

variables. By making particularly strong assumptions or picking particularly

large (or small) values of the relevant correlation coefficients, one can "stack

the deck" against the estimated union effect and thus get a good notion of its

strength. (2) Techniques which seek to treat the alleged experimental problem

through complex systems of equations in which both the relevant variables and/or

their exact functional form are used to identify the "true" union impact. Such

techniques can be used to deal with unobserved or mismeasured variables but are

most commonly used to treat the simultaneous equations and sample selection

problems. The methodolo is to postulate a "true" model which enables one to

deal with the alleged experimental problem and to solve the resultant equations
 to obtain the coefficient of concern. (3) Approaches which seek to obtain new

 and better quality data designed specifically to deal with particular experimen-

 tal problems, especially measurement error and omitted variables.

         A very different approach to the three types of problems described is to

apply a different experimental design to the problem of estimating union effects

by examining longitudinal (before/after) rather than cross—sectional data.

Longitudinal information provides what is perhaps the most direct way of dealing

with the essential cross—sectional data problem-—that we are comparing different

people or firms rather than conducting the ideal experiment described earlier.

If one obtains longitudinal data in which omitted, mismeasured, or unobserved

variables are constant over time, one can obtain estimates of union effects

purged of biases due to these problems. Similarly, by enabling us to compare

outcome variables before and after unionization, such data provide the proper

recursive structure for dealing with both the "union causes" versus "causes

unionism" question and the problem of cross—sectional selectivity bias.

        It is important to recognize, however, that longitudinal studies are

themselves subject to potential experimental problems not unlike those with

cross—sectional data. One potential difficulty is that when persons change

jobs, other relevant variables are also likely to change, such as occupation or

industry or tasks at work, which may be omitted, mismeasured or unobserved in

the analysis. Pnother potential problem is that classical measurement error

bias may become more severe because the systematic parts of variables are dif—

ferenced away. Third, since only a limited number of persons are like to

change union status in a given period of time, longitudinal studies may be prone

to a sample selection problem not unlike that in cross—sectional studies.
                                       —2 —


Longitudinal   calculations reveal the effects of changing union status on the

position of workers (firms) who change:       if those persons (firms) differ in some

fundamental way from other workers, the results may riot generalize to the entire

population. Whether the selectivity of union and nonunion changers is an impor-

tant phenomenon and, if' so, in what way it affects results are unclear a

    r i .3 /



          Recognizing the problems of longitudinal analyses does not of course
vitiate the fact that before/after data provide a distinct and real set of

potential experiments which can go a long way toward dealing with the potential

difficulties with cross—sectional work discussed above. By following the same

individual (firm) over time as he/she/it changes status from nonunion to union

or vice versa, one is able to control in a more natural way for all missing or

unobserved variables which do not change over time. The longitudinal data are

an invaluable complementary form of information to the more widely used cross—

sectional data.


Results of Econometric Probes

          Much recent work on unionism has used the econometric techniques alluded

to earlier to probe the union/nonunion differentials summarized in Table 1.

What have been the results of these efforts to obtain better estimates of the

"true" union effect on economic   outcomes?    To what extent are the Table 1 dif-

ferences "moved" by sensitivity probes which use new data or information to eva—

luate the effect of omitted, mismeasured, or unobserved variables in a specified

study?     How sensitive are the empirical results to probes which rely on exten-

sive cross—sectional modeling in which unionization is taken as endogenous, for

reasons of either simultaneity or selectivity? What are the results of panel or
                                       —25—


longitudinal   studies designed to deal with the potential "experimental problems

with cross—sectional analyses? In short, what does the evidence say about

possible ways of answering, and about possible answer to, the frequently heard

seminar assertions regarding the potential problems with the cross—sectional

investigations of the impact of collective bargaining?

          Our review of the relevant econometric studies yields three conclusions.

First, the econometric probes do not invalidate the findings summarized in Table

1 by attributing all or the vast bulk of observed differences to the inade-

quacies of the experimental comparisons. Studies which probe the sensitivity of

cross—sectional findings to omitted, mismeasured or unobserved variables show

that while these experimentaiproblems appear to bias union coefficients

somewhat, they are far from the sole explanation of the ordinary least squares

regression results. Studies which use longitudinal data to deal with the

problems of unobserved factors, siruitaneity, or sample selectivity tend to

yield lower estimates of union effects than do OLS studies using cross sectional

information, but they also fail to eliminate the bulk of estimated impacts.

Studies which seek additional data regarding the potential causality of union

effects through surveys of firms also tend to find real union impacts on behavior.

          Second, union/nonunion differences in the nonwage outcomes of concern

appear to be no more affected, and in some instances, to be less affected by the

absence of the perfect experimental data than are the union/nonunion differences

in wages. tvbreover, the relevant analyses suggest that both sets of differences

are   real. Furthermore, the studies examined imply that probes of the wage dif-
ferential can be expected to shed such light on the likely outcome of probes of
other differentials.
                                          —26—

           Third, studies which use systems of equations with cross—sectional data

to "correct for" potential simultaneous equations and sample selection bias pro-.

vide very little insight into whether the Table 1      union/nonunion   differences are

real   or illusory. The models employed rely on "restrictions" or "exclusions"
which are far from convincing. More importantly the results show great instabi-
lity in the face of seemingly small changes in the model or the sample analyzed.
In some cases the systems yield union effects iach below those obtained with
OLS; in others they yield effects much above those from OLS; and in yet
others    the systems of equations give about the same   results as does OLS. In a
surprisingly   large number of cases, the systems yield results so implausible on

a priori grounds as to be dismissed out of hand. While this instability and

implausibility does not demonstrate that the OLS union/nonunion differences are

unbiased, it does indicate that the system of equations methodolor does not

offer a reliable and useful way of improving on these estimates.

          We consider next the evidence regarding these conclusions. We review

first the results of efforts to probe cross—sectional findings with sensitivity

analysis, better data designed to deal with omitted variables, and systems

techniques. Then we review the growing body of evidence which uses longitudinal

experiments to check on the      cross—sectional findings.
Probing   the Cross—sectional evidence

          Table 2 summarizes some recent efforts to assess the validity of cross—

sectional ftndtngs using one or more of the methods discussed in the preceding

section. For each study    the   table shows: the type of bias being focused on,

the econometric technique employed, the variable analyzed, the data used, the

key empirical results, and the appropriate references. While our listing is
                                          —21—

undoubtedly incomplete, we believe it is broadly representative of the pattern

of results in extant work. Because of the initial concentration of quantitative

analyses on wages, the table is top heavy with the results of econometric probes

into the union wage effect.

          The first and undoubtedly the most widely used technique for dealing

with data inadequacies is to test the sensitivity of results to the inclusion of

detailed industry or occupation controls in the data set under study. Addition
of such controls in some sense leads to finer experiments by focusing on union
effects within more detailed groupings. Alternatively, to the extent that
missing   or mismeasured variables differ across the relevant sectors, inclusion

of a large number of variables can be justified by pointing out that they help

control for those variables. Even when one might argue that exclusion of

detailed controls is theoretically "correct", it is      useful to know whether these
variables   "matter". in many   studies   attempts are made to obtain information on

the posited missing variables at an industry level and to add those variables in

place of the dumniy controls. This provides a means of evaluating what industry

dummies in fact stand for, but offers a weaker test of the extent to which

results stand up to addition of numerous covariance controls.

          In most cases in which additional controls are added to analyses, either

by augmentation of data sets with industry—level variables or by inclusion of

numerous industry or occupation dumrrr variables, the greater refinement of the

comparison set reduces the estimated impact of unionism. But this occurs only

up to the point of, say "1"— or 2—digit industry or occupation controls.

Additional controls appear to have only a modest effect on the estimates.

Consider, for example, the effect of adding industry controls to the equations

estimating the effect of unionism on the usual hourly pay of private, le wage
                                          —28—

and   salary workers using 1916 May CPS data. With a standard log—linear hourly

earnings functional form which includes race, years of'        education,    age minus

years of education minus six and its square, three region dummies, and a blue—

collar    dumnr variable,   the effect of adding industry   controls    on   the estimated
coefficient of the union membership dumnr (member =         1) is    shown below.
                                            Estimated Union Member Coefficient
           Industry   Controls               In May 1916 CPS (Standard Error)

          None                                                .29
                                                             (.oi)
           1—digit Census (20)                                .21
                                                             (.01)
          2—digit Census (15)                                 .19
                                                             (.01)
          3—digit Census (200)                                .18
                                                             (.01)
As is common in such sensitivity probes, the reductions (in absolute value) in

union coefficients approach zero very quickly as the number of industry dummies

grows, and the estimated union/nonunion difference of concern does not vanish.

          Addition of other variables designed to reflect union/nonunion com-

parisons by holding fixed work place conditions likely to cause compensating

differentials yields similar results: union/nonunion wage differentials dimi-

nish but do not disappear. The most sizeable reduction, obtained by Duncan and

Stafford (1980), showed that addition of variables relating to the nature and

intensity of work to a ln (wage) equation reduced a union coefficient estimate

of .29 to .19. Other studies by Brown (1980) and Leigh (1981), however, show no

such relation between union/nonunion differentials and characteristics of work

places.

          There have been a limited number of studies which have sought to eva-

luate the effect of measurement error or omitted variables on estimated

union/nonunion    differentials. In their study of productivity, Brown and Medoff
                                                     Table 2

 EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES INTO UNION/NONUmON DIFFERENCES USING CROSS-SECTIONAL DATAa

Issue and TeLhnique               Variable,
                                                                Result                    Reference
                                  Data Set,
                                   Sample
Omitted, Nisrneasured, or
Unobserved Variable Bias
Enter additional dummy                          Addition of various dummies for
                                           ul t S                                         Diverse
variable(s), or other        layoffs;           2— and where possible 3—digit             studies.
variables to obtain          dispersion;        Census or SIC industry or for
finer comparisons            productivity; etc. occupation can reduce but not
                                                eliminate estimated union!
                             Diverse            nonunion differential; similar
                             Diverse            results from adding average
                                                characteristics using industry
                                                figures and from adding vari-
                                                ables capturing work place
                                                characteristics.
Set coefficient on           Productivity              Union coefficient is reduced       Brown &
mismeasured variable                                   substantially by forcing esti-     Me doff
                            Census of
at predetermined                                       mated coefficient of capital!      (1978).
level                       Manufactures;              labor variable to equal an
                             CP S
                                                       upper bound of capital's
                            All workers in             share of value added in
                            manufacturing              Census of Manufactures data
                            indus tries                set, but still implies that
                                                       unionized estalishments are
                                                       moderately more productive
                                                       (by a lower bound of 6%).
Use omitted variable        (?u i t   s                Correcting for omitted fringe      Freeman
formula to discern                                     benefits variable and mis—         (1980b).
                            CPS P511);
likely bias                                            measured alternate earnings
                            NLS Older 1en;
                                                       variable can most likely
                            NLS Younger ?len;          reduce large union coefficient
                            All Workers                by no more than 1/4.

                            Productiyity               Capturing true labor quality is    Clark
                                                       unlikely to greatly reduce the     (l98Oa,
                            Cement company             union productivity effect in
                            d i  ta                                                       1980b).
                            I' r 0(1 II C t i 0 0      cement.
                            workers
Collect new data            Pro duct ivi      ty       Physical output data for cement    Clark
                                                       plants and coal mines obtained     (1980a,
                            Cement        mpany        to deal with problems of dis-      l980b),
                            data;
                            Under g r no nd            tinguishing output variation       Connerton,
                                                       from price variation indicate      Freeman, &
                            h i t tim I nous coa 1
                                                       that the fact that the earlier     Medoff (1979).
                            mine data                  union productivity studies used
                            Pro d ic t I on            a value measure cannot explain
                            workers                    the estimated positive union
                                                       effect; in addition, these data
                                                       point to the importance of the
                                                       quality of labor—management re-
                                                       lations as a mediating factor in
                                                       the union—productivity relationship.
                                            —30—


                                             Table 2

 EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES INTO UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES USING CROSS—SECTIONAL DATAa
                             Van able,
Issue and Technique                                         Result                      Reference
                             Data Set,
                               Sample
                           Role of Seniority       Union/nonunion differences in the    Medoff &
                           per    se               relationships between seniority      Abraham
                                       of
                                                   and both terminations and promo—     (l980b,
                           Surveys                 tions cannot be explained in         1981a).
                           companies               terms of an unobserved union!
                           All workers             nonunion differential in the re-
                                                   lationship between seniority and
                                                   contribution to firm.
Construct unobserved       Fringes                 Magnitude of union coefficient       Freeman
variable model                                     is sensitive to precise model        (1981).
                           EEC
                                                   for unobserved establishment
                           Production              characteristics, but qualitative
                           workers                 conclusion that unions are asso—
                                                   ciated with higher fringe
                                                   benefits is not.
Simultaneous Equations
Bias
Replace a union variable
with a predicted
                           es
                           E&E;    Census
                                                   Union/nonunion wage differential
                                                   declines for 49 manufacturing
                                                                                        Pencavel
                                                                                        (l970)
union variable                                     industries from 37% with OLS to
                           All    workers          27% in a 2—SLS model.
                                                   Union/nonunion wage differential     Ash en felt e r
                                                   declines for 2—digit SIC manu-       Johnson
                           E&E; Census             facturing industries from 46% OLS    (l972)
                           All Workers             to 19% or 4% in 2—SLS models and
                                                   to —9% in a 3—SLS model.

                           Wages; quits            Both wage and quit differentials   Kahn (1977)
                                                   grow substantially (in absolute
                           E&; Census              value) with data for 3—digit SIC
                           Product ion             manufacturing industries, when
                           workers                 2-SLS replaces OLS; the wage
                                                   differential rises from 50 to 80%.

                           Wages                   Wage differential reduced from 11%   Schmidt &
                                                   to 6% by fitting a system of equa-   Strauss (197'
                           S EO                                                         Olsen (1078).
                                                   tions in which the estimated union
                           All workers             coefficientbis unbiased by           SchmIdt 1978
                                                   assumption.
                                                   Wage differential. rises with        Farber
                                                   selectivity correction from 32%      (1979).
                           NLS Young Men           to 51%; differential in quit
                           All workers             probability switches from signi-
                                                   ficant ne°ative (—.487) to near
                                                   significant positive (.878).
                           Wages                   With selectivity adjustment,         Leigh (1980b)
                           NLS Young Men           union differential rises from 22/
                                                   38% to 28/105% for young and
                           All workers             middle—aged black employees and
                                                   from 25/13% to 37/46% for young
                                                   and middle—aged white employees.
                                       —31—



     EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES INTO UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES USING
                             CROSS—SECTIONAL DATAa




                       Variable,
                       Data Set,
Issue and Technique    Sample           Result                       Reference

                       Wages            Results vary with data       Cain et al,
                       CPS detailed     set and model, with es-      (1980);
                       occupational     timated differentials        McLaughlin,
                       data             flDving, in many cases       (1980);
                                        quite substantially, in      Podgursky,
                       Hospital wor-    both directions (pre-        (1980).
                       kers             sented in ble 14)
                       Wages
                       PSID: Michi-     Differential increases       Duncan &
                       gan Time Use     from 19% to 214% with        Stafford
                       Burvey           union made endogenous        (1980).
                       All   workers    on work conditions.

                       Dispers ion      Union impact of reducing     Hirsch.
                       Aggregate        dispersion is not sig-
                       Industry         nificantly affected by
                       All workers      sinniltaneity adjustment.

Sample Selection Bias Wages             Coefficients in separate   Duncan &
A.d an inverse Mills                    union and nonunion         Leigh
ratio terni to outcome NLS Older Men    equations are only moder- (1980).
equation or estimate                    ately affected by addition
a system which expli- All workers       of inverse Mills ratio;
citly recognizes cor-                   estimated union/nonunion
relation between selec-                 differential rises moder-
tion and outcome                        ately.
equation.

                      Wages             Sizeable wage differential   Lee (1918).
                                        declines slightly (from
                      SEQ               18% to 16%) with selec-
                                        tivity correction.
                      Operatives

                      Wages             Estimated union wage dif— Ne uniann
                                        ferential rises signifi—    (1911).
                      PSID              cantly to 14o% from its OLS
                                        value of 13% in one cal—
                      All workers       culation and modestly in
                                        another (from 6% to 9%).
                                             —32—

                                        TABLE 2    (cant.)

                       Variable,
                       Data Set,
Is sue and Technique   Sample                     Result                     Reference

                       Wages                      Results vary with data     Cain et al,
                       CPS detailed               set and model with esti—   (1980),
                       occupation                 mated differentials moving,McLaughlin
                       data                       in many cases quite sub—   (1980)
                                                  stantially, in both direc— Podgursky,
                       Hospital wor-              tions to large positive or (1980).
                       kers                       large (in absolute value)
                                                  negative (see Table 5 for
                                                  specific results).

                       Wages                  Sizeable increases in wage     Feldman,
                       CPS detailed           differential for nurses       Lee, and
                       occupation             aides (to 89%); moderate      Ho ffbeck
                       data                   increases for health           (1980).
                                              aides and technical
                       Health care            workers; decline to —6%
                       e mp lay e e s         for nurses.

                       Wages                  Union coefficient in          Sloan &
                       Survey of              wage equat ion goes           Elnicki
                       Hospital               from insignificant posi-      (1919).
                       Directors of           tive (OLS) to insignifi-
                       Nursing                cant negative (2—SLS).

                       Th move r              Percentage reduction in     Becker
                       Ho spital              turnover associated with    (1978).
                       survey data            unionism is large (50%)
                       set                    even when 2—SLS is used
                                              to correct for selectivity.
                       Health care
                       workers

Notes: ame following abbreviations are used throughout this table and the
         remainder of the paper for data sources: CPS represents the Current
         Population Survey, E&E represents nployment and Earnings, EEC repre-
         sents the Expenditure for Employee Compensation survey, NLS represents
         the National Longitudinal Survey, P311) represents the Panel Study of
         Income Dynamics survey, and SEQ represents the Survey of Economic
         Opportunity, and for statistical technilues: OLS represents ordinary
         least squares, 2—SLS represents two—stage least squares, and 3—SLS
         represents three—stage least squares.
       bThis result is reported in the Schmidt response to Olsen's piece, which
        pointed out a flaw in the original Schmidt & Strauss ndel.
                                      —33—


 (1918) probed the extent to which the coefficient on unionism could be explained

 by classical measurement error in the capital/labor ratio by exploiting the fact

 that with the Cobb—Douglas production function, under profit maximization, the

 coefficient of this ratio should equal capital's share of value added.   Because

 unionization and capital/labor ratio are positively correlated, they found that

mismeasureiaent of the capital intensity variable may have substantially biased

upward the estimated impact of unionism on productivity. However, even when the

coefficient of the capital/labor variable was forced to equal an upper bound

estimate of capital's share, there remained a nonnegligible positive union pro—

ductivity effect. In a study of quits, Freeman (1980a, 1980b) used the omitted

variable bias formula to assess the sensitivity of the apparent union effect on

quits to the omission of fringe benefits from the analysis and to measurerrnt

error in alternative wages. The formula was applied using information from

other data sets in conjunction with strong assumptions designed to yield lower

bound estimates of the union effect. The lower bound estimates showed a signi-

ficant and large effect about half as large as the initial OLS impact. In

another study dealing with omitted variables Clark (1980a, 1980b) examined the

likely effect of omitted labor quality on the union/nonunion productivity dif-

ferential. Using a formula describing how labor quality enters the production

process, and exogenous information on possible quality changes during the period

since his sample of cement plants had gone from nonunion to union, he concluded

that only a small piece of the differential he had originally estimated could be

explained by this uncaptured work force dimension.

        There have been some recent efforts to generate new data sets to deal

with omitted or mismeasured variable problems. To determine whether union
                                        —3It—



effects on productivity, measured by value added, might be due to union effects

on the price rather than the output component of value added, Connerton,

Freeman, and Medoff gathered data on tons of coal, while Clark gathered data on

tons of cement. The coal study found sizeable positive union productivity

effects when industrial relations in the sector appeared to be good but negative

effects in a period of seemingly poor industrial relations. The cement study

found positive union effects on physical output per worker in that industry. To

determine whether union/nonunion differentials in the extent to which seniority

reduces the probability of termination and increases the chance of promotion

could be explained by an unobserved union/nonunion differential in the rela-

tionships between company service and current contribution, Medoff and Abraham

(l98lb) asked companies to compare the termination and promotion probabilities

of senior and junior employees whose performance was equal. Based on more than

500 responses, it was concluded that the greater importance attached to

seniority per se under unionism could not be explained in terms of an uncaptured

differential in the way performance and seniority were related.

        Finally, the recently developed "unobservables" models (see Chamberlain,

1911) were used by Freeman (1981) to assess the possibility that part of the

estimated union impact on fringes was due to an omitted firm characteristic.

The analysis showed that the extent to which the OLS differential could be

attributed to unobserved firm differences depended greatly on the way the model

was constructed.   When it   was assumed that there was no within—firm spillover

from blueoltar unionization to white—collar fringes, the original fringe dif-
ferential was reduced substantially by the firm-effects correction. Hence, any
concluslo concerning the impact of unobserved firm effects on the
                                          —35—

union/nonunion   fringe differential depends crucially on one's a priori logic

concerning the "true" unobservable model to be used.


Simultaneous Equations

          Several analysts have sought to explore the causality of observed union

effects using simultaneous equations models in which unionism is endogenous,

i.e. ,   determined by the equations of the system. In the outcome equation(s) the

actual union variable is replaced by a predicted variable. Identification of

the system is obtained either by exclusion of one (or more) variables from the

outcome equation, but not from the unionism equation, or on the basis of dif-

ferent functional forms for the two equations.

          The first analyses using the simultaneous equations technique focused on

industry aggregates. Both Ashenfelter and Johnson (1972) arid Pencavel (1910)

showed that, depending on the particular model employed, a large positive OLS

union/nonunion wage differential in U.S. manufacturing was substantiaU.y

reduced; Ashenfelter and Johnson estimated a differential of 146 percent with a

single equation (oLs) model, a differential of 19 percent with one two—stage

model, a differential of 14   percent   with another two—stage model, and a differen-

tial of —8 percent with a three—stage model. The more recent work on mariufac—

turing by Kahn (1917), who used 3—digit SIC data, whereas the previous

researchers used 2—digit data, but followed the same general procedure,

generated quite different results: substantial increases (in absolute value) in

both the union wage and quit effects upon correcting for the endogeneity of

unionism. Kahn's estimated wage differential rose from 50 to 80 percent when he

changed his technique from OLS to two—stage least squares and his estimated quit

effect also rose noticeably. In a later study, Kahn (1979) attempted to control
                                          —36--

for    union—induced increases in labor quality. Using his 3—digit SIC manufac-

turing data, he found a wage differential of about 50 percent with a two—stage

model versus 25 percent with an OLS model. Hence, seemingly small changes in

the models employed and in the degree of data aggregation have yielded very dif-

ferent results with systems designed to correct for potential simultaneous

equations bias in analyses of aggregate cross—sectional data.

          A widely divergent pattern of results has also been obtained when

roughly similar siniultaneous equations models have been estimated with similar

bodies of individual—level data. Schmidt (1918), relying on functional form for

identification, reported a decline in the effect of unionism from 10 percent to

)4   percent   with SEO data (his two equation model was not, however, needed to

obtain unbiased estimates, since it assumed away the correlation that gives rise

to the bias problem). On the other hand, Duncan and Stafford (1980) showed an

increase in the estimated coefficient of unionism when unionism was made endoge—

nous in their model which focused on work conditions, as did Leigh (1980a).

Applying a simultaneous equations model with both a wage and a quit equation to

the young men NLS data, Farber (1919) obtained an increase in the union wage

effect while at the same time switching the sign on the standard quit effect

from negative to positive, the opposite of Kahn's quit result. Farber found his

results somewhat puzzling. Overall, in the regressions cited in Table 2

(including those from Cain, et al. presented in detail in Table 3) ,    there   is an

alarming amount and pattern of' instability when actual unionism is replaced by

predicted unionism; in somewhat more than half the cases, the estimated union

coefficient rises, counter to expectation, often to rather large values, while

in many c •s in which the coefficient declines it becomes negative.
                                         —31—

 "best" way to identify the systems of concern and the results obtained seem to

be highly sensitive to the one chosen, as well as to the data and sample with

which it is used. While the problems addressed by the techniques may be real,

the econometric solutions offered can do little to solve them with extant cross—

sectional data. Econometric manipulations of these data do not appear to be a

good substitute for better data, for experiments more suitable to answering the

problems of concern, or for genuine institutional or theoretical knowledge about

better data, for experiments more suitable to answering the problems of concern,

or for genuine institutional or theoretical knowledge about the interactions

bewteen union, employers, and workers.


Longitudinal data

          The results of some recent studies of union effects that exploit the

before/after nature of longitudinal data sets to obtain estimates of the effect

of   unionism on the same   person or firm are summarized in Thble 4•    These

studies, which ask "How does the characteristic of a worker (firm) change when
he/she (it) goes from union to nonunion status or vice versa?" yield estimates

of union wage and non—wage effects which, while frequently smaller (in absolute
value)   than those obtained in   comparable   cross—sectional analyses, are always

quite consistent with the cross—sectional findings. In contrast to the attempts

to deal with the problem of causality and selectivity with systems of equations,

in no case does a longitudinal analysis result "blow up". Finally, but perhaps

most   importantly for the present discussion, the non—wage union/nonunion dif-
ferentials   seem to be inexplicable in terms of unobserved (or observed) fixed

price—theoretic or monopoly effects.
                                               —38—




                                             Table   3

 EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES INTO UNION/NONUNiON DIFFERENCES USING CROSS—SECTIONAL DATAa

Issue and Technique          Variable,
                                                         Result                     Reference
                             Data Set,
                              Sample
                          Wages                Results vary with data set and       Cain et al,
                                               model, with estimated differenti-    (1980)
                          CPS detailed
                          occupation data      als moving, in many cases quite      McLaughlin
                          hospital workers
                                               substantially, in both directions    (1980);
                                               (presented in Table 4).              Podgursky
                                                                                    (1980).

                          Wages                Differential increases from          Duncan &
                                               19% to 24% with union made           Stafford
                          PSID; Michigan
                          Time Use Survey      endogenous on work conditions.       (1980).
                          All workers
Sample Selection Bias      Wages               Coetficients in separate            Duncan &
Add an inverse Mills                           union and nonunion equations
ratio term to outcome
                                                                                   Leigh
                          NLS Older Men        are only moderately affected        (l980)
equation or estimate                           by addition of inverse Mills
a system which explicitl YA1I workers          ratio; estimated union/nonunion
recognizes correlation                         differential rises moderately.
between selection and
outcome   equation

                          Wages                Sizeable wage differential          Lee (1978).
                          S ED                 declines slightly (from
                                               18% to 16%) with selec-
                         Operatives            tivity correction.

                         Wages                 Estimated union wage differ—        Neumann
                         PSID                  ential rises significantly          (1977).
                                               to 40% from its OLS value
                         All workers           of l37 in one calculation
                                               and modestly in another
                                               (from 6% to 9%).

                         Wages                 Results vary with data set          Cain et al,
                         CPS detailed          and model with estimated dif-       (1980),
                         occupation data       ferentials moving, in many          McLaughlin
                                              cases quite substantially,           (1980)
                         Hospital workers      in both directions to large         Podgursky
                                              positive or large (in absolute       (1980).
                                              value) negative (see Table 5
                                              for specific results).

                         Wages                Sizeable increases in wage dif-      Feldman,
                                              ferential for nurses aides (to       Lee, and
                         CPS detailed
                         occupation data      89%); moderate increases for         Hoffbeck
                                              health aides and technical           (l980)
                         Health care          workers; decline to —6% for
                         employees            nurses.
                                                -39-




                                                Table 3

 EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES INTO UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES USING CROSS—SECTIONAL DATAa
                               Var in t) 1 e,
Issue and Technique            Data                         Result                    Reference
                                S am p 1 e

                                                   Union coefficient in wage          Sloan &
                           Survey of Hospital equation goes from insignificant        Elnicki
                           Directors of       positive (OLS) to insignificant         (1979)
                           Nursing            negative (2—SLS).
                           Nurses

                           Turnover                Percentage reduction in turnover Becker
                                                   associated with unionism is large (1978).
                           Hospital survey
                           data                    (5O/) even when 2—SLS is used to
                                                   correct for selectivity.
                            (a1 th care
                           wo r k e r s




Notes. aTIO
             following abbreviations are used throughout this table and the remainder of
        the paper for data sourcns: CPS represents the Current Population Survey, E&E re-
        presents Employment and Earnings, EEC represents the Expenditure for Employee Comp
        sation survey, NLS represents the National Longitudinal Survey, PSID represents
        the Panel Study of Income Dynamics survey, and SEO represents the Survey of Eco-
        nomic Opportunity, and for statistical techniques: OLS represents ordinary least
        squares, 2—SLS represents two—stage least squares, and 3—SLS represents three—stage
        least squares.

       bThjs result is reported in the Schmidt response to Olsen's piece, which pointed
        out   a flaw In the original Schmidt & Strauss model.
                                         —-
          We   conclude that the highly sensitive results obtained with both aggre-

gate industry and individual—level data sets when unionism is "predicted" raise

serious questions about the usefulness of the simultaneous equation methodolor

for analyses of what unions really do. The technique appears to be trying to

squeeze out of the data more than the data contain; it does not, in our view,

provide a reliable way of addressing the illusion/reality question.


Sample Selection

          The recently popular technique for dealing with potential sample selec-

tion bias——adding an inverse Mills ratio terre to outcome regressions, which

corrects for the potential bias under certain assumptions (see Heckman, 1916)——

has been used in a number of analyses of the union/nonunion wage differential.

In the first such piece, Lee (1918), using exclusion of variables as well as

functional form for identification, reduced slightly the OLS wage differential

for operatives (from 11 to 16 percent) with data from the SEQ. Leigh (1980b),

fitting models very similar to those used by Lee, analyzed NLS data for both

older and younger men. He found that wage differentials were increased, rather

than decreased, by the selectivity adjustment in both samples. In several cases

they were increased by extremely large amounts; in three of six sets he pre-

sented, the selectivity—adjusted percentages were at least three times as large

as the OLS estimates. Another very substantial increase in estimated wage dif-

ferentials was obtained by Neumann (1971); with PSID data for 197k his adjusted

estimate was 1o    percent while his OLS estimate was 13 percent. However, when
Neumann used average data for 1968—197)4, the difference was such smaller: 9

percent   versus 6   percent.   Overall, the results from adding sample selectivity

"correction" terms to wage regressions appear to be as unstable and divergent a
                                         - 1-
those   obtained with simultaneous   equations "corrections". Studies that differ

only slightly in specification, data, or group covered show wide differences in

the impact of the "corrections" on OLS results.5/

         Work focusing on the wage differential in a given sector, hospitals,

tends to confirm this judgment. Becker (1918) and Sloan and Elnicki (1919)

found that selectivity adjustments reduced estimated union coefficients, whereas

the results in Table 3 from Cain, et. al. (1980)     and McLaughlin (1980) for
various groups in this sector show as many increases as decreases in the union

coefficient upon addition of the inverse Mills ratio to regressions using the

same survey data and model. In yet another study, Feldman, Lee, and Hoffman

(1980) obtained increases in the union wage effect for several occupations in

the health sector but obtained decreases in the union wage effect for nurses

when they corrected for selectivity.

         Podgursky's (1980) work with the CPS files provides yet additional evi-

dence which calls into question the usefulness of the inverse Mills ratio tech-

nique for analyses of union/nonunion differentials. In his work on private sec-

tor production workers, an initial positive OLS differential of 10 percent

(significant at the .01 level) becomes a highly dubious negative 63 percent

(again significant at the .01 level) when an inverse Mills ratio term is added

to a wage equation.

         What is one to make of the aberrant results obtained with the simulta—

neous equations (predicted unionisril) technique and with the inverse Mills ratio

technique for examining   whether   observed union/nonunion differences are real or

illusory? We believe that the empirical results just presented strongly suggest

that there is little to be learned from using either of the two techniques for

analyzing the impact of unionism. Unfortunately, there seems to be no obvious
"best" way to identify the systems of concern and the results obtained seem to

be highly sensitive to the one chosen, as well as to the data and sample with

which it is used. While the problems addressed by the techniques may be real,

the econometric solutions offered can do little to solve them with extant cross—

sectional data. Econometric manipulations of these data do not appear to be a

good substitute for better data, for experiments more suitable to answering the

problems of concern, or for genuine institutional or theoretical knowledge about

the interactions bewteen union, employers, and workers.


Longitudinal data

        The results of some recent studies of union effects that exploit the

before/after nature of longitudinal data sets to obtain estimates of the effect

of unionism on the same person or firm are summarized in Table ..   These

studies, which ask "How does the characteristic of a worker (firm) change when

he/she (it) goes from union to nonunion status or vice versa?" yield estimates

of union wage and non—wage effects which, while frequently smaller (in absolute

value) than those obtained in comparable corss—sectional analyses, are always

quite consistent with the cross—sectional findings. In contrast to the attempts

to deal with the problem of causality and selectivity with systems of equations,

in no case does a longitudinal analysis result "blow up". Finally, but perhaps

most imortaritly for the present discussion, the non—wage union/nonunion dif-

ferentials seem to be inexplicable in terms of unobserved (or observed) fixed

price—theoretic   or monopoly effects.
                                              143—

           As was the case with cross—sectional studies, there are still more

longitudinal analyses of wage rates than of other outcomes of concern. The

magnitude of the difference between longitudinal and cross—sectional estimates

of union wage effects varies somewhat by study. Chamberlain found that the

effect of unionism estimated with the longitudinal data in the young men NLS was

about six—tenths as large as the effect estimated with cross—sectional data.

Mincer found the longitudinal effect roughly two—thirds as large as the cross—

sectional effect. Mellow's analysis of the May—May matched CPS tapes, by

contrast, obtained a longitudinal effect that was about LiD percent of that esti-

mated in CPS cross—sectional regressions. One possible explanation of the

greater difference between the CPS results and other results is that in the CPS,

unlike other surveys, workers do not typically respond for themselves, raising

the possibility of greater measurement error in the union variable using the CPS

than using the other surveys. As noted earlier, classical measurement error can

be expected to become a more serious problem in longitudinal than in cross—

sectional data. Finally, with respect to wages, Duncan and Stafford and Leigh

have presented figures on the change in wages for workers who switch union sta-

tus and those who remain union or nonunion. These figures, given in Table ,

provide    several interesting comparisons which illuminate the nature of the

longitudinal experiment. From them one can compare the wage changes of workers

who were nonunion in the first period and became union members in the second

period   to the    wage   changes                              periods or to
                                    of workers who were nonunion in both

the changes of those who began as members but left their unions or to the
changes of workers who were unionized in both periods. A similar set of coim-
parisons    can also be made for workers who began as      union members but left their
union.     Each   comparison   provides an answer to a different question concerning
                                      _)4 t —


the   impact of unionism on wage rates. For present purposes, it suffices to note

that in all relevant comparisons, the results in Table 4 show a substantial

union wage impact of a magnitude somewhat smaller than, but consistent with, the

Table 1 findings.

         In each case, the results confirm the cross—sectional findings. Hence,

they imply that the set of non—wage cross—sectional differentials discussed

above cannot be explained in terms of unobserved differences in price theoretic

or monopoly variables or in terms of any other constant person or firm

differences.

         A longitudinal analysis of quit behavior with PSID data produced esti-

mated coefficients on the union variable roughly equal to those obtained in

cross—sectional analyses. This finding is consistent with longitudinal analyses

of quits, permanent separations and tenure on NLS data for men.

         Longitudinal studies have also roughly replicated the cross—sectional

differentials for fringes, dispersion, and productivity. In the case of

fringes, Mincer (1981), using NLS data for working men, found estimates of

union/nonunion differentials whose magnitudes differ only modestly from com-

parable cross—sectional estimates. With respect to dispersion, Freeman (in

process), analysing young male blue—collar workers, observed that among those

who moved from union to nonunion employment there was a substantial increase in

wage dispersion while among those who moved in the opposite direction there was

a significant decrease, with both changes in dispersion only modestly smaller

(in absolute value) than the cross—sectional dispersion differential. Finally,

with regard to productivity, Clark (1980a) found only a modest diminution in his

estimated effect of unionism on productivity in the cement industry when he went

to a before/after data file.6
                                         - ) 5-
TABLE 4:   Evidence of Econometric Probe6 into Union/Nonunion Differences
           Using Longitudinal Data

Variable, Data Set,
Saj,                          Result                       Reference

Wages                        Changes in wages from         Chamberlain (1980).
                             going union to nonunion
NLS Young Men                (UN) as opposed to re—
                             xnai.ningunion (uu) and
All workers                   of going nonunion to union
                             (NU) as opposed to re-
                             maining nonunion (NN) are
                             about six—tenths as large
                             as the comparable cross—
                             sectional differentials.

Wages                        Wage Differential of          Mellow (1919).
                             about 8% in longitudinal
May CPS                      analysis compared to 19% in
All workers                  cross—sectional analysis.

Wages; Work Conditions       Change in wages; UN 7%;       Duncan & Stafford (1980).
                             NU 55%; UU 33%; NN 140%;
PSID; Michigan Time Use      Estimated UN change in
Survey                       "choice of work" is posi-
                             tive while NO change is
All workers                  negative. Estimated UN
                             changes in "freedom to
                             increase work hours" is
                             near zero while NU change
                             is negative and substan-
                             tially so in absolute value.

Wages; Work Conditions       Change in wages; UN 45%;    Leigh (1980a).
                             NU 118%; UU 11%; NN 81%.
NLS Young Men                Estimated UN change in
                             "progress at work"   is
Al]. workers                 positive while NU change is
                             negative. Rstiniated UN
                             change in "job pace" is
                             positive while NU change
                             is zero.

Permanent Separations;       Men who join unions have Mincer (1981).
Fringes; Wages               sizeab.le r(1uction in quits;
                             reduction related to union
PUID                         wage gains; joiners also ob-
                             tain less training than non—
NLS Young and Old Men        union workers; union wage
                             effect of 20% among young re—
All workers                  duced in half; results for old
                             men less clear.
                                 — 16 —


                            TABLE )       (cant.)

Variable, Data Set,
Sample                  Result                       Reference
Quits                   Quit differential in         Freeman (1918b).
                        longitudinal study is
PSID                    roughly the same as in
                        corrarable cross—section
                        investigations.
Tenure; Dispersion      Tenure and dispersion        Freeman (1982).
                        differentials in longi—
NLS Young Men           tudinal study are quite
                        consistent with those from
Blue—collar   Workers   comparable cross—sectional
                        analyses.

Productivity            NU change is approx—         Clark (1980a, 1980b).
                        mately equal to the
Cement company data     comparable cross-
                        sectional differential.
Production workers
                                        — 147_


          Overall, the longitudinal 'inalyses suggest that much of the cross—
sectional union/nonunion differentials presented in Table 1 are "real" and can-
not be explained in terms ot' price--theoretic or monopoly effects. Since, as
noted   earlier, it is likely that t)iere are some potential problems with analyses

which estimate union impacts by focusing on marginal as opposed to average

workers, we endorse neither the longitudinal nor the cross—sectional results as

the answer. However, the fact that they regularly point in the same direction——

there   is much more to unions than t;heir monopoly power——is reassuring.

III. Conclusions
          This   paper has reviewed a significant body of evidence regarding the

impact of trade unionism on economic performance and sought to evaluate antithe-

tical views regarding whether estimated differences in nonwage outcomes between

union and nonunion workers and firms are real effects which can be fully

understood in terms of monopoly unionism. The review has yielded conclusions on

both the substantive questions at hand and the methodologies which have been

used to address their validity.

          With respect to the reality of the differences in nonwage variables, the

preponderance of evidence indicates that union effects estimated with cross—

sectional data are real. This statement is based on econometric probes into

the cross—sectional findings and analyses of longitudinal data sets. While both

types of investigations have shown that cross—sectional union effects tend to be

somewhat overstated, no effect has been explained away as due solely to the poor

quality of the relevant econometric experiment. vbreover, since the effects of

unions on nonwage outcomes come    from models   which   generally hold fixed the level
of   wages and variables affected by wages, the evidence supports the view that
unions do much more than simply raise wages through their monopoly power.

          Thus, our examination of the   existing   evidence indicates that the new

facts about the impact of collective bargaining cannot be fully explained by

monopoly unionism. For this reason, we have offered elsewhere our "collective

voice/institutional response" view of trade unions.1/ While we feel that this

view is of value for understanding the institution, it is our belief that other

views which go beyond monopoly unionism ca•n also play major roles in explaining

what unions do.

          With respect to methods for evaluating the quality of standard cross—

sectional experiments, some techniques appear more useful than others. In

particular, we have found that sensitivity analyses of single—equation results

and longitudinal experiments provide valuable checks on cross—sectional findings

while multiple—equations approaches produce results which are much too unstable

to   help resolve the questions of concern.
          Our conclusions   seem to have three messages for future research on trade

unionism. First, the operating assumption that trade unions have important and

real nonwage effects which cannot be explained in price—theoretic terms is

strongly supported by the extant evidence. Second, the search for a valid

answer to the question of what unions do should involve more than just manipu-

lating existing data with sophisticated techniques; it should have at its heart

the collection of new evidence concerning the functions and operations of trade

unions   and their interactions with firms and employees. Third, the
illusion/reality question should be asked not only of empirical results on the
impact   of collective bargaining, but also of   the efforts to probe these
findings.   In sum, monopoly unionism appears unable to explain such of the

impact of collective bargaining, even with the assistance of econometric model

builders.
                                        _)49.

                                      Footnotes
 1/        See Freeman and Medoff, (l95lb).

 2/        See Freeman and Medoff, (1981b).

 3/        Several arguments can be advanced regarding the possible problems

 involved in infering union effects for the population from what happens to a

 sample of changers. To see the first, consider wages. To the extent that

 voluntary job changing is viewed as an investment in mobility, there is likely

 to be a tendency for both union and nonunion job changers to experience the same

 wage gains, as both would change only if they could earn the appropriate return.

 This would bias comparisons of the differences in the wage growth of union—to—

 nonunion and nonunion—to—union changers toward zero. One would most likely get

better estimates by looking solely at changers who left their firm involuntarily

 for reasons unrelated to their individual actions (e.g., those whose firms went

out of business). Another point is that observed wage changes of union—status

changers depend on where the changers were in the relevant wage distribution.

If union or nonunion changers came disproportionately from either end of' the

distribution of concern, the estimated wage changes would not reflect those that

would result from a person selected at random.

          Specifically, counting the number of cases in Thbles 2 and 3 in which

actual unionism was replaced by predicted unionism shows eight instances in

which union coefficients declined from OLS levels, four to negative values, and

twelve in which the coefficient rose conared to OLS values, five of which

reached levels in excess of .4O in points.

5/        Specifically,   counting the number of cases in Tables 2 and 3 in which

a selectivity correction term was introduced shows ten instances in which union

coefficients declined from OLS levels, six to negative values, and eleven in
                                       —50—

which   the coefficients rose compared to OLS values, two of which reached levels

in excess of .110   in   points.

6/          Brown and Medoff (1918) gathered data by 2—digit industry for 1929 and

1953 to use with data on unionization in these two years found in Lewis (1963,

pp. 289—290) in an effort to capture productivity before and after

unionization. They regressed the change in in (value added/labor) on the change

in in (captial/labor) and the change in fraction unionized. With only 20 obser-

vations they could not estimate the union productivity effect with any

precision. The estimated coefficient on the change in fraction—unionized

variable ranged from negative to positive depending on the data used and the

assumptions made.

1/          See Freeman and Medoff, (1919) and (forthcoming, c).
                                            —51--

                                       Re ferences

Allen, Steven G. "Unionized Construction Workers Are More Productive".

   (Mimeograph, 1919).

Ashenfelter, Orley. "Union Relative Wage Effects: New Evidence and a Survey of

   Their Implications for Wage Inflation". (Mimeograph, 1916).

                    —   and George E. Johnson. "Unionism, Relative Wages, and Labor

   Quality in U.S. Manufacturing Industries", International Economic Review,

   XIII, (October, 1972), L88_5o7.

Becker, Brian. "Hospital Unionism and Employment Stability," Industry

   Relations, XVII (February,      1918),   96—101.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. "The Exit—Voice Tradeoff in the Labor

   Market: Some Additional Evidence". (Mimeograph, 1981).

Bloch, Farrell E. and Mark S. Kuskin. "Wage Determination in the Union and

   Nonunion Sectors", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXI (January,

   1918) 183—192.

Block, Richard N. "The Impact of Seniority Provisions on the Manufacturing Quit

   Rate," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXI (June, 1978), 355—378.

Borjas, G.J. "Job Satisfaction, Wages, and Unions". Journal of Human Resources

   Xiv (Winter, 1979), 2l—40.

Brown, Charles. "Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market," Quarterly Journal

   of Economics, XCIV (February, 1980), 113—l31.

                 and    James Medoff. "Trade IJnions in the Production Process,"
   Journal   of Political Economy, LXXXVI (June, 1978),    355—37'8.

Cain,   Glen G., Brian E. Becker, Catherine 0. McLaughlin, and Albert E. Schwank.

   "The Effect of Unions on Wages in Hospitals". (Mimeograph, 1980).
                                              —52—

Chamberlain,       Gary. "Are Brothers as Good as Twins?" in Paul Taubman, ed.,
   Kinometrjcs: The         Determinants of Socio—Economjc Success Within and Between

   Families.       Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1977. pp.
        —
   1981).
                       .   "Multivariate
                                                            287—298.

                                           Regression Models for Panel ta" (Mimeograph,



Clark, Kim B. "The Impact of Unionization on Productivity: A Case Study,"

   Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXIJLI (July, 1980a), )45l—69.

______ ______      "Unionization   and Productivity: Micro—Econometric Evidence,"

   Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCV (December, 1980b), 613—639.

____—          .    "The Impact of Unionization on Firm Performance: Profits, Growth

   and Productivity," forthcoming.

Connerton, M., R.B. Freeman, and J.L. Medoff. "Productivity and Industrial

   Relations: The Case of Bituminous Coal". (Mimeograph, 1919).

Dalton, James A. and E.J. Ford, Jr. "Concentration and Labor Earnings in

   Manufacturing and Utilities," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXI

   (October, 1977), 14560.

Doeringer, P.B. and M.J. Piore. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis.

   Lexington, Mass.: Heath, 1971.

Donsirnoni, Marie—Paule Joseph. "An Analysis of Trade Union Power: Structure

   and Conduct of the American Labor Movement". Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard

   University, 1978.

Duncan,   Greg J.     "Earnings Functions and Nonpecuniary Benefits", Journal of

   Human   Resources,      XI (F'ail, 1976), L62_183.

_____ _______ and Duane E. Leigh. "Wage Determination in the Union and

   Nonunion Sectors: A Sample Selectivity Approach", Industrial and Labor

   Relations Review, XXXIV (October, 1980), 24—3.
                                                         —53—


Duncan,    Greg J. and. Frank P. Stafford. "Do Union Members Receive Compensating
   Wage Differentials?" American Economic Review, LXX (June, 1980),                              355—311.

Ehrenberg, Ronald.               e_ Regulatory Process and             Labor Earnings, New York:

   Academic Press, 19(9.
Farber, Henry S.          "I.Jnionirn, Labor Turnover, and Wages of Young Men", Research
   in Labor Economics, 3(1980) ,                33—53.

Feldman, Roger, Lung—Fei Lee, and Hichard Hoffbeck. "Hospital Employees' Wages
   and Labor Union 0rganizabon". (Mimeograph, 1980).
Frantz, John. "The Impact               of   Trade Unions on Productivity in the Wood Household
   Furniture Industry". Senior Honors Thesis, Harvard College,                              1976.

Freeman,     Richard B. "Individual Mobility and Union Voice in the Labor Market,"
   American    Economic Review, LXVI (May, 1976), 361—168.

                                "Job Satisfaction asan Economic Variable," American

   Economic Review, LXV[i[ (May, lOTHa).

______       _____              "A Fixed Effet Logit Model of the Impact of Unionism on

   Quits". (Mimeograph, 1978b)

                         •      "The Hffect      P   In Lonisri on Worker Attachment          to Firms",
   Journal    of Labor Sesearch •            I ( i.  I          1950a) , ?9—61.

                         •      "The Hx L..-Vo.i         IrI:o If    in the Labor Market, Unionism, Job

   Tenure,    quits ,    arid    epn ril.    uris"   iin burly       Journal of    Economics,   XCIV (June,

   198(Jb)   6)43—673.

                                              ml Ui        )i jiurnon of     Wages", Industrial and
   Labor RciaLi.on IIuitw, X                 'V (        dr , loHOc) , 3—2.
                                                u        ri l   'JiH uninn on   Fringe   Benefits ,"
  Industrial     and J..;il'r Re];iL.i ons               I , XXXIV (July , 1981)
                                            —5 4 —


Freeman R.B. "The Longitudinal Estimates of the Nonwage Impacts of Unionism",

   (in process).

Freeman, R.B. and James L. Medoff. "The Two Faces of Unionism", The Public

   Interest, LVII (Fall, 1979), 69—93.

____________ and ____ _____ _____. "The Percent Organized Wage Relationship for

   Union and Nonunion Workers", Review of Economics and Statistics LXIII

   (November, 1981a), 561—572.

_____         and —         _______   .    "Substitution   Between Production Labor and

   Other    Factors   in Unionized and Nonunionized Manufacturing," Review of

   Economics and Statistics, (forthcoming, a).

__________    and   —_________        .    "The Impact of Collective Bargaining:

   Illusion or Reality" in J. Steiher,         R.B. McKersie and D.Q. Mills, eds. U.S.
   Industrial   Relations 1950—1980: A Critical Assessment. Madison, Wisconsin:

   Industrial Relations Research Association, 1981b, pp. 47—97.

_________ and ___________             •    What Do Unions Do? (forthcoming, c).

Goldstein, Gerald and Mark Pauly. "Group Health Insurance as a Local Public

   Good" in R. Rosett, ed., The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services

   Sector. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1976, pp. 73—110.

Haiasz, Peter. "What Lies Behind the Slope of the Age—Earnings Profile?" Senior

   Honors   Thesis, Harvard Coltege, 1980.
Hamermesh, Daniel. "Market Power and Wage Inflation", Southern Economic

  Journal, XXXIX (October, 1972) ,        201_2l2.
hayden, James F. "Collective Bargaining and Cartelization: An Analysis of

  Teamster Power in the Regulated Trucking Industry". Senior Honors Thesis,

   Harvard   College, 1977.
                                             —55—


Heckman, James D. "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,

   Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for

   Such Models". Annals of Economics and Social Measurement, V, (1976) 75——492.

Hendricks,    Wallace. "Labor Market       Structure and Union Wage Levels", Economic

   Inquiry,    XIII (September, 1975), LOitti6.
          ___________      "Conglomerate   Mergers and Collective Bargaining",
   Industrial Relations, XV       (February,   1976), 75—87.
Hirsch,    Barry. "The interindustry Structure of Unionism, Earnings, and Earnings

   Dispersion", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, forthcoming.

Hyclak,    Thomas. "The    Effect of Unions on Earnings      Inequality in Local Labor
   Markets", Industrial and       Labor Relations Review, XXXIII (October, 1979), 77—84.

_____________         "Unions and Income Inequality: Some Cross—State Evidence",

   Industrial Relations, XIX (Spring,        1980), 212—215.
Johnson,    George E. "Economic Analysis of Trade         Unionism", American Economic
   Review,    LXV (May, 1973), 23—28.

__________________       "Changes Over Time in the Union/Nonunion Wage Differential

   in the United States", (Mimeograph, February 1981).

_____ __________ and Kenneth Youmans. "Union Relative Wage Effects by Age and

   Education", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXIV (January, 1971),

   171—179.

Kahn, Lawrence H. "Union Impact: A Reduced Form Approach", The Review of



—  Economics and Statistics, LIX (November, 1977) 503—507.

                   .    "The Effect of Unions on the Earnings of Nonunion Workers",

   Industrial Labor Relations Review, XXXI (January 1978) 205—216.

_______     _______     "Unionism and Relative Wages: Direct and Indirect Effects",

   Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXII (July, 1979), 520—532.

Kalachek, Edward and Frederic flames. "Trade Unions and Hiring Standards,"

   Journal of Labor Research, I (Spring, 1980)        ,   63—75.
                                            —56—

Kiefer, Nicholas and Sharon Smith, "Union          Impact and   Wage Discrimination by

   Region", Journal of Human Resources, XII (Fall, 1977), 521—534.

Kochan, Thomas A. Collective Bargaining and Industrial Relations. Homewood,
   Ill. :    Richard D. Irwin, Inc.   ,   95O.
________________ and Richard N. Block. "An Interindustry Analysis of Bargaining

   Outcomes: Preliminary Evidence from Two—Digit Industries", Quarterly Journal

   of Economics, XCI (August, 1977), )431—452.

Kochari, Thomas A. and David     E. Helfman. "The     Effects of Collective Bargaining

   on Economic and Behavioral Job Outcomes", in Research in Labor Economics,

   Vol. IV, Greenwich: JAI       Press,   forthcoming 1981.

Lee, Lung—Fei. "Unionism and Wage Rates: A Simultaneous Equations Model with

   Qualitative and Limited Dependeflt Variables", International Economic Review,

   XIX (June, 1978), 4iSJ33.

Leibenstein, Harvey. "Allocative fficiency vs. 'X—Efficiency'", American

   Economic Review, LVI (June, 1960), 392—15.

Leigh, Duane E. "Racial Discrimination and Labor Unions: Evidence from the NLS

   Sample of Middle—Aged Men", Journal of Human Resources, XIII (Fall, 1978),

   568—577.

______________.     "Unions and Nonwae Racial       Discrimination", Industrial and
   Labor    Relations Review , XXXII (July, 1979), 439-J45O.

___________         "Do Union Members Receive Compensating Wage Differentials?"

   (Mimeograph, 1980a).

____________        "Racial   Differentials in Union Relative Wage Effects: A

   Simultaneous Equations Approach", Journal of Labor Research, I, (Spring,

   1980b) , 95—114.
                                           —57-.


 Lewis, H. Gregg. Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States.             Chicago:

    University of Chicago Press, 1963.

                      "Interpreting Unionism Coefficients in Wage Equations",

    (Mimeograph, 1980).

Mandelbawn, David. "Responses to Job Satisfaction Questions as Insights into

   Why Men Change Employers", Senior Honors Thesis, Harvard College, 1980.

Mandelstamm, Allan B. "The Effects of Unions on Efficiency in the Residential

   Const,ruction Indusery; A Case Study", Industrial and Labor Relations Review,

   XVIII (July,   1965),   503—521.

 McLaughlin,   Catherine G.      "The Impact of Unions on Hospital Wages". Ph.D.

   Thesis, University of Wisconsin—Madison, 1980.

Medoff, James L. "The Earnings Function: A Glimpse Inside the Black Box".

   (Mimeograph, 1977).

___________           "Layoffs   and Alternatives Under Trade Unionism in U.S.

   Manufacturing", American Economic Review, LXIX (June, 1979), 380—395.

    ___________ and Katharine G. Abraham. "Experience, Performance, and

   Earnings", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Xcv (December, l9BOa), 703—736.

_______________ and ____                     . "Years     of Service and Probability of

   Promotion". (Mimeograph, 1980b).

     __________ and                          .
                                                   "Involuntary   Terminations Under

   Explicit and Implicit Employment Contracts". (Mimeograph, 1981a).

                and                          .     "The Role of Seniority at U.S. Work

  Places: A Report on Some New Evidence". (Mimeograph, 1981b).

  _____ ____   and __________ ___________—. "Are Those Paid More Really More

  Productive?: The Case of Experience", Journal of Human Resources, (Spring,

  1981c), 186—216.
                                          —58—

Medoff, James L.    and Jon A. Fay, "'Ihe Short Run Productivity Puzzle and
   Inferences of    Labor Hoarding't, (in process).
Mellow, Wesley.     "Unionism and Ways:     A Longitudinal   Analysis",   Review of
   Economics and    Statistics,   Lxiii (February, 1981a), J43—52.

_____________       "Employer Size ari Wages". (Mimeograph, 1981b).
Mincer, Jacob.     "The Economics of Iage Floors". (Mimeograph, 1980).

____________       "Union Effects: Wges, Turnover & Job Training", NBER Working

   Paper No. 808. Cambridge: NatLonal Bureau of Economic Research.

Mitchell, Daniel J.B. "Some Empirical Observations of Relevance to the Analysis

   of Union Wage Determination", Journal of Labor Research, I (Fall, 1980),

   193—215.

Mitchell, Daniel J.B. Unions, Wages, and Inflation. Washington: The Brookings

   Institution, 198Gb.

Moore, William J. and Baisian, Johii. "Cyclical Sensitivity of Union/Nonunion
   Relative Wage Effects", Journal of Labor Research, I (Spring, 1980), 115—132.

Neumann, George. "Union Wage Diffrentials and the Decision to Join Unions",

   (Mimeograph,    1911).
Oaxaca,   Ronald L. "Estimation of TJnion/Nonunion Wage Differentials Within

   Occupational/Regional Subgroups," Journal of Human Resources, X (Fall, 1915),

   5 29—536.

Olsen, Randall J.     "Comment on 'Thy Effect of Unions on Earnings and Earnings on

   Unions: A Mixed Logit Approach'", International Economic Review, XIX

   (February, 1978), 259—261.

Pencavel, John. An Analysis of tht Quit       Rate   in American Manufacturing

   Industry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University, Industrial Relations

   Section, 1970.
                                         —59—

 Pfeffer, Jeffrey and Jerry Ross. "Union—Nonunion Effects on Wage and Status

   Attainment", Industrial Relations, XIX (Spring, 1980), 1140_151.

Pierson, Gail. "The Effect of Union Strengths on the U.S.         'Phillips   Curve'",

   American Economic Review, LVIII (June, 1968), 1456—)467.

Plotnick, Robert. "Trends in Male Earnings Inequality" (Mimeograph, November

   1980).

Podgursky, Michael John. "Trade Unions and Income Inequality". Ph.D. Thesis,

   University   of   Wisconsin—Madison, 1980.

Raisian, John. "Cyclic Patterns in Weeks and Wages," Economic Inquiry, XVII

   (October, 1979), !7595.

Rice, Robert G.      "Skill, Earnings and the Growth of Wage Supplements", American

   Economic Review, LVI (May, 1966), 583—593.

Schmidt, Peter. "Estimation of a gimultaneous Equations Model with Jointly

   Dependent Continuous and Qualitative Variables: The Union—Earnings Question

   Revisited", International Economic Review, XIX (June, 1978), 153165.

_____________ and Robert P. Strauss. "The Effect of Unions on Earnings and

   Earnings on Unions: A Mixed Logit Approach", International Economic Review,

   XVII   (February, 1976)   204—212.

Schoeplein,   Robert N. "Secular Changes in the Skill Differential in

   Manufacturing, 1952—1973", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXX (April,

   1977), 311_32).

Shapiro, David. "Relative      Wage Eflects of Unions   in the Public and Private

   Sectors", Industrial and Labor Relations     Review,   XXXI (January, 1978), 193—20t.

Simon,   Herbert. "A Behavioral Mod&l of Rational Choice", Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, LXIX (February, 1955), 99—118.
                                       —6o—

Slichter, Sumner, James Healy, and E. Robert Livernash. The Impact of

   Collective Bargaining on Management. Washington, DC: The Brookings

   Institution, 1960.

Sloan, Frank and Richard A. Elnicki, "Determinants of Professional Nurses'

   Wages", in Research in Health Economics, Vol. I, Grenwich: JAI Press, 1979,

   pp. 2172514.

Solnick, L.M. "Unionism and Fringe Benefit Expenditures", Industrial Relations,

   XVII (February, 1978), 102—107.

Viscusi, W. Kip. "Wealth Effects and Earnings Premiums for Job Hazards", Review

   of Economics and Statistics, LX (August, 1978), 408—)4i6.

______________      "Union, Labor Market Structure, and the Welfare Implications of
   the Quality of Work", Journal of Labor Research, I (Spring, 1980), 175—192.

Weiss, Leonard. "Concentration and Labor Earnings", American Economic Review,

   LVI (March, 1966), 96—117.

Welch, Stephen W. "Union—Nonunion Construction Wage Differentials", Industrial

   Relations, XIX (Spring, 1980), 152—162.

Williamson, O.E., M.L. Wachter, and   J.E.   Harris. "Understanding the Employment

   Relation: The Analysis of Idiosyncratic Exchange", The Bell Journal of

   Economics, VI (Spring, 1975), 250—278.

Yanker, Robert H. "Productivity Versus Seniority: What is the Determining

   Factor in Regard to Wages and Promotion?" Senior Honors Thesis, Harvard

   College, 1950.
