NBER WORKING PAPER SER IRS

THE LABOR MARKET IMPACT OF FEDERAL REGULATION:
OSHA, ERISA, EEC) AND MINIMUM WAGE

Olivia S. Mitchell

Working Paper No. 84-4

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
January 1 982

Assistant Professor, New York State School of Industrial and Labor
Relations, Cornell University, and Faculty Research Fellow,
National Bureau of Economic Research. Helpful suggestions were
provided by Charles Brown, Lee Dyer, Jennifer Gerner, Alan Gustman,
Janet Johnson, Tom Kochan, Dan Mitchell, Michael Piore, Steve
Welch, and the participants at the MIT Industrial Relations
Workshop. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBRR Working Paper #844
January 1982

The

Labor Market Impact of Federal Regulation:
OSHA, ERISA, EEO and Minimum Wage

ABRACT

This paper critically evaluates the contribution of labor economics
and industrial relations research to our understanding of the impact of
government labor market regulation. Recent theoretical and empirical
literature is analyzed for four major policies: (a) workplace safety and
health; (b) employer—provided pensions; (c) wage minimums; and (d) employment and pay practices with regard to women and minorities. Studies on EEO
and OSHA reforms find small but positive impacts on the outcomes they sought
to alter: the minimum wage literature indicates low skilled workers were
not benefited much by wage floors; and as yet no analysis exists on whether
ERISA improved pension security. Directions for future analysis are
suggested, including the role of research in policymaking, whether and how
regulatory policy affects labor productivity, and the distributional impact
of different forms of regulation on various labor market groups.

Olivia S. Mitchell
NBER——1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 68—39ll
or

NYSSILR-Ives Hall
Cornell University

Ithaca, NY 14853

The Labor Market Impact of Federal Regulations:
OSHA, ERISA, EEO and Minimum Wage

This paper critically evaluates what we have learned about the impact

of federal regulation of the workplace in the last decade. Policies selected
for special attention are those affecting (a) workplace safety and health,
(b) employer—provided pensions, (c) wage minimums, and (d) employment and pay

practices with regard to women and minorities. Discussion of each policy is

organized in the same way. First, we present a brief overview of the major
legislative, administrative and judicial developments in the policy area that

occured during the 1970's. Next ,

the

theoretical literature is summarized,

followed by a discussion of studies on the specific labor market regulation.

Finally, for each policy, we ask the question: What have we learned about the
effect of the regulatory policy on the level and distribution of social well-

being? General observations on all four regulatory programs appear in a fiual
section.
I.

Occupational Safety and Health
Until 1970, occupational safety and health standards were not uniform or

consistent across the nation's workplaces. In a few industries, federal government supervision was the norm, as with the Mine Safety Act. Some states ran
programs varying in scope and impact. For the most part, however, industry—
level groups in the private sector developed their own concensus standards for

job health and safety, and complied with them on a voluntary basis. During the
latter half of the 1960's, public policy on workplace safety began to change,

in part responding to high and rising injury rates on the job. This concern
found a voice in the Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Act of 1970, and in
subsequent judicial and administrative developments in the area.

—2—

1. Policy Overview
The Act's goal was to make the workplace "healthful arid safe for working men

and women" (Smith, 1976, p. 14), imposing on employers the responsibility for

insuring that workers were not exposed to hazardous conditions. In addition
to this general mandate, employers were instructed to abide by a rather lengthy
list of safety and health standards that had been devised by private industry,
as well as

other

federal safety laws such as the Nine Safety Act and the Walsh

Healey Act. Enforcement of the law's general safety and health clause as well
as a multitude of individual standards, devolved upon Department of Labor inspectors.
While inspectors were most frequently allocated to firms in targeted industries,

they could also be invited in by employees suspecting violations. Employers
found in noncompliance were usually fined, about $25 per violation during the

mid—1970's (Smith, 1976). Additional administrative agencies were charged
with reviewing practice and suggesting changes in policy. These included the
Occupational Safety and Health Commission, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and the National Advisory Commission on Occupational

Safety and Health. The OSH Act also indirectly facilitated the formation of
union management committees to deal with occupational and safety matters at the
firm and industry level ((Kochan, Dyer, and Lipsey, 1977).
Various judicial interpretations of the OSH Act influenced the form and

substance of the legislation over timeJ

For instance, the Act did not require

OSHA inspectors to obtain a search warrant; however in 1978 the Supreme Court

ruled that employers could require inspectors to obtain one. Employers and
workers both were granted permission to accompany safety inspectors on rounds.

An important case in 1977, Marshall v. Daniel Construction, produced the ruling
that employees would not be allowed to refuse to work even if they feared or

—3—

suspected dangerous working conditions on the job. The most controversial
issue in the safety and health area was only recently reviewed by the
Supreme Court: The question was whether economic cost—benefit analysis could
be used in evaluating health and safety standards.

Several textile firms

argued that compliance with the Act's standards would be so expensive as to

threaten their economic viability. The defendants argued, and the Court
agreed, that the OSH Act did not require a comparison of compliance costs and

benefits in determining new standards.2 The long—term impact of this decision
is still unclear, since the Agency's director has argued that OSH standards must
still be "the least expensive way of reaching a specific level of protection".3
The pros and cons of cost—benefit approaches in this context are considered in
more detail below.

2. The Impact of Safety and Health Policy
Most theoretical analysis of safety and health policy applies a neoclassical

framework. This approach focuses on how OSH law affects labor costs, and traces

its impact through the economic system. In a world where all employers and
workers are competitive and well informed, wages paid in the labor market would

reflect workers' evaluations of the risk they face on the job. Different types
of employees demand different amounts of on—the—job safety, and employers
supply different amounts depending on their own technology and the cost of

lowering job risks. The labor market rewards workers willing to take risks
with wage premiums depending on
technologies.

the

distribution of workers' tastes and employers'

(Lucas, 972; Rosen, 1974; Thaler and Rosen, 1973).

In this neoclassical, world, imposing minimum legal standards
workers'

are

on

physical environment raises employers' costs of hiring labor. Profits

lowered and firms have an incentive to substitute away from labor to capital.

Depending on the degree of responsiveness in labor demand and consumption, this

process produces a cutback in employment and in overall output. Many neo-

classical analysts would therefore view an OSH—type standards approach with
some skepticism, since it creates inefficiencies in markets presumed to
operate efficiently.

Somewhat less orthodox approaches have also evolved in the last decade

which perceive safety regulation somewhat differently. Many such analysts
believe that workers are exposed to too much risk because the costs of making

jobs safer appear too high. This is explained by workers' and/or firms' imperfect information ——

they

do not have the technical and medical capabilities

required to monitor and alter the work environment. As yet, there exists no
careful study of the ways in which workers obtain, process and act on informa-

tion pertaining to workplace safety and health. Bacow (1980) suggests that most
workers do have difficulty monitoring compliance with OSH standards. Complimentary
evidence from Kochan (1980) finds that union workers appear to obtain higher risk

premiums than do their nonunion counterparts. On the other hand, Smith (1979)
and Viscusi (1979) find no significant effect of unionism on the injury rate.
Thus, the evidence suggests that large organizations like unions may improve

workers' perceptions of risk on the job, but perhaps cannot significantly lower
those risks. There is at least fragmentary evidence indicating that there are
scale economics for firms in the production of job safety and safety information;
Gordon (cited in Smith, 1974) suggests that large firms are more able to implement

standards for this very reason. Oi (1974) along with Cooke and Cautchi (1981)
also find that injury rates are lower in large firms, which is consistent with
the view that

firms may experience

scale economies in injury reduction.

Whether or not these studies judge OSHA favorably in terms of
improving the functioning of the labor market depends on whether information

problems or scale economics are more important. OSH—type standards imposed
by the government benefit workers most if they are unable to determine desireable
safety levels on their owli. On the other hand, legally required safety equipment
and job redesign may be costly and in fact be more expensive than fully informed
workers would be willing to incur in changing their own working conditions.
Another group of studies has inquired about whether the labor market

responds enough to information about workplace hazards. The evidence here is
mixed. Viscusi (1979) concludes that workers are often poorly informed
about workplace hazards, and adapt slowly by quitting their jobs, as they

learn about the risks involved. Smith (1979) reviews the literature on
wage premiums for higher risks of death on the job, and concludes that riskier
jobs do pay more though injury rate differences across industries do not appear

to be reflected in wage premiums. Smith (1974) also examined firm behavior,
focusing on the relationship between workplace injuries and risk premiums that

firms pay their workers. He concludes that "employers do seem to be responsive
in their safety efforts to the cost of injuries" (p. 741), and will react to

economic incentives by making the workplace safer. However, this responsiveness
is not large; he estimates that it would take a per—injury penalty of $1,600

to $3,000 (in 1974 dollars) to lower the injury rate 10 percent. This was

about 100 times as large as the average OSHA penalty at the time. All three
types of studies would suggest that OSH regulation was a necessary though
probably not sufficient policy to improve working conditions.
Differences in theoretical frameworks have generated different empirical

approaches for evaluating the impact of OSH law. Some authors provide fascinating

—6—

descriptive analyses of the medical, technical, practical, and bureaucratic

difficulties encountered during OSHA's first year of life. Ashford (1976)
has an extensive review of problems encountered in medical research and the
difficulties of convurting these medical/technical finds into OSH standards.
He also provides an interesting overview of the bureaucratic obstacles encountered in developing new standards, complemented by Mendeloff's (1979)
review of vinyl chloride and mechanical press standards.

Other new initiatives in the safety area are the focus of authors
interested in union—management negotiations over changes in workplace health

and safety practice. Bacow (1980), for instance, reviews the quite different
approaches to worker safety of the United Auto workers, United Steelworkers

and the United Association of Plumbers and Pipefitters. Kochan, Dyer and Lipsky
(1977) study the relationships between a single union (Machinists), the
perceptions of the workers represented by this union, and management's percep-

tion of safety and health issues. These case studies provide a wealth of information about the ways in which particular unions and companies interact
altering workplace safety and health, and will serve as models for institutional
researchers in the future.

In addition to these more descriptive evaluations of OSHA, a few more

quantitative studies are also available. Unfortunately, these studies are
plagued

by almost insurmountahi e data problems. Perhaps the

serious

problem

single most

deterring good quality research in this area is that no good

data exist on workers' exposure to risk.4 Thus, there is no way to determine
the rein tionship between the number of workers affected by workplace illness

or injury and the total number actually at risk on their jobs. A second
problem with workplace safety data is that statistics collected prior to the

—7—

passage

of the OSH Act are incompatible with post—OSH Act statistics. Analysts

therefore cannot determine the effect of OSHA directly5 by examining trends
in injuries or illness over time, and instead must focus on differences in
workplace hazards as reflected in post—OSFIA data alone. This may lead to underestimates of the effect of OSFIA, since one would suspect that inspections

would have some spillover effects even on firms not directly subject to
inspection.

A third drawback of workplace safety data is that the reporting requirements are better for injuries and very poor on occupational illness

(Ashford, 1976). Thus, policy evaluations have been restricted almost

exclusively to the analysis of work injuries. Virtually nothing is known about
the long run effect of OSH on occupational illness. Other analysts

have criticized available data for still another reason: "assessment of small
risks requires immense amounts of data" in order to be certain that changes
in injury rates are indeed permanent and not due to measurement error (Rosen,
1981, p. 242). Efforts to reduce measurement error in data have led analysts
to examine industry level statistics, yet such aggregation obscures a great
deal of variation across firms in an industry

6

(Oi, 1974).

Another serious drawback of quantitative data in this area is attributable
to the problem of defining and measuring the policy variable of interest.
7

Some analysts focus on industry—wide probabilities of OSHA inspection or citations.
However, the likelihood of inspection is distributed unevenly across firms,
implying

that the impact of OS}1 policy on individual firms is not well

measured by industry level data. Other analysts have focused on plant—level

data, representing the effect of OSHA policy by timing of inspections, whether
or not there was an OSHA inspection in a given year, or the number of citations
over time (Smith, 1979; Cook mid Catitchi, 1981). No study has yet determined
which is the most useful and sensible measure of the policy variable, and more

—8--

work needs to be done in this area.

With these caveats in mind, let us turn to the evidence. Most empirical
studies focus on injury rates as the dependent variable, and relate them to
measures of OSIIA policy.

Mendeloff (1979) uses time series information, focus-

ing on national injury rates. He concludes that injury patterns after the
passage of the Act did not differ significantly from thL overall injury rate that

would have been predicted in the absence of OSHA. His further analysis with
state—level statistics are almost as inconclusive. Smith (1974) looked at cross—
sectional injury rate statistics for 3—digit industrial groupings, and rejects
the hypothesis that Target Industries program reduced injury rates significantly.
Viscusi (1979) also uses industry level data, but follows the same industries
over a period of four years; the policy variables he includes are the industry—
specific OSHA inspection rate and the proposed OSHA penalty for noncompliance.
Again, no significant effect of the government policy was detected.

Because of the drawbacks noted earlier in national and industry level

aggregate data, a few analysts have looked at injuries at the plant level. An
early report by DiPietro (cited in Mendeloff, 1979) studies firms' injury rates
in 1973 as a function of whether or not firms were inspected in the previous

year. Firm size and changes in employment were also controlled. Overall, results
from this study reiterate the evidence generated by aggregate analyses——OSHA
inspection apparently had no statistically significant effect on firm level injury

rates. That author suggested that the null finding might be attributable to the
fact that inspections were often targeted at firms with exceptionally poor injury
records; in other words, the inspection variable was probably endogenous and

thus biased toward zero. A more recent study by Smith (1979) controls for this
potential problem by focusing on a subsample of plants, all of which had been

inspected in either 1973 or 1974. In order to measure the effect of inspection,

— C) —

Smith differentiated between plants which were inspected early in the year, and
others which were not visited until the winter months. He postulates that firms
visited

earlier would have a longer period over which to correct workplace

hazards and thus should have experienced lower injury rates than the plants

visited

later. interestingly, the evidence indicates that days lost due to

injury were significantly reduced by early inspection in 1973, but not in 1974.
Various explanations for the lack of consistency are suggested, the most plausible
being that firms inspected in the later year were more likely to be "problem

cases" as compared to the plants visited earlier in the program. Overall, the
author concluded that injuries were reduced from 5 to 16 percent with additional

inspections. A third study of plant level data (Cooke and Gautchi, 1981), investigated changes in days lost due to injury over the period 1970 to 1976.
These

the

authors found that an increase in the total number of OSI-IA citations over

same period reduced days lost due to injury by a (statistically significant)

.3 to .5 days per worker in large plants. No effect was discerned in small workplaces, however.

Clearly much more work remains to be done in this area. To reiterate
Rosen (1981), the dependent variable should measure which workers are at risk,

rather than the very crude measures usually used. The endogenity of inspections
at the firm level must also be an analyzed in more detail, ideally within the
context of a model which takes into account the role of unions and management
in enforcing the law.

!3ettcr ways

of modelling the implementation of OSHA policy

must be devised, to better reflect Lhe likelihood of apprehension, the likelihood
that

OSHA inspectors will actually perceive violations, the probable size of

penalties if apprehended, and the role of follow—up investigations. On the basis
of empirical work in the 1970's, it is suggested that the estimated effect of an

—1)-

increase in OSHA inspections on workplace injuries ranges between zero and about
15 percent, where the lower end of the range is characteristic of empirical
studies using aggregate data, and the higher estimates are produced by plant

level studies. More empirical studies of behavior at the individual firm level
in the future will probably produce estimates of the impact of OSHA at the
higher end of this range.

3. Effects of OSHA Policy on Levels of Well—Being
Has national policy on occupational safety and health had any significant impact

on the level and distribution of well—being? This is one of the most interesting
of all the research questions in the occupational safety and health area, and yet
the most overlooked.8 There are, of course, many methods of devising answers to

the question. One approach has been to use cost benefit analysis as an intermediate step in guiding decision—making (Ot, 1974). However, others (Chown, 1980;
Wood, 1974) argue that cost—benefit places a price on illnesses and injuries, and

"the worker must not be viewed simply as an economic entity." Regardless of
whetlier

cost—benefit is the only criterion that should be used, or whether

instead it

should be one of many, no one in the health and safety area has yet

developed a list of the costs and benefits of OSHA and their distribution across

the workforce. In addition, no one has asked whether other policies, such as
those which impose more safety responsibilities on workers directly, might be
more cost effective and/or equitable than the current standards—setting approach.
4 .

Couci usion

This review of what we know about job safety and health policy has revealed some

strengths and many weaknesses. No one has inquired into the impact of OSH policy
on employment and wages. The best available firm—level evidence indicates that
current practice has a small negative effect on workplace injuries. No one has

examined the
receive

impact

of OSH policy on occupational illness, and this area should

highest research priority in the next decade. The evidence suggests that

workers are not well acquainted with workplace hazards, though they do learn over
time.
act

Better ways of making available such information should be found. Firms

as though they face rather minimal incentives to reduce workplace hazards

under

current Jaw and practice. While the socially desirable level and distri-

bution of risk on the job has not been established, existing cost—benefit methodology is probably too narrow in scope to completely measure the effects of work-

place risk. On the other hand, more attention must be devoted to understanding
the costs and benefits of safety and health policy. A prerequisite to more useful research is better information on who is actually exposed to what kind of

risks. Labor management and the federal government should join to produce and

these sorely needed data.

analyze

II.

Pension Income Security: ERISA
Private pensions today cover roughly half of the workforce, and provide

an average of $3,000 to retirees receiving a pension (President's Commission on

Pension Policy, 1981). Pensions grew in importance as a source of retirement
income mainly since wwii,

spurred by tax deferral of employer contributions to

company plans, NLRB rulings that pensions were appropriate topics of collective

bargaining and the Taft—Hartley Act which provided the framework for private
multi—employer

pension plans. The Welfare

and Pension Plan Disclosure Act (WPPD)

of 19.5? wa an early attempt to organize data collection on the nation's patch-

work

of retirement

and other

employer

provided

During the late 1960's and early
surface

1970's,

welfare plans.

reports in the press began to

about companies who reneged on or were unable to keep promises to

retirement

pay

benefits. In addition, concern over workers' difficulties in vesting

—12—

was expressed in several Congressional hearings.10 This discussion prompted
passage of the Employment Retirement Income Safety Act (ERISA) of 1974; its
purpose was "to reduce the risk of workers not receiving adequate pension benefits, despite long—term participation in a firm's pension plan, by establishing
funding standards, reporting requirements, and regulations on information that
must be provided to participants and minimum vesting rules" (Masters et al, p.43).
1. Policy Overview
ERISA establishes minimum standards with which a pension plan must comply,
including (Skolnick, 1974):

a. Participation: A full—time employee must be allowed to participate
in a plan if he is at least age 25 and has worked at the firm one
year.

b. Vesting: The employee has full legal rights over employer pension
contributions after having fulfilled one of three vesting require—
merits (the most cornnioii l)Lng 10—year "cliff vesting").

contributions are immediately vested.

Emaloyee

c. Information. Employees must be provided with an annual statement on
their benefit and vesting status; the Department of Labor must
receive periodic reports on a plan's financial standing.
d. Financial: All plans promising a specified benefit to retirees
(defined benefit plans) are required to accumulate funds in compliance with actuarial principles. Unfunded liabilities must be
amortized over a period oF 30 years in most cases. A governmental
non—profit firm, the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC),
insures a portion of defined benefit plans income by charging a
flat per—worker premium. In case of plan illiquidity, the PBGC
can claim up to 30% of a firm's assets to cover benefits promised.
e. Fund_management: Pension plan sponsors are personally liable for
pension investment performance if their investment advice is not
in conformity with accepted money management practice (the "Prudent
Man" rule).
(This applies to both defined benefit and defined
contribution plans, where the latter specify how much is contributed
to the plan, but not payouts.)
f. Liidividual plans: Workers with no employer—sponsored plan may
establish an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) or a Keogh plan
(for the self—employed) into which tax—deferred contributions
(up to a limit) may be deposited.

- 3The law does not require employers to provide a pension nor does it interfere with
the determination of pension contribution or benefit levels. The
minimum
a

standards, therefore, is to increase the

purpose

of the

chances that a worker promised

pei-ision actually receives some form of retirement income from the employer

making the promise.

Administration and enforcement of ERISA policy is allocated to several

different entities: the Labor Management Services Administration of the Labor
Department monitors pension plan reporting and disclosure, and pension fund

asset holdings. The Internal Revenue Service has responsibility for evaluating
plans' compliance with participation, vesting and funding standards established

in ERISA. In addition, the PBGC oversees plans' long—term and short—term financial status. Finally, individual employees are empowered to file suit against
plan administrators——if benefits are illegally withheld.

Judicial decisions in the last decade have also modified the way ERISA

is interpreted. The most recent Supreme Court decision found that an employer's
pension promise should not be construed to be a guarantee of any particular
benefit level, real or nominal.

The long—term implications of this finding are

unclear at this juncture, but would seem to be far—reaching.
2. The

Impact

One group of
as

of Pension Reform Regulation

studies

evaluating the impact of pension policy classifies pensions

defined wages (Schiller and Weiss, 1979). In

pensions because (1) they

permit

this view, workers like group

tax deferral of income, and (2) they offer a

higher return on savings and lower insurance costs than individual plans could
provide (Mitchell and Andrews, 1981).

This approach has been criticized for not explaining why most pension
plans require the employee to work for several years before vesting; why defined

—14-

the wnrker's income level while working; and, why many pension systems are

underfunded (Logue, 1979). An alternative theory holds that pensions are an
implicit contract between workers and employers, designed to improve worker

productivity and lower turnover (Lazear, 1979c). Vesting and participation
requirements are understandable in this light. Pension underfunding has been
interpreted along the same lines (Treynor, Regan and Priest, 1976; Feldstein

and Seligman, 1980; Smith, 1981). The underfunded pension will pay off if the
firm is in good financial health, which induces workers to internalize incentives to become more productive, exhibit lower turnover, and require less super-

vision. The existence of defined benefit plans which are unrelated to workers'
salaries may be explained by the view that workers are risk—averse, and prefer
a flat dollar benefit with certainty to a benefit based on a worker's own
(uncertain) income stream as he nears retirement age.

Though the different theories emphasize distinct aspects of the private
pension system, no one yet knows what role pensions actually play in the labor

market. For this reason, there is some disagreement about the expected impact
of ERIISA regulations in the literature. Those who believe the labor market
behaves

according to neoclassical rules predict that ER1SA lowers the riskiness

of a pension promise, by virtue of which
expensive.

the pension promise becomes more

In response to more costly but

more secure pensions, workers' wages

and/or benefit levels may fall; however, expected total compensation over
individuals' lifetimes would not necessarily change (Schiller and Weiss, 1980).
On the other hand, the justification for ERISA might be different in a less

neoclassical labor market. Research by Hamermesh (198la), for instance, suggests
that workers have very imprecise ideas about their own health and life expectancies, implying that they do need help planning their retirement savings.

-15-

Employees, especially at younger ages, tend to value pensions at a relatively
low rate (Mitchell, 1980, 1982), suggesting that unions and other institutions
are useful in making them more aware of the need for pensions (Custman and
Segal; 1972; Lester, 1967), and in redistributing income via pensions (Freeman,
19??). ERISA is needed in this non--neoclassical environment because it protects

workers against the possibility of fraudulent pension nonreceipt. There is also
some

evidence that

economic

in

pension managers are less than perfectly "rational" in the

sense,12and might

not reduce

other elements of the

compensation

package

response to the greater security of pensions.

Before turning to the results of empirical studies on the effects of ERISA,
several comments are required on the severe data problems encountered by any

would—be empirical researcher in this area. Perhaps the single most serious
problem is that there is no way to measure the outcome variable of greatest
interest to many researchers; i.e., the lifetime consumption and pension benefits
eventually received by today's workers, as compared to what they were promised

(and, perhaps, to previous cohorts' benefits). Until today's workers retire from
the labor market, it will be impossible to determine what they actually received

in total compensation. An additional problem is that it has been difficult to

quantify the appropriate policy variable(s) associated with ERISA. For these
reasons, empirical research on ERISA is almost nonexistent. The few available
studies have focused on other (non benefit) factors: for instance, analysts have
examined pension portfolios (Cummins et al, 1980), the impact of underfunding
on firms' stock prices (Feldstein and Seligman, 1980 Gersovitz, 1980), and the
costs of administering pension plans (Mitchell and Andrews, 1981, and Andrews

and Mitchell, 1981). No one has carefully and systematically analyzed whether
and how ERISA has changed wage and/or pension benefit levels and employees'
rights to pensions; no one has determined whether pension plan termination

—16-

patterns are attributable to the regulation or the poor financial market; and
there are virtually no representative pre—ERISA data that can be used to
determine scientifically whether the regulations had any effect on any outcome

variable over time. Therefore we must conclude at the outset that empirical
evidence on the impact of ERISA is almost nonexistent and the few available
studies do not examine the effect of the regulation on compensation levels,
income distribution, employment patterns, or many other dependent variables of
interest.

Two descriptive and two quantitative empirical studies focus directly
on the impact of ERISA reforms. Logue (1979) and Ture and Fields (1979) sketch
evidence on vesting and participation rules before and after ERISA, but do not

develop a systematic empirical model. Cummins et al (1980) and Cummins, Percival
and Westerfield (1979) analyze non—labor market aspects of the regulatory impact;
the first paper focuses on plan administrators' attitudes about extra costs
attributable to the law, while the hatter paper attempts to determine whether
ERISA had any significant impact on the portfolio composition of pension funds

(Chapters 3 and 4). Both studies found little if any evidence that ERISA affected
pension plan operation, though the former article suggested that costs for
multi—employer plans may have been increased somewhat.
Two additional studies examine the impact of ERISA indirectly by

focusing on pension underfunding patterns. Gersovitz (1980) finds that pension
underfunding tends to lower a firm's stock prices, but only to the extent that

underfunding is less than one—third of the firm's assets. This is significant
because under ERISA, a pension plan has claim to that proportion of the

company's assets; this study thus implies that ERISA indeed influences the
probability of retirees receiving promised pensions.

Nonetheless, the report

-1 7-

by Bulow (1979) shows that ERISA's regulations on pension underfunding are likely
to be ineffective since actuarial assumptions are not specified in the law,

and firms can alter their reported level of underfunding simply by selecting

different actuariaL assumptions. Finally, two studies (Mitchell and Andrew,
1981; Andrew and Mitchell, 1981) find that larger pension plans benefit from
scale economies, arid suggest that ERISA may encourage plan merger by standardizing
pension characteristics.

3. Effects of ERISA on Levels of Well Being
Has the change in policy expressed in ERISA had any significant impact

on society's level and distribution of well—being? As should be clear from the
preceding discussion, the paucity of studies evalluating the effects of ERISA on

the labor market makes it impossible to answer this equity question. Some overall
descriptive material on the income distribution of retirees is available from

various sources; for instance, the Presidents' Commission on Pension Policy (1981)
finds that poverty among those over 65 years of age has declined relatively
and absolutely over time, in part due to increases in private pension income.'3
However, no one has attempted to evaluate how much of this change in income was

due to ERISA regulation, and how much is attributable to other causes. No study
has determined whether groups who traditionally received little from pension
plans,such as women and blacks, have indeed benefited from ERISA as a result

of the less strict vesting and participation requirements. Impacts on the rest
of the

economy have been

largely ignored this far: Cummins, et al (1980)

suggest that small firms might he most seriously affected by the regulation, but
careful analysis of this topic remains to be done.

4. Conclusions
One of the most surprising features of the literature on ERISA is that

- 3-

there is so little of it, and that it is so unsystematic. In part this is
explained by recognizing that pensions have become a topic of research interest

only recently, and their role in the labor market and the economy as a whole
is as yet not completely clear. This review of studies available to date suggests
that ERISA has had no significant effects on the outcome variables examined ——

pension portfolios and administrative costs —— but no data are yet available
to address the issue of whether ERISA has affected benefit levels and/or benefit

security for current or future retirees. It is hoped that researchers in the
1980's will devise better ways to fill some of the gaps identified here.
We also suggest that various reform proposals discussed in the last decade

deserve serious research scrutiny. Some analysts suggest that existing regulations
governing investment of fund assets are too restrictive and should be relaxed

to permit a more innovative investment pattern (Rifkin and Barber, 1978). Others
recommend looser participation and vesting provisions, to benefit workers with
short job tenure who have difficulty qualifying for benefits.

14

A few researchers

have begun to investigate the Tros and cons of indexing pension benefits to
inflation (Feidstein, 1981 ; todie, 1980).Some urge the establishment of a
mandatory private pension system covering all workers, a position particularly
favored

by the Presidents' Commission on Pension Policy (1981). Finally,

several researchers have proposed that the PBGC be revamped in light of its low

level of reserves and its lack of experience rating (Treynor, Regan and Priest,
1976).

As yet however, all of these proposed reforms remain in the planning

stages.
III. Federal Ninimum Wage Policy
Minimum wage legislation grew out of national concern over workers'
standards of living and how to best improve them. During the 1920's and '30's,

— 9-

proponents of the policy argued that employers should not be permitted to pay

workers below—subsistance income. Thus a wage floor was expected to be and is
still touted as an anti—poverty (Levitan and Belous, 1979). Opponents then and
now contended that a legislated wage floor would be ineffective against poverty,
since low wages reflected low productivity rather than exploitative employer

practices (Welch, 1)78). This portion of the paper reviews theoretical and
empirical minimum wage research over the last decade.
1. Policy Overview

The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) was passed in 1938, to bring about
a "minimum standard of living necessary for health, efficiency, and general

wellbeing of workers.., without substantially curtailing employment or earning

power".

15

The bill was of necessity born of compromise; several earlier efforts

to implement state specific wage floors had failed in the courts, and Roosevelt's
attempt to establish industrial wage minimums under the National Recovery Act

met a similar fate in 1935. Initially the FLSA was limited to the 20%
of the workforce engaged in interstate commerce. For employees subject to the
law, the Act set a wage floor of 25 cents an hour for both men and women, or

about 1/2 of the average hourly wage in manufacturing at the time.'6 The
minimum has risen over time and now
facturing wage (F. Welch,

l978).17

stands

at about half the average manu-

Coverage increased over the last 40 years

from about 40 to about 80 percent of non agricultural civilian nonsupervisory
employees.

Administrative and enforcement powers under the FLSA were granted

to a special Wage and hours ijivisioti of the Department of Labor. The Labor
Department

was given responsibility for granting exemptions to the law where

specified, including for companies with annual sales under a quarter of a million
dollars.

-20-

2. The Impact of Minimum Wage Policy

A simple neoclassical model of the effect of a minimum wage was first

stated four decades ago (Stigler, 1946) If employers and workers are
competitive, a minimum wage set above the competitive level will reduce
employment because firms cannot pay workers more than the value of their marginal
product and thus the wage floor induces layoffs of workers that would otherwise

be earning less than that floor. The extent of disemployment is a function of
labor demand elasticity when coverage is universal and the wage floor uniform

across workers (Welch, 1978), and of how high the wage floor is set. Incomes
fall to zero for those who lose their jobs, and the overall distribution of
18

earnings becomes more unequal.
Theoretical neoclassical research of the 1970's elaborated on this simple
textbook approach in several ways. llashimoto and Mincer (1970) recognized that
Sonic firms are exempt from FLSA provisions, implying that they may lower

wages and absorb those laid off from covered sector jobs. Wachter and Kim (1979)
pointed out that some individuals may be unwilling to take uncovered sector jobs,
preferring instead to remain unemployed in the hope of finding a job at a higher

covered—sector wage. Therefore, Mincer (1976) concludes that unemployment rates
are not particularly good measures of the impact of wage minimums. Other
authors (Hainermesh, 1981) stress that firms' responsiveness to a wage floor
depends

on the

general

equiUbrium long—run

which

ease

of substitution between skilled and unskilled workers. A
theoretical model of the impact of a minimum wage

takes into account: both physical and human capital formation has not yet

been analyzed in detail, though recent efforts by Cox and Oaxaca (1981) are
promising.

Though neoclassical models of the minimum wage impact grew increasingly

—21—

sophisticated over the last decade, their theoretical predictors became less and

less clear cut, In general, the following theoretical conclusions follow
from

the analyses:

1. A wage floor will reduce labor demanded in firms covered
by the minimum, though the quantity and distribution of
labor cutbacks depends on the level and coverage of the
wage minimum, labor and product demand elasticities,
substitutability of capital and labor of various types,
and labor supply.
2. Aggregate employment may or may not fall.
3. Aggregate unemployment may or may not rise.
4. The effect of minimum wages on the overall income distribution
cannot be determined a priori.
real

Resolution of these theoretical ambiguities requires empirical analysis.
Theoretical neoclassical models of the minimum wage have been

challenged from three directions. All three emphasize labor market inefficiencies
due to employer behavior; in contrast to the literature on other forms of labor
market regulation, virtually no attention has been devoted to other labor
market structures that might justify government regulation.
One interesting case, mentioned by Stigler (1946) and others, arises
when empioycrs

are

monoposonists and control labor purchases completely.

In this type of market, a wage floor set high enough forces the monopsonists

to

19

raise wages and employment without reducing efficiency.

The single

quantitative paper on this topic, West and McKee (1980) reports that firms' output

indeed tends to rise significantly after the wage minimum is raised. If this
finding is supported in other data, it would constitute an important argument
in

favor of minimum wage policy.
A

second rationale for a wage floor was elaborated in the early

writings of Webb (1912). He held that workers respond to higher wages by
becoming more productive, so that a wage floor may improve earnings without

—2—

lowering employment at all. Why

employers

do not pay enough to benefit

from this wage—productivity interaction is as yet unclear in the literature.

A third argument for a minimum wage is usually termed the "shock theory".

It states that employers are slow to adopt productive new technology, but a
wage floor induces them to overcome this lethargy by investing in more innovative

production techniques. Whether or not innovation in this form contributes
to net employment increases or not, and why employers are slow to adjust, is

unclear. These two rationales for a wage minimum seem to raise more questions
than they answer, and require more theoretical and empirical attention before
they can stand on their own.

The empirical literature on minimum wages is voluminous, perhaps

larger than on any other single labor market regulation. Its quality is,
20

however, uneven.

Most studies identify employment rates (or levels) as the

dependent variable of most interest, though some concentrate on unemployment.
In part, this relatively narrow empirical focus was a result of data shortcomings:
aggregate figures on employment were typically easier to obtain than were other

data. One disadvantage of an

aggregate

focus is that changes in group composition

when people leave and enter the ranks of the unemployed may affect results.
As individual level micro data become available, this problem of sample

selection began to be addressed. Relatively few studies focus on the distribution
of individwd or faniily income.
patterns over time and

over

Fewer studies still analyze changes in income

peoples'

lifetimes.

Data problems have also made it

difficult

to develop good measures of

the appropriate policy variables. In any particular cross section of firms, all

covered employers must offer the same minimum.2' This uniformity means that
cross section data do not contain a "control group" with which firms covered by

-23-

the law can be compared. Some cross section studies develop a variable
which is the ratio of the federal. wage minimum to some area—specific average

wage, often multiplied by a variable proxying for coverage. This approach
may be criticized by recognizing that regional variation in wage levels often
reflects not minimum wage level differences, but other labor market features
(like industrial structures) which may more readily explain regional disemployment.
Other analysts use time series data, on the argument that changes in the price
level and in the nominal wage floor over time should provide the empirical

variation required for quantitative analysis. Time series studies have drawbacks
too, because they pick up changes in workforce composition as females and youths

entered the labor market. Finally, both cross section and time series studies
have found it difficult to distinguish between the impact of the minimum level

and coverage, since policy changes usually alter both variables at the same
time.

With few exceptions, empirical studies tend to focus on teenage
employment patterns, because this demographic group is the most numerous, the
22

least skilled, and probably most susceptible to disemployment effects.
Keeping in mind the methodological and data differences across studies, the
time series evidence suggests that a 10% increase in the minimim wage is
associated with a 0.5% to 1.5% decline in youth employment; cross sectional
evidence is more variable but also spans that range (Brown, Gliroy and Kohen,

1980). Some analysts claim that the wage floor has a larger disemployment effect
on blacks than on whites, but this contention is as yet only weakly supported
in the data.

Studies on adult employment response to the minimum wage are even more
inconclusive; analysts disagree not only on the magnitude but also the sign of

—24—

the impact. Hamermesh (1981b) claims that adult employment is marginally
enhanced by the minimum wage, while Gramlich (1976) finds no response.

Mincer

(1976) concludes that older males and many females

lose jobs, but

Parsons (1980) argues that adult females are, on net, not adversely affected.
This evidence is thus contradictory and will remain so until empirical work

controls for compositional changes in groups under study and identifies
substitution between different kinds of labor and capital.

While the majority of studies takes a static perspective, a few analysts

examine labor market dynamics as workers and firms adjust to new wage minimums

over time. Here the conclusions are also in disagreement: Zucker (1973)
reports that about 4/5 of the total employment changes occured within six

months of a change in the minimum. This rapid adjustment is confirmed by
Hamermesh (1981), but Moore (1971) in earlier work, found a much slower

adjustment pattern. More research is needed on this topic in future years.
3. Effects on Well Being
Many have inquired about the distributional effects of the minimum.
Welch (1978) and Parsons (1980) conclude that many minimum wage workers are from

reasonably well—to—do families. Gilroy (1981) puts it differently (p.179—81)
1tAs one might expect, a large proportion —— 43 percent ——
those workers in families below the official poverty level
are making the minimum wage or less.. .Wliat is surprising is that
these workers account for only 11 percent of all mimimun wage
workers."

of

I.n general, the policy does not appear to
when evaluated in cross

conclusion

benefit the poor relatively more

section data or even over short periods of time. This

may he altered as new data become available on the impact of the

wage floor on workers' skills and lifetime income patterns: studies by Mincer
and Leighton (1980) and Ehrenberg and Marcus (1980) conclude that the life—long
impact of minimum wage coverage may lower income for low wage workers.

—2 3—

4. Conclusion

The literature on one of the oldest forms of labor market regulation, the

minimum wage, contains some strengths and some weaknesses. To a great degree,
appi

led

models.

researchers in the last decade have tested only neoclassical empirical

The available

evidence suggests that teenage employment is somewhat

lower than it could be as a result of wage floors, though in the long run
effects are as yet uncertain. A less clear picture emerges about the impact
of

the minimum wage on adult employment. Our understanding of how the policy

affects the distribution of income is as yet rudimentary; as better micro
data on firms and workers are developed, this shortcoming must be remedied.
It must also be recognized that existing empirical studies have not
viewed broadly enough the context in which minimum wage policy operates.
Other institutions, regulations, and social policies also affect the eventual
income distribution of earnings and nonlabor income, and should be taken into

account as well. For instance, levels of and eligibility rules for welfare
programs vary across regions and over time, influencing the payoff to work and

participation as well as unemployment. Unemployment insurance plays a major
role for some workers. Income and other taxes alter the relative returns to
working as do in—kind transfers and their eligibility requirements. The role
of labor unions in establishing and maintaining prevailing wages has not yet
been taken into account in studies which purport to evaluate the minimum wage,

either. The interactions of poLitics and institutions should he examined in
order

to develop

distribution

a clearer

understanding of the contribution of each to the

of income and employment. They are usually not, however.

Even this brief review of minimum wage policy would be incomplete
without mentioning some of the more controversial topics surfacing in recent

—26—

years. The Report of the Minimum Wage Study Commission (1981) touches on several:
What would result from a special subminimum for youth? On this topic, Brown (l981b)
Hamermesh (1981) ,

and Freeman, Gray and Ichniowski (1981) come to quite divergent

conclusions. Should the wage floor be indexed to inflation? Does the minimum wage
cause wage structure compression, or do employers maintain traditional wage differ-

entials? Should the minimum be tailored to specific industries and regions?
Evaluating these questions will, no doubt, receive a great deal of attention in

the 1980's. Whether the wage minimum is the best way to alleviate poverty is an
add

IV.

Ltionai important concern that

must

also

he examined

in the

next decade.

Antidiscrimination Policy
Prior

to the 1960's individual states

had a variety of bills on the

books protecting workers treated unequally because of race, sex, or age (Landes,

1968). At the Federal level, some concern over discriminatory practices was
embodied in the

against

1938 Fair Labor Standards Act, but this law protected mainly

long hours and poor working conditions. Not until the 1960's did Federal

regulation directly confront the labor market problems of minorities and women.
This section evaluates what we have learned in the last decade about the
23

impact of Federal antidiscrimination policy on blacks and women.
1. Policy Overview

Covcrnmc'nt policy toward labor market discrimination in the 1960's found

expression in two major pices of legislation: the Equal Pay Act of 1963, and

Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. The Equal Pay bill focuses specifically
on sex discrimination, by prohibiting employers from maintaining separate pay

scales for males and females. The law specifies that men and women must receive
the same wage when they work at the same establishment, performing equal work
which requires the some skill, effort and responsibility ("equal pay for equal

—27-

work"). It does permit pay differences across workers performing different
jobs, or where seniority and piece rate systems produce different earnings
outcomes.

Title VII of the Civil Rights bill contrasts with the Equal Pay Act
because it proscribes discrimination due to race, religion and national origin

as well as gender. Its pay provisions are broader than those in the Equal Pay
Act because they are not explicitly limited to comparisons across equal jobs.
Employment provisions figure prominently in this law: it prohibits unequal

practices in hiring, training, promotion or discharge. A novel feature of this
bill is that it establishes an enforcement arm, the Equal Employment Opportunity

Commission

(EEOC), .lcrrged

briefs and

later

initially wi Lii

conciliation

arid

preparation

permitted to initiate court proceedings and

A second important antidiscrimination

tool wielded by

of court
24

represent employees.

the federal govern-

ment is its leverae as a purchaser of goods and services. Executive Order 11246
(as amended in 1968) requires government contractors not only to abide by
existing antidiscrimination law, but also to

training

and promoting minorities and women. If a firm is found in noncompliance,

it may lie penalized in
In

addition to

antidiscrimination

several

ways, including debarrment in the most extreme case.

Congressional Acts and administrative practice, a third

tool became

25

action.

take affimative action in hiring,

The Supreme Court

important during the 1960's and 1970's: judicial

took

active stances in several important cases.

Incriggs v. Duke Power (197.1) for instance, it prohibited pre—employment tests
which selected against racial minorities more often than whites, when they did
not predict successful performance on the job.

The principle of retroactive

back pay was examined in a case involving American Telephone and Telegraph,
culminating in a $38 million negotiated settlement for women employees (Wallace,
1976). More recentl.y the Court has examined particular affirmative action plans.

—:s—

In the Weber case, for instance, the Supreme Court found that a degree of reverse
discrimination was permissible under Title VII.

Cases involving yet another principle have begun to emerge in the last

few years. The controversey here is the principle of "equal pay for comparable
worth", which holds that men's and women's pay rates should be equalized for
jobs which are in some sense comparable though not identical (Livernash, 1980;
The Supreme Court's recent (1981) decision

Lindsay, 1980; Milkovich, 1980).

on County of Washington v. Gunther was less than definitive on this new principle,

because of several narrow interpretations of the legislative record. It is likely
that this topic will continue to find its way to court during the 1980's.
2. The Impact of Antidiscrimination Policy
One of the most interesting features of national antidiscrimination

policy is that it regulates labor market outcomes rather than labor market

processes. Thus it differs from, say, health and safety policy which establishes
standards for working conditions but does not specify worker health levels.
This focus on outcome has some drawbacks: if the nature of discrimination is
poorly understood, required changes in labor market processes may not occur as

a result of policy (Marshall, 1974). On the other hand, a result of the law's
focus

on outcomes

is that policymakers have been forced(with some difficulty)

to focus on workers' earnings and employment patterns directly.
Bvcanse the regulatory
ant

its

icliscr iti ina

t on

pci icy

might

approach
be more

is so direct, it might be thought that
successful

than other laws in attaining

goals. Neoclassical theorists find some ground for disagreement, however.

Analysts in this tradition note that Federal pay provisions, in particular, can
have unexpected results: raising blacks' or womens' wages may encourage employers
to hire fewer of them,in favor of (now relatively cheaper) white males (Madden, 1973).

The simple theoretical approach suggests, then, that higher pay may be offset
by employment losses for blacks and women.

Though equal pay regulations may be ineffective, employment and affirmative action provisions are more likely to reduce barriers confronting minorities

and females, according to neoclassical analysts. These barriers arise from
what Becker (1957) calls "tastes for discrimination" on the part of employers,

fellow workers, and/or consumers. When equal employment legislation is effectively enforced, employers will find it expensive to avoid hiring women or blacks,

and will increase their demand for these types of workers. If qualified females
and minorities are available for hire, the policy should, on net, improve their
earnings and employment both in absolute terms and in comparison with white

male workers. The effectiveness of this policy is further enhanced if misinformed
employers do not realize that women and minorities are as productive as are

white males, and the law forces them to revise their expectations (Cain, 19).
Challenges to the neoclassical view of the labor market and policy are

quite numerous. Some authors emphasize that unequal outcomes occur because
workers face difficulties in other markets. For instance, black workers have
often paid more than whites for housing, transporation, and education (or
received lower quality for the same price) as well as other services (Kain,

1968; Danziger and Weinstein, 1976; Welch, l973;Butler, 1981). Women also face
non-labor market barriers of various types (Loury, 1981; Frank, 1978). To the
extent that these non—labor market factors determine entry to jobs and training
opportunities, females and minorities find good jobs less accessible. Anti—
discrimination policy was thus complemented by housing and educational subsidies
of the last decade.

A second and influential group challenging the neoclassical model is

-othe dual labor market analysts (Doeringer and Piore, 1971). Writers in
this group postulate that various institutional labor market features explain
the lower job attainment of blacks and women, including co—workers' unwillingness to bring blacks and women into training and apprenticeship programs
(Briggs and Foitman, 1981), inability of employees to turn educational

skills into monetary rewards (Oaxaca, 1973), and difficulties of women and

minorities in holding jobs once hired (Marston, 1976). In this view,
vigorous affimative action was likely to be quite valuable in altering
discriminatory labor market structures.

Monoply and monopsony have been emphasized in still other studies as
factors contributing to the persistence of unequal pay and employment for women

and blacks. Stiglitz' (1973) analysis led him to conclude that employer

monopsonies were not strong enough to explain lower earnings for females
and minorities, but more recent researchers find that monopolistic firms

pay black workers less (Haessel and Palmer, 1978). Few alternative job
opportunities for women is given as the explanation for lower wages in other
studies (Frank, 1978; Cardwell and Rosenzweig, 1978); thus firm—side market

power appears to depress women's earnings as well as blacks'. Others note that
unions were discriminators in the past (Wallace and Driscoll, 1981), barring
entry to all but white males. High union wage levels might also have facilitated
employer discrimination indirectly, by creating a labor pool from which
employers
in

could select only the workers that they favored. Analysts writing

this vein tended to conclude that the equal pay and especially the affim—

ative action provisions of antidiscrimination
important

policy would be especially

in helping women and blacks override monopsonistic and union barriers.

Making the transition from theoretical to empirical policy analysis

—3 L-

proved to be difficult for many researchers, in

part because of several data

problems. Freeman (1973), Butler and Heckman (1977) and Brown (1981a)
have written extensively on the fact that aggregate data can
of workers in and out of the labor

conceal

flows

market, so that increases in reported earn-

ings attributed to policy initiatives might be spurious. Almost equally

problematic has been the empirical

difficulty of finding policy variables that

adequately reflect antidiscrimipation policy. Studies of compliance with
federal contractors typically use companies without any federal contract

as the "control group" for purposes of

evaluating the impact of affirmative

action policy. However, Brown (l981c) points out that federal contractors
may
differ systematically from
noncontractors, making the comparison erroneous.
Osterman's (1981) policy measure is more precise, since the term he uses is
an industry specific tally of contract reviews and compliance agreements.

EEO studies have even more difficulty

quantifying the policy variable of

interest: Beller (1980) focuses on EEO investigations by type, but is forced

by data constraints to limit her attention to state—level data rather than
individual company and employee groups.
Empirical studies of antidiscrjmjnation

policy may be divided into

federal contract compliance studies, and research on EEO. Prominent in the
first literature is a set of studies

appearing in the Industrial and Labor

Relations Review in 1976, as well as the review by Brown (198lc). Ahart
(1976), for instance, provides a descriptive account of the difficulties encounter-

ed in enforcing the policy. The papers by Goldstein and Smith (1976) and Heckmen
and olpin (1976) are some of the better—known

econometric evaluations of the

micro—economic data. Flanagan (1976) and Brown (198lc) compile and examine the
evidence from time series and other studies.

Overall these studies indicate

—32--

that

federal contract compliance efforts were rather ineffective,

at least with respect to relative employment rates of blacks and whites.
Employment gains for black males are detected in a few studies (Brown (1981)

concludes no more than 10% in the long run"), but specific policy variables

like contract reviews are usually not responsible. No effect is found for
black females, in most cross sectional studies. Smith and Welch (1977) and
Freeman (1973) examine relative earnings of blacks, and suggest that racial
earnings differences between males were not strongly influenced by contract

compliance policy. Only the Osterman (1981) study detects a significant policy
impact, and that paper looks at turnover rates rather than earnings.
Less quantitative research analyses the direct impact of EEO, in part

because of data problems noted earlier. A cross section study by
Belier (1980) uses data on the probability of EEO apprehension and of having
to pay a penalty to the EEOC or to state Fair Employment Commissions, derived

from actual data on EEO investigations by state. Interestingly enough, the
effectiveness of the law appears to differ across minorities and women: on
net, policy variables are found to reduce black employment and have
virtually no effect on black—white relative earnings; in contrast EEO
policy significantly narrowed the sex difference in earnings over time by 3

to 8%.26 A time series analysis by Freeman (1973) found that cumulative EEOC
expenditure had

a positive

and significant effect on relative black earnings.

Butler and Ileckmnn (1977) correct for sample composition bias noted above

and find virtually no effect of EEO variables. Smith and Welch (1979) also

cha1leng Freeman's conclusion, saying that an improvement in educational
quality was more likely the responsible factor in improving black relative
earnings.

Arriving at a firm conclusion in this area is difficult, but the

—33-

available evidence iindicates that women's relative earnings were marginally

improved by EEO policy, while black/white employment and earnings differentials
were probably not significantly affected.
3. Impact on Wellhving

It is difficult to evaluate the impact of antidiscrimination

policy

on the overall level and distribution of wellbeing. The consensus to date
might be summarized as follows: overall employment probably was little affected
by the policy, and relative earnings growth was largest for women. Both
highly skilled females and minorities benefited more than did others (Freeman,
1973).

No one has yet attempted an overall assessment of the short—run costs

and benefits of antidiscrimination policy, nor a complete analysis of its effect

on individual and family income and expectations. Long—run impacts have
generally been neglected; two exceptions are found in Lazear's (l979a, 1979b)
work, which concludes that job advancement is much more likely for females

as a result of the policy initiatives, but not for blacks. Much research
remains to be done in this area.
4. Conclusion

The main contribution of antidiscrimination analysis over the last decade
has been its new insights into real world labor market institutions.

Structures

coming under scrutiny include the role of hiring and personnel policy, on—the---

job training and apprenticeship, and the relationship between earnings, worker

characteristics, and firm—level variables. More analysis is needed on each
of these elements, in order to more fully understand how antidiscrimination

policy works when it does, and why it failed when it did. In general, existing
analysis indicates that antidiscrimiriation policy probably improved women's

earnings, and had little effect on black workers' earnings and employment.

-34-

V. Concluding Remarks
Previous sections discussed the available research on workplace health
and safety, pensions, minimum wages, and discrimination in pay and

employment. It is also instructive to look across the policy areas to
appraise the literature as a whole.
1. Did the government policies attain their goals?

Neoclassical and institutional research is uneven on the direct impact

of the four regulatory policies. The evidence indicates that EEO and OSHA reforms
had a positive though small effect on the outcomes they sought to alter; the
minimum wage probably did not improve earnings for most low skilled workers;

and no study examined whether ERISA improved pension security. More analysis
needs to be done on the direct as well as the second—round effects of these
labor market regulations, including their impact on total compensation
and employment, collective bargaining, organizational structure, and

whether they alter employer and worker attitudes. Most studies take a
fairly narrow perspective, looking only at one particular program or policy

at a time. A wider net must be cast to understand how any given policy initiative
interacts with other political and economic entities in the labor market.

2. What were the costs and benefits of these regulatory policies and to whom
did they accrue?

Rational social decision making should be based on an understanding of
the level
yet

the

and distribuL on

of costs and benefits associated with a given policy,

literature is far from helpful in this regard. No researcher has fully

examined the direct costs of any of tile four policies including compliance and

enforcement expenditures. In only a few instances, analysts have investigated
which labor market groups benefited from regulations ——

the minimum wage

studies stand out as exceptions. There are also no studies of the effect of

— 5—

these regulations on overall productivity, and virtually no analyses on how
the regulations altered the distribution of power between labor and management,

if at all, and between these parties and the government. Each of these questions
should be addressed in the next decade.

3. Was the actual regulatory package the best possible set of policy instruments
available to attain the desired goals?

In evaluating existing programs, it is important to ask whether more
beneficial outcomes might have been achieved with a different set of policies,
given the same budget allocation and the same socio—economic circumstances.
Most of the regulations impose standards on employers, but a variety of other

schemes might be devised. For instance, many safety and health studies
mention alternative policy tools to reduce risks; the various options should

be enumerated and analyzed in other a'rs as well. We still have only a
rudimentary understanding of regulatory agencies' behavior, goals and constraints;
this gap must be filled too if realistic and feasible policy alternatives are
to be considered.

4. What kind of policy research is likely to be the most useful in the next decade?
Labor market outcomes are the product of complex and fluid interactions
between workers and employers, operating in the context of a variety of social,

economic and political influences. Over the last decade, researchers have
realized ever more clearly that good policy analysis requires a thorough

understanding of what goes on inside the "black box" of the labor market. This
is necessary because policy affecting one aspect of the employment relationship
sometimes elicits unexpected reactions along other dimensions: for instance,

wages may decline in response to regulations about job or pension risk. The
most useful research must decode institutional and economic puzzles to find
out how they work. To date, some influential insights of this type have

—36—

been provided by analysts of the discrimination area. To this analysis
must be added research on how policyinakers incorporate research findings

in developing new regulations a topic seriously understudied to date.
The questions that remain to be answered are challenging. More
complete and sophisticated answers are beginning to emerge. However, if
this trend is to continue, more and better data are required than have been
available in the past ——

particularly

with respect to union, firm—level

and government behavior. It is hoped that recent cutbacks in federal
support for data gathering and research programs will not retard this
endeavour too seriously.

—37-.

Footnotes
1Savelson and Wainger (1978), have a discussion of recent legislative developments.

2See the exchange between MacAvoy and Williams In the New York Times, for
instance.

3"Safcty Agency to Forego Cost Benefit Analysis", New York Times, July 13, 1981.
4

Rosen (1981) states this even more forcefully.

5Mendeloff (1979) examined trends by analyzing changes in injuries over time,

rather than levels, but assumed that the underlying mechanisms generating injuries did not change structurally over time.
6Certain target industries were selected for concentrated government attention,

though 01 (1974) points out that several industries not targeted had higher injury
rates in 1970.

7Bacow (1980) has a succinct review of these studies.
8Mendeloff (1979) suggest that male, blue collar, and union employees were

perhaps the groups most advantaged by OSHA

policy,

but confirmation of this

surmise awaits further research.
9See Ture and Fields (1979) and Greenough and King (1976) for a history of
private pension development in the United States.

'0Ture and Fields (1979) cite several Conittee findings and statements of concern.
11

12For instance, Bulow's paper (1979) indicates that pension funds do not invest
solely in bonds, though economic theory predicts that they should.

—38--

13Most of the increase is probably attributable to real improvements in Social
Security benefits.

14See, for instance, the hearings summarized in the President's Commission on
Pension Policy (1981).

a summary of historical precedents to the FLSA and the Act's major provisions

see the Report of the Minimum Wage Study Commission (1981). Here we focus only on
the wage floor provisions of the Act.

16Iost of the minimum wage literature refers to "covered workers" though "subject

workers" is the more technically correct terminology. The distinction here is that
a covered worker may be exempt from the Act while a subject worker is both covered

by the Act and not exempt from its provisions. In fact it has recently been estimated
that one quarter of the employed wage and salary workers are covered, though exempt
from the minimum wage provision of the Act. (S. Welch, 1981).

'7Many states also established their own legislation governing wage and hours.
These state floors are typically less than or equal to the federal level, but
may cover more workers.

18Cramlich (1976) and Ragan (1977) recognize that workers hours might adapt rather

than employment, particularly if the firm bears hiring and training costs. This
does not materially affect the conclusions drawn from the model with respect to
total earnings and employment changes, however.

19Thether a national uniform wage minimum is likely to be "correct" for all firms
is unlikely, though how the correct levels might be set has not generated much debate
in literature.

20Several early efforts sponsored by the Department of Labor in the 1950's focused
on low—wage sectors such as the garment and lumber industries. Though these pieces

—39

usually concluded that the minimum wage had little or no deleterious effect on
employment in these sectors, their empirical conclusions did not stand up to
re—analysis by Peterson and Stewart (1969) and Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen
(1980).

21Ashenfelter and Smith (1978) argue, however, that compliance varies across fis

and over time, depending on the cost and probability of being caught and penalized.
Compliance is also influenced by regional and sectoral differences in wages and

prices. Recent evidence indicates that minimum wage violations are concentrated
among

the retail

women

and teenagers. (Sd

22

and trade sectors of the economy, and disproportionately impact

.[ekaerLs and Welch, 1981).

Teenagers under 18 years o]d

also covered by FLSA restrictions on child

labor. Hence for that subset of teens, the minimum wage may not be the only cause
of disemployment.
23Goldfarb (1974) has a well—organized review of papers appearing up to the early
1970's. The Report of the Minimum Wage Study Commission (1981) provides a
bibliography and review of several works the Commission sponsored as well as in-

dependent research. The paper by Brown, Gilroy and Kohen (1980) is perhaps the most
comprehensive.

24Antidiscrimination policy also covers workers indentifiable by religion, age,

handicap and

veterans

status. Less attention has been devoted to these areas,

however.

25See Smith (1980), Gold (1981) and Wallace and Driscoll (1981) for a review
and discussion of legislative issues.
26The

reduction in the earnings gap was largely due to lower male wages.

—4 0--

Wage increuses for white females attributable to the antidiscrimination
policy were estimated to he between 3 to 8%, higher in years of lower
unemployment.

—41--

RII1ENC EU

Ahart, Gregory J. "A Process Evaluation of the Contract Compliance Proram in
Nonconstruction

Industrial

Industry .,v

and Labor Relations Review. (July

1976).

and MitchelL, Olivia S.

Andrews, EmIly S.

Data

Base."

"Evaluatirid a National Pension Plan

Proceedinds of the American Statistical Association Meetings

(Summer 1951)
Ashenfelter, Orley arid Smith,

Journal

Asliford,

Economy (April

of Political

Press,

Law."

197'S).

the Workplace.

Crisis in

Niclioiao A.

Cauibrid5e: MIT

Robert S. "Compliance with the Minimum Waue

Occupational Disease and Inju.

1976.

Bacow, Lawrence S. Bargainin5_for Job

Safety

and Health.

Canibride:

MIT

Press,

1950.

Becker, Gary. ihe Economics of Discrimination. Chica5o; University of Chica5o
Press, 1957.

Belier, Andrea. "The
Ernhiloymeiit

Effect

of'

Economic Conditions on

Opportunity Laws.

Earninds." Review of

the Success of Equal

An Application to the Sex Differential in

Economics and Statistics (AUdU5L 1950).

Bodie, Evi. "Purenasiri5 Power Annuities: Financial Innovation for Stable Real

Retirement Income in an Inflationary Environment," NESS Workinu Paper No.
)142,

February

1950.

Bri0gs, Vernon arid Foltman, Felician

Cornell
Brown,

1. eds.

ApprenticeshJjesearch, NYSSILS,

University, 1951.

Charles. "Black/White Lartiirlds Ratios

i9bLn The

Since the Civil Ri4hts Act of

Importance of Labor Market Drmpouts." NBER Workin Paper No. Gil,

1951a.
Brown, Charles. "Estimating the Effects of a Youth Differential on Teenagers and
Adults." Report of the Minimum Wage Study Commission, Vol. V, USGPO, 1981b.

—42—

Brown, Charles. "The Federal Attack on Labor Market Discrimination: The Mouse
that Roared?" NBHR Working Paper No. 669, May
Brown, Charles,

Giiroy, Curtis,

aiih

1981c.

Koheri, A. "Effects of the Minimum Wage on

Youth Emp.Loymetit arid Urieinplo uieiit." Miniimm Wage Study Commiss ion Worki n

Paper No. 1, May 1950 (revised).
Bulow, Jeren. "Analysis of Pension Funding under ERISA." NEER Working Paper
No. 502,

November 1919.

Butler, Richard U. "Smaller Apples: irends in Racial arid Sexual Discitaination
Among South Carolina Scooo.L Teachers.". WY2SiLR, Cornell University, unpublished

paper, July 195i.
Butler, Richard and Heckinari, James J.

"The Government's Impact on the labor

Market Status of Black Americans: A Critical Review." NEER Working Paper

No. l8, June 19(1.
Carwell, Lucy A. and Rosenizweig, Mark R. "Economic Mobility, Monopsonistic

Discrimination and Sex Differences in Waes." Yale University, March 1918.
Chown, Paul. "Workplace Health and Safety: A Guide to Collective Bargaining."

Center for Labor Education, Institute for Industrial Relations, University
of California, Berkeley 1980.
Cain,. Glen G.
(December

"The

Challenge of Segmented Labor Market Theories to Literature

1976)

Cooke, William N. and Frederick H. III, Cautschi. "The Impact of OSHA Citations

and P1an-pecific Safety Programs on Lost Days Due to Injuries." Industrial
Relations

(Fall, 1981).

-43-

Cox, James arid Oaxaca, Ronald L. "Effect of

Minimum Wa6e Policy on Inflation and

Output Prices, Erip.lo nieijt, and Real Wa0e Rates by Industry." Report of the
Minimum Wage Study Commission, Vol. VI, Washinton, D.C., USUPO, 1951.

Cummins, J.

David, Pervical, John,

"Effects
Survey

Westerfield,

Randolph, and Hamae, J. 0.

of ERISA on the Investment Policies of

Private Pension Plans:

Evidence." Journal of Risk and Insurance (September 1919).

Cummins, J. David, Pervical, John, anti Westerfleld, Randolph.

"The Impact of

ERISA on the Investment Policvies of Private Pension Funds and Capital

Market Efficiency." Final Report to the US Department of Labor, July 1919.
Danziger, Sheldon, and Weinstein, Michael, "Eiip1oymeut Location and Wage Rates

of Poverty—Area Residents," Journal of Urban Economics (April 197b).
Doerinber, Peter and Piore, Michael J.

Manpower Analysis, Lexinbtorl,

Ehrenber,

Ronald and

Educational

MA:

InternationalLabor Markets and
D.C. Heath and Co., 1911.

Marcus Alan. "Minimum

Outcomes of

Wage LebisLatioll and the

Youth." In lesearch in

Labor Economics, ed. R.

Ehrenber, 1951

Feldstein, Martin. "Private Pensions and Inflation." American Economic Review
(May 1951).

Feldstein,

Martin and Selitnan, Stephanie. "Pension Funding, Share Prices and

National
Flanagan,

avirig."

Robert J.

NEER Working Paper No. 509, July 1950.

"Actual Versus Potential Impact of Government Anti—

Discrimination Programs." Industrial and Labor Relations Review (July
1916).
Frank,

Robert J.

"Why Women Earn Less: The Theory and Estimution of

Differential Overualtfication," American Economic Review (June 1978).

—44—

Freeman, Richard B.

"The Effects of Trade Unionism on Frirlbe Benefits," NBER

Working Paper No. 292.
Freeman,

Richard

B. "Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans. l945—12."

BrookingsPonEconoinic_Activity, 1913.
Freeman, Richard, Gray, Wayne, and Ichniowski, Casey. "Low Cost Student Labor:
The Use and Effects or the Subminimum Wage Provisions for Full—Time
Students," NBER Working Paper No. 165, September,

Gersovitz,

1981.

Mark. "Economic Conseciuences of Unfunded Vested Pension Benefits."

NBER Workin0 Paper No. 1480. May 1950.

Gilroy, Curtis, "A Demoraphic Profile of Minimum Wage Workers," Mininaim Wage
Study Commission Working Paper No.
Gold, Michael.

"Some

DiscriuLination."

rLi1O1gl1tS

14,

September 1980 (revised)

on the Disparate Impact Definition of Employment

N $i3iLt, CoruelL

Uriiversit ,

unpublished paper, April

1951.

Goldfarb, Robert S. "The Policy Content of Quantitative Mininum Wa0e Research."
IRRA Proceedings (December 191)4).

Goldstein, Morris and SinitFi, Robert S. "The Estimated Impact of the Anti—
Discrimination Program Aimed at
Relations

Federal Contractors." Industrial and Labor

Review (July 1916).

Gramlich, Edward M. "Impact of Minirrium Wa0es

on Other

Wages, Employment, and

Farni .ly In COLIACG." Brookirigs Papers on Economic Activity

1916).

Greenough, William and King, Francis. Pension Plans and Public Policy
New york. Columbia University Press, 1916.

Gustman, A. L. irid Segal, M. "Wabes, Wage Supplements, and the Interaction of
Union Bargains in the

Construction Industry." Industrial and Labor

Relations Review (January 1912)

—45—

Haessel, Walter and Palmer, John. "Market Power and. Employment Discrimination."

Journal cf Human Resources (Fall 1975).
Hamermesh, Daniel S.

"A General Empirical Model of Life—Cycle Effects in

Consumption and Retirement Decisions," unpublished paper, Michigan State

University, June 1951a.
Hamericesh, Daniel S. "Minimum Waes and the Demand for Labor." NESH Working

Paper No, 656, Apr11
Hashimoto,

l9hlb.

Masanori and Mincer, Jacob. "Employment and Unemployment Effects of

M nirlium Wa0es." N13H11 Working Paper, April 1910.

Heckman, James J. and Wolpin, Kenneth 11.

"Does the Contract Compliance Program

Work?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review (July 1976).
Kain, John F.

"1-lousing Segrebation, Nehru Employment arid Metropolitan

Decentralization," Quarterly Journal of Economics
Kochan, Thomas A., Dyer, Lee and Lipsky, David G. The Effectiveness of Union—

Management Safety and Health Committees. WE Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research (September 191)

Landes, William H. "The Ecotioubus of Fair Employment Laws." Journal of
Political Economy
Lazear,

(July—August 1965).

Edward. "Male/Female Wage DiiCereiitiaiLs: Has the Government Had Any

Eft'ect?" in Women in the Labor Market, ed. Cynthia Lloyd, Emily Andrews and
CurLL;; Gitroy

,

New

York; Columb:La lJriiversity Press, 1919a.

Lazear, Rdwird. "The Narrowing 01 l3lack/Wiiite Wage Differentials is illusory ."
American Lconomic_Review. (September 1979b).

Lazear, Edward 0. "Why is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
Economy (i979c).

—46-

Lester,

Ricbard. "Benefits as a Preferred Form of Compensation." Southern

Economic Journal (APril, 1901),
Levitan, 3ar A. and B1ous, Richard S. "The Miriinmm Wade Today. How Well Dqes

It Work?" Monthly Labor Review JuIy 1919).
Lindsay, Cotori Mather. Equal Pay for Comparable Worth: An Economic Analysis of

aNew Antidiscrimination

Doctrine. An LEC Occasional

Economics Center, University of Miami,

Paper, Law and

1980.

Livernash, E. Robert. Comjrable Worth: Issues

and Alternative. Equal

Employment Advi sory Council, 1980.
Logue, Dennis E. Legislative Influence on Corporate Pension Plans. American
Enterprise Institute, Washin0ton, D.C., 1919.

Loury, Glenn C.

"Is Equal Opportunity Enough?"

American_Economic Review (iay

1981).
Lucas, H. E. B. 'Hedonic Price Functions," Economic Inquiry, 1915.
"The Nondecision Cotton Dust Decision." New York Times

MacAvoy, Paul W.

July 5, 1981.
Madden,

Janice Fannery. The Economics of Sex Discrimination. Lexinbton Books,

1973.

Marshall,

Ray.

Economic
Marston,

"The Economics of RaciaL Discrimination: A Survey." Journal of

Literature

(September l91)

Stephen T. "Employment Instability and High Unemployment
1916)

Rates, BPEA

—47-

Masters, St;iritl.ey ,
La Luzriy ,

Z.irrimeruian,

David, Holden, Karen, Jones, James, Jr.

Rirliare, Meives , Susan, and Olson, Oral0. "PotentiaL for Planned

:xJ)eriicrltaL Lori in the Department of Labor Regulatory Area. " Inst Ltute for

Ide;earoh on Poverty Special Report SR 2, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
undated.

Mendetoff, John. Regulatir1 Safety: An Economic_and Political Analysis of

0cpational Safety and Health Policy. MIT Press, 19(9.
"Pay lneualitios and Comparable 4ortki." Proeeedins
LLlirt, Third riiiaL MeeLiri IRRA eptember 19b0).

tviitkovicli, (jeorbe T.

of

Mincer, Jacob.

"Uneiiipluymeiit Hf feeLs of Minimum Waes." Journal 01' Political

lU2L!Y Au0usU 19(0').
Mincer, Jacob and Lei3hton, Lindan.

"Effects of Minimum Wa0es on Human Capital

Formation." HERR Workinb Paper No. 44l, February 1950.

MitchelL, Olivia S. "Frin0e Benetits and the Costs of Chandind Jobs." Labor
Economics Workind Paper, Cornell University, 1950.

MitchelL, Olivia S. "Frine Benetits and Labor Mobility." Journal of Human
Resources, fort1icomiw, 1952.
Mitche L L, Olivia S. arid Aridrews , Rmily S. "Scale Economies in Privat,e

Multiemployer Pension Dystenis." Industrial and Labor Relations Review

Juiy l;sl)

utii

Moore , LLoi;cL:;

.

"The HI' tee L ut Miii Liuiri Wa0eu on Teeiiu,e Uneiaplo meiit Rates .

July -Au0ust 19'(l
Ouxaca, Ronald, "Sex Discriiiiinatioii in Wa0es," in Discrimination in Labor

Markets, eds. Asheiilelter and Rees, Princeton, NJ. Princeton University

Press, L9T.

—48—

Oi, Walter Y.

"On the EconoJAics of Industrial Safety." Industrial Relations

Section, Working Pa1er No.

b,

Princeton

University, June l97.

Osterruan, Paul, "Affirmative Action and Opportunity: The impact of the Federal
Contract Compliance Program Upon the turnover of Women Workers," Department
of Economics

Parsons,

Workiri Paper No. 70,

Boston University, August 1981.

DonaLd 0. Poverty and the Minimum Wage. Washington: American

Enterprise Institute, 1980.
Peterson,

John and Stewart,

Rates. Washington:

Charles Jr. Employment Effects of Minimum Wage

American Enterprise institute, 1969.

President's Commission on Pension Policy, Coming of Age: Toward a National
Retirement Income Policy,
Ragan, James.

"Miniiiium

Final

Report, Washington, D.C., February 1981.

Wages and Youth Labor

Market."

Review of Economics and

Statistics (May 1977).

Report

of the Minimum Wage Study Commission, USOPO, 1981.

Rifkin, Jeremy and Barber, Randy. The North

Will Rise

Again, Boston: Beacon

Press, 1970.

Rosen, Sherwin. "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation
in

Pure Competition." Journal of Political Economy (Jan.—Feb. 1)().

Rosen, Sherwin. "Valiiin, health Risk." American_Economic Review y
"Safety

1901)

Agency to Forgo 'Cost—Benefit Analysis'" New York Times July 13, 1981

Savelson, Donald W. and

Hark A: Wainger. "New

Problems and Recent Developments

in Occupational Safety and HeaLth Law." Proceedings of New York University
Thirty—First

Annual National Conference on Labor, (June ii—i6, 1978).

—49-

Schiller, BradLey H. and Weiss, Randall D. "The Impact of Private Pensions on
i ins Attduhm nt Reviuw ol Bconoinics and Statistics (April 19 (9)
U

Schitler, Bradley H. and Weiss, Randall I). "Pension and Wa0es: A Test for
1 qu±lizini Di1ferLnce "

Review

ol Lconomic and Statistics (Novuiiber 1980')

Sellekaerts, Brir;itte and WeLch, Stephen W. 'Violations of the Fair Labor

Standards Act: Inferences from the 19(9 Noncompliance Survey," Report of
the Mimumurn Wade Study Commission, Vol. III, URUPO, 1981.

Skolnik, Alfred H. "Pension Reform Le1isLatiori of l9(4." Social Security
Bulletin (December 19()
Smith, Arthur B., Jr. "The Law and Eciual Emplojxaent Opportunity: What' s Past

Should Not be Proloue," Industrial arid Labor Relations Review (July 19db).

Smith, Robert S. "The Feasibilit of an 1nury lax' Approach to 0ccuationa1
Safety ."

Law

and Contemporary Pro blenis (

Summer—Autumn

l9'(l)
Smith, Robert S. The Occupational Safety_arid Health Act: Its Goals and Its

Achievements. American Enterprise Ins titute for Public Policy Research,
1976.

Smith, Robert S. "Compensatir1 Wade Differentials and Public Policy: A Review."
Industrial arid Labor Relations Review (April 1979a)
Smith, Robert S. "The Impact of OSHA Inspections on Manufacturin0 Injury

Rates." Journal of Human Resources (Fall l9i9b,
Smith, Robert 5. ''Pero.iiorin , Uniderfutidin, and Salar es in the Public Sector:
Ten L 1 ri the Tb cony of Co mjerlsa t iii, Di f terentia L . " Review of Economics

ttiti (1981)
Smith, James P. and Welch, Finis. "Black/White Wa5e Ratios: 1960—10." American
Economic Review Ciune 197()

—50—

Smith, James P. and Welch, Finis. "Race Differences in Earnings: Survey and.
New Evidence." RAND Report P55513, 1919.

Sti1er, (;eorge J. "The

Econonics of Miriiirxum Wade Legislation." American

Economic Review (June

Stigiitz,

Joseph E. "Approaches to

the

Economics

of Discrimination." American

Economic Review (MaY 1913)

Thaler,

"T1i. Value of Saving A Life: Evidende from

Richard and Sherwin Rosen.

the

Labor Market." Paper

Presented at

the NBER

Conference on Income and

Wealth. Household Production and Conaurnption. Washington, D.C., November,
1973.

Treynor, J. L., Priest, W., and Regan, P. The Financial Reality of Pension
Funding_under EHISA. Hornewood, Illinois: Dow—Jones Irwin, 197b.

Ture,

Norman with Fields, Earbara

A. The Future of Private Pension Plans,

Washington: American Enterrise Institute, 1979.
Viscusi, W. Kip. "Job Hazards and Worker Quit Rates: An AnaLysis of Adaptive
Worker behavior." international Economic Review 20 (Februarj 1979)
Wachter,

Michael tod Kim S.

"Ii cc Series Chan5es in Youth Joblessness."

NBRR

Workinu Paper No. 351, August, 1919.

Wallace, Philtis A., ed. qua1EmpyientOortunity and the AT&T Case,
Cambridge, MA MIT Press, 197b.

Wallace, Phitlis A. and Driscolt, James W. "Social Issues in
Bargainirmu

Collective

1950—do: A Critical As;essment." Sloan School of Management

Working Paper 1203—51, MIT, April 1951.

—51—

Webb, Sydney.

Political

"iDe

Economic Theory of

a Legal Minimum Wage." Journal of

Economy (Deceiher l9l2 -

Welch, Finis. "Black/White Differences in Returns to Schooling." American
Economic Review Desember 19(J)
Welch, Finis. Minimum Wages: Issues and Evidence, Washington: American
Enterprise Institute, 1918.

Welch, St ephen W. "FLSA Coverage, Exempt ions and Violations: Some Institutional

Considerations," Report of the Minimum Wa0e Stuuy Corrunission, Vol. III,
USUPU, 1951.

West, E. G. and McKee, Michael. "Monopsony and Shock Arhuments
Wages." Southern 1conomic

Wilkiahis,
Wood,

Fiarold 11.

Michael. "An

Journal (January

Proceedings, December 25—9, 1L9'(4,

Years

July

16, 1901.

of OSIIA: Labor View." 1RRA

San Francisco.

Zucker, Albert. "Minimum Wage and the Demand for Lo1—Wae Labor."

Quarterly

Journal 01 Economics EMaY 1913)

Minimum

1980)

"A Job for Congress." New York Times,
Assessment of Three

for

