                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE EFFECT OF THE MINIMUM WAGE ON EMPLOYMENT
                   AND UNEMPLOYMENT: A SURVEY


                          Charles Brown

                          Curtis Gilroy

                          Andrew Kohen


                      Working Paper No. 846




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          January 1 982




We are indebted to Katharine Abraham, John Cogan, Robert Qoldfarb,
Jacob Mincer, James Ragan, Fred Siskind, Michael Wachter, Finis
Welch and Moses Abramovitz and two referees for help at various
stages of our work. This survey represents a substantial revision
of work originally supported by the Minimum Wage Study Commission.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #846
                                                         January 1982




                            The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
                          Employment and Unemployment: A Survey


                                        ABS TEA CT

        In this paper, we survey theoretical models of the effect of the

minimum wage and, in somewhat greater detail, evidence of its effect on

employment and unemployment. Our discussion of the theory emphasizes

recent work using two-sector and heterogeneous-worker models. We then

summarize and evaluate the large literature on employment and unemployment

effects of the minimum on teenagers. Finally, we survey the evidence of

the effect of the minimum wage on adult employment, and on employment in

low-wage industries and areas.




Charles Brown                   Curtis Gilroy                  Andrew Kohen
Department of Economics         U.S. Army Research Institute Department of Economics
University of Maryland          5001 Eisenhower Avenue         James Madison University
Colllege Park, MD 207)42        Alexandria, VA 22333           Harrisonburg, VA 22807

(301)   )45)4-)4182              (202) 27)4-810)4              (703) )433-6605
                              INTRODUCTION

     Although the arguments for and against the minimum wage are the

same today as at the time of passage of the Fair Labor Standards Act

forty years ago, they are now accompanied by more sophisticated ap-

proaches to the measurement of its impact. Moreover, the increase in

minimum wage coverage makes the issue more important. The employment!

unemployment effect of the minimum wage continues to be a pivotal

issue around which present-day debate centers (Robert Goldfarb, 1974;

Steven Zell,l978; and Sar Levitan and Richard Belous, 1979), and will

be the focus of our attention.

      Despite     an     abundance     of    studies of the employment

and unemployment effects of the minimum wage in the U.S., there is no

  comprehensive review of their findings (although E.G. West and

Michael McKee (198O)have undertaken a broad assessment of some of the

Canadian and American literature).The purpose of this article is to

determine what generalizations this literature supports and, to the

extent possible, diagnose the causes of the most important disagree-

ments. This should assist both economists in identifying the direc-

tions for further research in this area and policy makers in inter-

preting the myriad of results.

     Section I of this paper discusses the theoretical framework in

which the minimum wage has been analyzed. Sections II and III contain

an analysis of time-series and cross-section studies, respectively,

of the effect of the minimum wage on teenagers, while Section IV
Page 2




focuses on the Impact on adults. Section V describes the effects on

low-wage ifldustries and labor markets. Conclusions appear in Section

VI.
 Page 3




                                I. THEORY

      Most textbook treatments of the employment effects of the minimum

 wagerely on the simple supply-and—demand model of price floors, and

 the outcome is often contrasted with that which occurs under monopsony.

 In recent years, the analysis of the effects of a minimum wage in

 competitive labor markets has been significantly extended to include

 formal treatment of a minimum wage which applies to one sector of

 a two-sector economy, or which has no direct effect on some workers

because they earn more than the minimum.

      The first three parts of this section deal briefly with the

 traditional analysis, while the next four sections deal with more recent

 additions to the literature. A theme which runs through Our treatment of these

additions is how the employment and unemployment effects of the

minimum are related to the parameters which each model introduces.

The final part of this section deals with the implications of these

models for the effect of the minimum wage on the efficiency of the

labor market.
Page 4




A.   Simple Supply-Demand Model

     The most basic model of the effect of the minimum wage on employ-

ment and unemployment focuses on a single competitive labor market

with homogeneous workers whose wage W0 would otherwise fall below the

legally set minimum wage Wm• Employers minimize costs both before and

after the minimum wage law, workers' skills and level of effort are

identical and given exogenously, and all workers in the market are

                                                                 is not
covered by the minimum wage. Adjustment to the new equilibrium

considered. In this model, initial employment E0 is determined by

supply and demand; once the minimum wage is introduced, employment

falls to Em the level demanded at wage Wm (Figure 1). The propor-

tional reduction in employment (n Em2fl E0) is equal to the propor-
                                                          of demand.
tional wage increase (n Wmfl W0) times the elasticity

     If employment would otherwise increase, the "reduction" in em-

ployment predicted by the model may take the form of a lower rate of

employment growth rather than an actual decline in the number em-

ployed. If employment actually declines, it may take the form of not

replacing workers who quit rather than discharging workers.1

     While the model determines an excess supply of labor at the new

minimum wage, SmEm this excess supply does not correspond to the
                                                          8), or even to
official measure of unemployment (Finis Welch, 1976, p.

the Increase in such unemployment above some "frictional" level. Sm

 represents the number (or work-hours) of those persons willing to work
     Page 5




     at Wm but some of the 5mm who are not employed may decide that

     prospects of finding work are too dim to make actively searching for

     work worthwhile. Those not actively looking for work are not included

     in the official unemployment count.




 B.      Monopsony

         A well-known exception to the conclusion that the minimum wage

 reduces employment is the monopsony case (George Stigler, 1946).

 Without a minimum wage, the monopsonistjc employer's marginal cost of

 labor everywhere exceeds the supply price; labor is hired until mar-

 ginal cost and demand are equal (Figure 2). A minimum wage makes the

employer a price-taker, up to the level of employment S(Wm)• Thus, a

minimum wage between W0 and W1 will increase employment (S. Charles

Maurice, 1974); choosing WmW1 brings employment to its competitive

level, E1. Once Wm equals W1, further increases would reduce employment

below the competitive level. The monopsony model has not motivated much recent

work, perhaps because there is little evidence that it is important in modern-
                                                       2
day low-wage labor markets (West and McKee, 1980b).



C.      'Shock" Effects
        If   employers do not minimize costs, there is the possibility that

they will respond to a minimum wage increase by raising the productivity
Page 6




of their operation to offset the increase (Lloyd Reynolds and Peter

Gregory, 1965, p. 193). This possibility is often labeled a 'shock"

effect —-   the minimum ushocksl employers into greater productivity.
     Such a shock effect might reduce the disernployment from a minimum

wage (increase) but is unlikely to eliminate it (West and McKee,

1980b).First, while some firms may be in a position to take advantage

of previously unrealized economies, other firms may not be so fortu-

nate. Surveys of employers find reports of such responses from some

but not all firms (U.S. Department of Labor, 1959b).Second, firms may

have failed to minimize costs by using too much labor at the previous

                                   take the form of discharging (or not
wage W0; cost-cutting would,then

replacing) the extra workers.

      Presumably, the scenario most favorable to the shock argument is

the employer being able to call forth greater levels of effort in re-

 sponse to the minimum. A formal model consistent with cost-minimizing

employer behavior along these lines has been developed by John Petten

 gill (1981). Just as rent controls are thought to induce landlords to

 lower apartment quality in response to excess demand, competitive

 employers may raise the required level of effort in response to mini-

 mum-wage-induced excess supply. Higher effort levels can offset the
                                                                     which
 effective increase in the minimum wage, depending on a parameter

 tells how much workers will increase effort at Wm rather than not work

• at all.3 For what appear to be plausible valuesof this parameter, effort

 reductions can offset much of the disemployment effect which would
 Page 7




 otherwise occur.4



 D.    Two-Sector Model

       Coverage under the minimum wage provisions of the Fair Labor

Standards Act has increased gradually, but even today it is not complete.

Since the 1977 Amendments to the Act, roughly 84 percent of all private non-

farm nonsupervisory wage and salary workers have been subject to the minimum

wage, compared with 53 percent in 1950 (Welch, 1978, p.3). Roughly 80 percent

of low-wage workers (those with wages at or below the minimum) work in estab-

lishments subject to the minimum wage (Curtis Gilroy,1981). Thus it makes sense

to consider a model in which coverage is incomplete, particularly in

studying effects of the minimum wage in earlier periods when coverage

was less extensive than it is today.

      In Welch's (1974) model of a partial-coverage minimum wage, the

covered sector reacts to the minimum as it would if coverage were

universal. Workers displaced by the minimum wage "migrate" to the un-

covered sector, shifting supply there outward. As a result, wages fall

and employment increases in the uncovered sector.

      Those displaced from the covered sector do not automatically

become employed in the uncovered sector. As wages in the uncovered

sector fall, some of those displaced by the minimum wage (as well as

some of those originally employed in the uncovered sector) decide

not to work in the uncovered sector because the wage there is less

than their reservation wage. Therefore, the effect of the minimum wage
Page 8




on total employment depends on the   elasticity of labor supply and
the reservation wages of those who do not obtain covered sector work,
as well as more obvious factors such as the size of the covered sector

and the elasticity of labor demand.

     Let S and D denote supply and demand, let the subscripts c

and u refer to covered and uncovered industries, and let c be the

proportion of employment before the minimum wage which is in industries

about to become subject to it; i.e.,


     (1) c = Dc(Wo)/[Dc(Wo)+

Before the minimum wage is introduced, wages in the two sectors are
equal, and the supply of labor in the uncovered sector, (1—c) S(W0),

equals demand in the uncovered sector, Du(Wo)

     Welch assumes that, after the minimum wage is introduced, each of the

S(Wm) workers willing to work at the minimum wage has the same probability

of obtaining one of the Dc(Wm) covered sector jobs. Therefore, this

probability equals

     (2) f =
                Dc(Wm)/S(Wm)

If wages are measured so that W0=l and ln(W0)0, the proportional increase

in the wage in the covered sector is ln(Wm)• The uncovered wage W must now

equate the new uncovered sector supplyS(W) =       S(W)(l_f),with   demand, D(W),
     After solving for W, one can find the overall level of

 employment (covered and uncovered sectors contined) as a function of

 the parameters r, ,   c,   and Wm• If we measure employment so

 that E0 =   1, the minimum wage elasticity of
 Page 9




employment m £fl(E)/ifl(W)          is equal to                               . Note   that
                                                  CC 9fl(Wm)/tl_C+c2fl(W 1]
while       is proportional to the demand elasticity q, it is not likely

to be close to q. If t0, rim = 0: covered-sector employment losses are

exactly offset by uncovered sector gains. As c increases, so does

approaching c as c approaches infinity. For "reasonable" values of

the parameters, m can be much less than '; e.g., if c.7, £rI(W)=6

c.3, and q=-]..O, m26


        A more convenient but perhaps less plausible assumption is that

those with the lowest reservation wages find covered-sector employ-

ment.     In this case, S,(W)= S(W) -             and the employment elas-
                                        Dc(Wm)
ticity m equals cc/[c-(1-c)q]. Thus, m no longer varies with the

proportional wage increase for covered-sector workers Wm It remains

true that        < —cq, approaching —cq as c becomes larger. For the

"reasonable" values used earlier, m equals only -.35. As one would

expect, the disemployment effect is larger as coverage c is increased.



E.      Two-Sector Model with Queueing for Covered-Sector Jobs

        Neither the simplest supply-demand model nor Welch's two-sector

extension relate the minimum wage to unemployment. Jacob Mincer (1976)

and Edward Gramlich (1976) provide such a link, by considering a

fourth labor market status, remaining unemployed while searching for

covered-sector employment, in addition to the three statuses identi-

fied by Welch (covered and uncovered employment, and labor force
 Page io




 nonparticipation). They assume that workers choose the sector which

 offers the highest expected wage. Those workers who choose the covered

 sector receive Wm if they are employed; if P is the probability of

 being employed, the expected wage in the covered sector is PWm (Gram-

 lich [1976] allows transfers of rWm to the unemployed, so the expected

 wage becomes [P +                  P depends on the number of unemployed
                      r(lP)]Wm.)
 looking for covered-sector jobs, U, relative to covered employment:



        (3) p =[l +



 In   Gramlich's model, a equals one. Although Mincer argues that a>1,

Gramlich's assumption is easiest to rationalize. If there is complete turn-

 over(i.e.aCh covered-sector job is filled anew in any period),each of

the      workers employed in the covered sector and the U unemployed

workers looking for such jobs have identical probabilities of being

employed in the covered sector in any period. That

probability equals D/(U +           which simplifies to (3) with a1.
                             Dr).
Because the model includes no barriers to uncovered-sector employment,

expected wages in the uncovered sector are equal to W.5 In equili-

brium, expected wages in the two sectors must be equal:




       (4) PW = W


The supply of labor, which is equal to the number of labor force

participants, depends on expected wages of labor market participants;

by equation (4) this just equals W. By definition, this supply of

participants is either employed in one of the sectors or unemployed:
  Page ii




         (5) S(W) = Dc(Wm) +   D(W)   + U.



 The three equations (3)-(5) can be solved for the three endogenous

 variables W, P, and U, as functions of Wm and, implicitly, c. With no

 minimum wage, UO and labor force and employment are equal. Once

 again measure employment so that this initial level of employment is

 one. If one assumes that demand elasticities in the two sectors are

 equal, the resulting expression for the logarithm of total employment

 is:




        (6) £n E = [c(+1/cY)q]/[E+c/cY-(1-c)qJ £n Wm


                                f employment
 The minimum wage elasticity m        again less than ri in absolute value;

 for a1 and the parameter values used earlier, m equals -.7 when

 rp-1. Not surprisingly, more complete coverage intensifies disemploy-

ment effects.

       The model can also be solved for the level or rate of unemployment.

The unemployment rate is the ratio of unemployed to labor force participants,

the latter given by equation (5):



       (7)   U/S(W) =   [c(-q))/[c+c-a(1-c)q]   £n Wm



Thus, the measured unemployment rate is an increasing function of the minimum

wage and (as can be seen by differentiating equation (7) with respect to c) an
Page 12




increasing function of c.

    One can show that the uncovered-sector wage rises if r+l/ is

positive and falls otherwise. Since this is the expected wage in

both sectors, it is a convenient measure of the effect on those who

remain employed. If Wu rises (because workers leaving uncovered jobs
to queue in the covered sector dominate the influx of workers from

the covered sector),additional workers enter the labor market,

If W fails,         workers leave the labor force and measured unem-

ployment is less than the employment reduction due to the minimum

wage. If W does rise, it rises by a smaller proportion than Wm.

     While the Mincer-Gramlich approach adds unemployment --     inter-
preted as queueing for covered-sector jobs --   to   the two sector model,

it makes the overly strong assumption that one cannot search for
                            S

covered-sector   jobs while employed in the uncovered sector. If the two

sectors are geographically separate, as might be true in developing

countries (Michael Todaro, 1969), this assumption would be realistic.

In the U.S., where coverage depends on industry and firm or establish

inent size, covered and uncovered establishments may be next door to

each other.

     The simplest generalization of the Mincer-Gramlich model would

allow those in the labor force two strategies. One strategy is to

search for covered employment if not employed in the covered sector;

the other is to work in the uncovered sector (perhaps searching for

covered-sector work) if not employed in the covered sector. The first

strategy gives a probability P of being employed in the covered sec-

tor, and a probability      1-P of being unemployed. The second strategy
Page 13




gives a lower probability of covered-sector work, BP (B<I), and thus

a probability of working in the uncovered sector equal to l-BP.

     In general, this extension produces few unexpected conclusions.

Larger values of B reduce the effect of the minimum wage on both

employment and unemployment. This is because, as B increases, uncovered

employment becomes more attractive compared with full-time search for

a covered-sector job (unemployment). Perhaps the most surprising result is
 Page 14




that, while 8=0 corresponds to the Mincer-Gramlich model, there does

 not appear to be a special case corresponding to the Welch model. This

 is because, regardless of the parameters, the attractiveness of the two

 strategies are equalized in the Mincer-Gramlich model, whereas covered

 jobs   are   rationed (by an unspecified mechanism) in Welch's model.
        While the idea of queueing unemployment certainly corresponds

more    closely to the official concept than the supply—demand gap in the
simplest      model, the distinction between nonparticipation and unemploy-

ment is much sharper in the model than in the real world. Kim Clark

and Lawrence Summers (1979, p. 9), for example, argue that many young

people are not actively searching for work but are willing to work if

an   opportunity is presented.


F.      Heterogeneous Workers
        While the theory outlined so far captures important aspects of

the relationship between the minimum wage and employment, its applica-

bility to empirical work is limited by the focus on a homogeneous

group of workers earning the minimum wage. Given available data,

empirical work has focused on groups of workers (usually demographic

groups such as teenagers) in which a significant fraction earns more

than the minimum wage -- and therefore is not "directly" affected by

it. Models of labor markets with heterogeneous workers have been a

subject of much recent work among labor economists in general, and the

minimum wage literature is starting to reflect that development.
Page 15




     The simplest heterogeneous-worker model allows for two types of

workers, one of whom initially earns less than the new minimum wage.

Let the subscripts 1 and 2 denote the directly affected low-wage and

higher-wage workers, respectively, and let h be the proportion of

workers who are initially in group 1. Group 1 workers receive         while

group 2 workers receive W2. For simplicity, the effect of          on both

   and output produced is neglected. This is a reasonable simplification

where minimum wage workers are a fairly small proportion of the workforce.

Finally, assume that group 1 workers are substitutes for both group 2

workers and the composite nonlabor input.

     The key question is the relationship between            the elasticity

of E1-FE2 with respect to Wm (which is what is typically estimated), and

    the elasticity of         with respect to Wm (which corresponds to the

conventional own-price elasticity of demand for group 1 workers).

Clearly, p1+2 will be less in absolute value than r1, because group 2

workers' employment is increased by the minimum wage. The assumptions

made above are sufficient to prove a more interesting bound on           6




     (8) Ii1 <   l+2   <
                           h(l_Wm/W2)ni
Page 16




         This simple model suggests that, in comparing effects of minimum

wages on employment of different demographic groups, those with a

 larger share of minimum wage workers (larger h) will face more severe

disemployment. Thus, it is frequently predicted that minimum wage laws

will have more negative effects on black teenagers than white teen-

agers, because a larger proportion of the black teenagers would be

directly affected by the minimum wage.

     An alternative model assumes a distribution of wages which mir-

rors the distribution of worker skill in the absence of the minimum

wage. In the presence of the minimum wage, those with value of mar-

ginal product below that minimum are not employed, and the distribu-

tion of wages is truncated at the minimum (Marvin Kosters and Welch,

1972).

     John Abowd and Mark Killinqsworth (1981) generalize th two-skill
  Page 17




 model by allowing for covered and uncovered sectors, with low-wage

 workers faced with the same choices as in the Mincer-Grarnijch model,

 and by allowing W2 to change in response to the minimum wage. They

 provide    approximate reduced-form expressions for changes in employment

 of the two types of workers separately, but even these approximations

 prove quite cumbersome.

      Two recent models of the minimum wage with heterogeneous workers

 (James Heckman and Guilherme Sedlacek, 1981; and Pettengill, 1981)

 allow for continuous distributions of worker skill, and hence relate

 the minimum wage to the wage distribution as well as to the level of

 employment.

      Heckman and Sedlacek (1981) assume workers have two kinds of skill, one
 which is useful in each sector. These
                                             two skills may be positively or nega-

 tively correlated acrosworkers. A worker is offered a wage in the covered
sector W equal to the price of skill in the covered sector, times the
               covered-sector
number of units of ,       skill
                              possessed by the worker; offered uncov-

ered-sector wages       are determined analogously. Each worker chooses

the sector where his offered wage is highest, so aggregate supplies of

skill to each sector depend on the relative prices of the two skills.

Employers hire skill to the point where the value of the marginal pro-

duct of skill is equal to its price.

     A minimum wage would, if skill prices were fixed, lead covered-

sector employers to discharge all workers earning less than the mini-

mum, W <    Wm
                 However, this is   equivalent   to a reduced supply of skill
Page 18




in the covered sector, which leads to an increase in its price. The

increased price of covered-sector skill raises the offered wage of

some of those not employable with a minimum wage at the old skill

price up to or above the minimum (i.e., they are "re-employed") and

attracts some of those initially employed in the uncovered sector

(those for whom    was "slightly" below Wu at the initial skill

prices). The price of skill in the uncovered sector may rise or fall,

but must fall relative to the price of covered sector skill. This is

analogous to the result for covered and uncovered wages with homogene-

ous workers.

     In order to limit the complexity of the model, Heckman and

Sedlacek assume that each industry uses only one skill and that

output depends on the simple sum of the skill levels employed. This im-

poses a very strong conclusion: wages of all workers who remain in an in—
 Page 19




 dustry Increase (or decrease) by the same proportion in response to

t-the minimum. This contradicts the conventional wisdom on the subject,

 which holds that such wage changes are largest for those initially just

 above the minimum.?

      Pettengill's (1981) model also focuses on the continuous distri-

 bution of worker qualities. As in the Heckman-Sedlacek model, worker

 quality is taken as predetermined, and workers seek the employment

 opportunity offering the highest wage. However, each worker has a

 unique quality (skill) ranking q,rather than a set of (possibly
 negatively correlated) skifls.

     The demand side of the market is also quite different. Industries

are identified with a continuous distribution of production "tasks"

which differ in their sensitivity to worker quality. While a higher-rated

worker is assumed more productive than a lower-rated one on all tasks,

the relative productivity of the higher-rated worker will be largest

on the tasks with the greatest quality sensitivity. Competition insures that

the highest quality workers are employed to perform the highest qual-

ity tasks. Substitutability between different types of labor is not

explicitly modelled, but is implicit in the notion of tasks arrayed

according to their quality sensitivity. The minimum wage is seen as
Page 20




eliminating the lowest-quality labor from the market, which potentially

alters the entire wage distribution. The resulting level of employment

and distribution of wages depend on the elasticity of substitution

between labor and capital on each task and the elasticity of demand

for output on each task (both of these elasticities are assumed constant

across tasks), the elasticity of supply of each quality of labor, labor's

share of total income, and the rate at which quality sensitivity varies

across tasks.

     Effects of the minimum wage must be calculated numerically, since

no reduced-form employment equation can be derived. For a full—coverage

minimum wage set at 55 percent of the median wage, the results are

surprisingly insensitive to the wide range of parameters chosen.

Total employment declines by 6 to 10 percent, and the wage of the

lowest quality worker who remains employed rises 7 to 20 percent

above its pre-minimum level. This wage increase is analogous to

Heckman and Sedlacek's increased price of covered-sector skill,

but wage increases diminish as one considers successively higher—

quality workers. Pettengill also considers a partial—coverage minimum
  Page 21




 wage and endogenous worker effort; as noted earlier, these greatly

 reduce the calculated disemployment.

         With worker effort endogenous, different quality workers can re-

 ceive the same (minimum) wage, because greater effort is required of

 the lower-quality workers. Thus, this version of the model predicts a

 spike in the wage distribution at. the minimum wage. That spike is a

 striking feature of observed wage distributions8 and is not explained

 by most competing models including those which emphasize truncation at

 the minimum wage (Kosters and Welch, 1972; Hecknan and Sedlacek,

1981).




 G.   Lagged Adjustment

      While lagged adjustment is often assumed in empirical studies of

the effect of the minimum wage, the theory underlying this assumption

is virtually undiscussed. Lagged adjustments to minimum wage increases

are probably less plausible than in most other contexts where such

lags are routinely assumed.

      One important consideration is the fact that plausible adjust-

ments in employment of minimum wage workers can be accomplished simply

by reducing the rate at which replacements for normal turnover are

hired. Employers report that separation rates among minimum wage

workers averaged 13 percent per month (         Converse, et al., 1981).
      Of course, inability to adjust other inputs instantaneously would

create lagged responses in employment of even a perfectly flexible
Paye 22



input (M. Ishaq Nadiri and Sherwin Rosen, 1969, p. 462). It is not

clear, however, that the required adjustments of other inputs are

large enough to generate appreciable lags. Let subscript 1 denote

minimum wage labor and 2 refer to the composite of other inputs.

and let k1, 012 and g be input l's share of costs, the elasticity of

substitution, and the elasticity of demand for output, respectively. Then the

proportional change in demand for input 2 equals k1(S12-g) times the

proportional change in the minimum wage. Since k1 is quite small,'0

and the demand elasticity g offsets at least part of the substitution

toward input 2, the indicated change in other inputs is likely to be

smal 1.


      A final consideration is the fact that minimum wage increases are

enacted months or even years before they take effect.11 Thus, "leads"

are as plausible as "lags," and the lag may be very short.



H. Welfare Effects

     The effect of the minimum wage in the simplest competitive market is

straightforward: employment is reduced, and the efficiency of the labor

market is impaired, because some individuals whose marginal product exceeds

their reservation wage are unable to work. Under monopsony, a minimum

wage could increase employment and enhance the efficiency of the labor

market.

     The remaining models often identify factors which could reduce the

disemployment effects of a minimum wage-- improved managerial efficiency
 Page 23




 (or additional worker effort), movement from the covered to the

 uncovered sector, or (partially) offsetting increases in employment

 of better-paid workers. Each of these mitigating factors, however,

 has a welfare cost of its own. For example, workers displaced

into the uncovered sector end up working in jobs where their marginal

product is less than it was in the covered sector. Thus, a zero em-

ployment loss would not imply that welfare costs were negligible. The

welfare economics of these more complicated models has not received

much formal development. As we shall see, the more refined models of

minimum wage effects have served to interpret the empirical results,

but the estimating equations have rarely served to identify the re-

finements (e.g. ,   the supply and demand elasticities embedded in equa-
tion 6 are not separately identified). Thus, even if formal welfare

treatments were available, key parameter estimates would be largely

conjectural.
 Page 24




             II. TIME-SERiES STUDIES OF TEENAGERS AND YOUTH

      Most of the time-series studies present estimates of minimum wage

 effects only for youth and some oniy for teenagers. These groups are

 most often disaggregated by age (16-17, 18-19, and 20-24 years), sex,

 and race. Peter Mattila (1978 and 1981) and James Ragan (1977 and

 1981) further disaggregate by school enrollment status. Gramlich

 (1976) estimates effects on full- and part-time workers separately

 while Welch (1976),12 Daniel Hamermesh (1981), and Robert Cotterman

 (1981) consider the distribution of employment of teenagers by indus-

 try. However, limitations of time-series data have precluded disaggre

 gation by region and detailed industry.



 A.   Basic Equations Estimated

      Time-series studies which attempt to estimate the effect of mini-

 mum wages on the labor force status of youth have relied upon single

 equation models of the type



            Y = f(MW,
                      0, X1... X)



 where the dependent variable Y is a measure of labor force status. In-

 dependent variables include MW as a measure of the minimum wage; 0 as

 an aggregate demand (business cycle) variable to account for changes

• in the level of economic activity; and X1. . .   X   representing a host of

 other exogenous explanatory variables to control for labor supply,
 Page 25




 school enrollment, participation in the armed forces, and the like

 (Table 1).

      To measure the "employment effect" of the minimum wage, the ratio

of employment to population is used most often as the dependent vari-

able. "Unemployment effects" are usually measured as the effect of the

minimum wage on the proportion of the labor force (or of the popula-

tion) unemployed. Unemployment equations were a characteristic of the

earlier studies; the more recent research ha5 estimated the effects of

the minimum wage on the employment-population and labor force-popula-

tion ratios, and has derived the unemployment effects from these.

Several of the most recent studies (Abowd and Killingsort'., 1981; Charles Betsey

and Bruce Dunson, 1980; John Boschen and Herschel Grossman, 1981; and Hamer-

mesh,198l) focus on employment effects to the exclusion of any unem-

ployment considerations. The shift in emphasis from "unemployment" to

"employment" effects is important. In our view, it is a positive

development, for four reasons.

     First, the "employment" effects more nearly measure the extent of

harm if the minimum wage does restrict job opportunities. Suppose that

an increase in the minimum wage were known to have reduced employment

by 10 jobs, compared with what employment would otherwise have been.

Some of those who would otherwise have been employed may give up look-

ing for jobs, and hence not be counted as "unemployed." But the harm

done is not reduced on this account. Furthermore, if additional mdi-

viduals enter the labor force to search for the now-more-attractive
 Page 26




 jobs (leading unemployment to increase by more than 10), the harm of

 the job-loss is not increased. Consequently, the "employment effects"

 more nearly measure the "cost' of the minimum wage in terms of job

 opportunities.

      Second, the concept of unemployment is not precise, simply be-

 cause the job search process is necessarily nebulous. While the offi-

 cial classification of individuals as employed is quite straightfor-

ward, the classification of persons as unemployed depends upon their

having made some active effort (however serious) to seek work within

the past four weeks. In other words, the line between unemployment and

not-in-the labor force is not well drawn. Hyman Kaitz (1970) and Alan

Fisher (1973) make this point explicitly.

     Third, focusing on employment status allows one to distinguish

between full-time and part-time employment. However, the impact of the

minimum wage on length of workweek has received relatively little at-

tention in the literature.13

     Finally, the changes in the methods for measuring labor force

status introduced to the Current Population Survey (CPS) in 1967 af-

fected the count of the unemployed significantly more than that of the

employed (Robert Stein, 1967).14 This discontinuity in the unemploy-

ment series renders the unemployment effect estimates less reliable

than the estimates of employment effects.

     The key variable, minimum wage, has generally been measured by

the ratio of the nominal legal minimum wage to average hourly earnings
  Page 27




 weighted by coverage, as devised by Kaitz (1970). Ratios of minimum

 wage rates to average hourly earnings are calculated for each indus-

 try, weighted by the proportion of workers covered. These are combined

 into an index in which the weight for each industry ratio is the

 number of persons employed in the industry as a proportion of total

 employment (Thomas Gavett, 1970). Specifically, the index takes the

 form



                                 +   (MW'/AHE.)(C')}


where

              =
        E         nonagricultural    employment

        MW        basic minimum wage rate

        AHE       average hourly earnings of nonsupervisory workers

        C     =   proportion   of nonsupervisory workers covered by the

                  basic minimum wage rate

              =   minimum wage rate for newly covered workers

        C =       proportion   of nonsupervisory employees covered by the

                  minimum wage applicable to newly covered workers

        i     =   major industry division
     t        =   total   private nonagricultural economy

Most studies which use this index use teenage employment ratios as

weights.

     The Kaitz index has the advantage of summarizing a great deal of
 Page 28




 information about the minimum wage law in a single variable. Consis-

 tent with the models discussed in Section I, it includes information

 about both the relative level of the minimum wage compared with mar-

 ket-determined wages and the degree of coverage; it also reflects the

 existence of lower minimums in newly covered industries. It thus seems

 superior to three alternatives which have appeared in the literature-—

dummy variables for changes in the level or coverage of the minimum

wage (Hugh Folk, 1968; James Easley and Robert Fern, 1969; Peter

Barth, 1969; and Yale Brozen, 1969),' the "real" minimum wage (Doug-

las Adie and Gene Chapin, 1970; Adie, 1973; Gramlich, 1976; and Abowd

and Killingsworth, 1981), or the ratio of the minimum wage to average

hourly earnings ignoring coverage (Arthur Burns, 1966; Lester Thurow,

1969; and Adie, 1971). As a result, most studies have used the Kaitz

index, or some variant of it, to represent the provisions of minimum

wage laws.16

     Hamermesh (1981) departs from the standard Kaitz index in two

quite different ways. First, he uses an estimate of average hourly

earnings of teenagers instead of an economy-wide average in the rela-

tive minimum wage portion of the index. (He then includes the teen!

adult average wage ratio as a separate variable. )1? Second, he cor-

rects hourly wage data to better reflect hourly compensation by in-

cluding costs such as Social Security taxes, pension contributions,

vacation pay, and training, and corrects the minimum wage for the

flrst two factors.
  Page 29




      An alternative strategy is to include separate measures of the

  level and coverage of the minimum wage. As Gramlich (1976) has ob-

 served, the Kaitz variable assumes that a 10 percent increase in the

 level of the minimum wage has the same effect as a 10 percent increase

 in coverage -- an assumption which has no theoretical justification.

 Fisher (1973) also argues against using a variable which makes these

 separate effects indistinguishable. As a statistical matter, however,

 the tendency for minimum wage increases and coverage extensions to

 occur simultaneously makes separate estimation of level and coverage

 effects difficult.

      The business cycle variable common to all studies is a measure of

 the overall demand for labor, although many proxies are used: adult

unemployment or prime-age male unemployment rates, the Federal Reserve
                                    gap between actual and potential GNP.
Board's index of industrial production, and the /        There is wide
variation in the choice of other control variables in these studies.

Nearly three quarters of the studies use a time trend variable. Half

of the studies incorporate a variable to control for participation in

the armed forces as well as an overall potential labor supply vari-

able, most often measured by the ratio of a particular group's popula-

tion to the total working-age population. About one third of the

studies control for school enrollment and/or participation in employ-

ment and training programs (Table 1).

     The most extensive discussion has focused on the inclusion of the

youth population share variable. Adie and Gallaway (1973) and Fisher(1973)
  Page 30




  have argued that this variable should not be included in either employment

 or unemployment equations estimating minimum wage effects. Because the simple

 supply-demand model suggests that employment is demand-determined in

 the presence of the minimum wage, excess labor supply is irrelevant;

 as a result, supply side variables (such as the population share) do not

  belong in the employment equation. Furthermore, because supply and demand

 would equilibrate in the absence of the minimum wage, increases in the

 supply of teenagers which increase teenage unemployment are really

 "minimum wage" effects as well, and are mistakenly attributed to the

 impact of supply-side variables.

      Once the overly restrictive assumptions of the simple model are

 relaxed, this view loses much of its attractiveness. For example, the

 view that employment of teenagers is demand-determined may be correct

 for the half of teenagers who earn the minimum wage, but is difficult

 to accept for the remaining half who earn more than the minimum. Their

 employment must depend on the relative supply as well as the demand

 for teenage labor. Morever, even if the demand-determination argument

 were correct, including truly exogenous supply-side variables would

 not bias the minimum wage coefficient in the employment equation,

 although the precision with which it can be estimated may be reduced

• to some degree.'8

      Excluding supply-determining variables from equations explaining
 Page 31




 teenage unemployment also seems incorrect. Contrary to the apparent

 message of the simplest supply-demand model, some teenagers would still

 be counted as unemployed in the absence   of the minimum wage (Michael
 Lovell,   1973; pp. 531—2; Goldfarb, 1974; pp. 264-5), as is obvious

 from the unemployment statistics of teenagers who ordinarily earn more

 than the minimum. Hence, the extent of unemployment not caused by the

minimum wage must be held constant, and including variables which

reflect relative supplies is necessary. This does, perhaps, introduce

some ambiguity into estimates of the effect of the minimum wage on

teenage unemployment -- how much teenage unemployment would be reduced

if the minimum wage were repealed. However, the relevant policy issue

is the effect of marginal changes in the minimum wage, and holding the

relative supply of teenagers constant is certainly necessary to make

that evaluation.19

     The majority of studies use quarterly observations. This permits

the capture of short-term cyclical fluctuations in aggregate demand

(considerably more difficult with annual data) and mitigates the

adverse effects of severe short-term variations in the values of

variables, particularly sampling variation for small age-sex-race

cells (a characteristic of monthly data). Linear and double-log speci-

fications (in which the logarithm of the dependent variable depends on

the logarithm of the minimum wage variable) are about equally common.

About one half employ some form of lag structure in their analyses.

     All studies use labor force data from the Current Population
   Page 32




  Survey. As a result, one could argue that there really are not 25 in-

  dependent studies. Since the earlier studies include about 15 years of

  data and the later studies about 25, the later ones can be thought of

  as replications of the earlier ones. However, subtle differences exist

  in the variables included, the form they take, functional form of the

  equation, and lag or lead structure utilized.

       While most studies present estimates for several subgroups (nec-

  essitating the aggregation discussed below'), most present only one

  specification. Where more than one specification was presented, we

  have tried to include the one which seemed most preferred by the

 author, or for which conversion to the 10-percent-increase format used
                                    20
  below was most straightforward.


 B.    Results

      Only the findings of those studies which attempt to measure the

 employment and/or unemployment effects of a minimum wage are reported

 here. In order to enhance the comparability of these studies, their

 results are displayed in terms of elasticities for employment and

 percentage point increases for the unemployment rate. To measure

 employment effects, Tables 2 and 3 present the percent change in

 employment due to a 10-percent change in the minimum wage; i.e. , 10

• times the employment elasticity of the minimum wage ri(E). For studies

 which regress the logarithm of an employment measure (the employment-

 population ratio (E/P), for example) on the logarithm of the minimum
   Page 33




  wage (W), the coefficient of the minimum wage variable is simply

  q(E). For studies which use a linear rather than a double-logarithmic

  specification, q(E) equals the regression coefficient times

  where the bar indicates the mean value over the sample period.

       To further enhance comparability of results, several types of

  aggregation are necessary, particularly in calculating impacts for all

  teenagers in Table 3: combining (1)   separate estimates for 16-17 and
  18-19 year olds when estimates for the 16-19 group are not presented; (2) esti-

 mates fordiffnt race-sex groups when results for teenagers as a

  whole are not reported; and (3) separate estimates for enrolled and

  non-enrolled individuals. For any two groups, elasticities

  are aggregated according to the formula:


             q(E1+E2) =           (1-) ri(E2)
                          where
                                  E1/(E1+E2)


      The unemployment effects in Tables 2 and 3 represent the change

 in the unemployment rate due to a 10-percent change in the minimum

 wage. For example, a .500 would indicate that a minimum wage increase

 of 10 percent is estimated to raise the unemployment rate from, say,

 6.0 to 6.5 percent. For the studies which estimate separate employment

 and labor force equations in logarithmic form using the employment-

• population ratio (E/P) and labor force participation rate (LIP) as

• dependent variables, the minimum wage coefficients are the employment

 and labor force elasticities q(E) and r(L). Where the equations are
Page 34




linear, the regression coefficients must be multiplied by Wm/(E/P) and

Wm/(iJ) respectively, to derive q(E) and q(L). The impact, x, of a

change in the minimum wage on the unemployment rate can then be de-

rived as follows:


          u = 1 -   (E/L)   =   the unemployment rate
            = (LzE-EL)/L2 =        E/L(L/LE/E)   =   (1-u)(L/LE/E)
          x =                   = (1-u)(q(L)r1(E))
                £U/(Wm/Wm)
            = the impact on the unemployment rate (in percentage

                points) of a 1 percent change in the minimum wage

                                                                      = .10),
     Thus, if the minimum wage increases by 10 percent (Wm/Wm

tLJ expressed as a decimal is .lOx, and the change in the unemployment

rate in percentage points         is lOx. For studies in which the dependent

                                                                 points, x is
variable is the unemployment rate expressed in percentage

calculated as the regression coefficient for the minimum wage multi-

plied by m• Just as the employment elasticities were aggregated as

described earlier, so the labor force elasticities were similarly

weighted using labor force shares.

      On balance, the effects of a 10-percent increase in the minimum

wage are estimated to result in about a 1-3 percent reduction in total

 teenage employment (Table 3). All studies find a negative employment
                                                            almost exclu
 effect for all teenagers together, and the signs are
                                                     subgroups. Since it is
 sively negative for the various age-sex-race

 necessary to compute many of the overall "effects" from the disaggre
Page 35




gated equations, it is not possible to conduct tests to determine

whether they are statistically significant. The coefficients from

these disaggregated equations are mostly negative, with about half

being statistically significant.

     Although the research is consistent in finding some employment

reduction associated with minimum wage increases, the estimated ef-

fects on unemployment appear to be considerably more varied. Of parti-

cular note are the large positive unemployment effects estimated by

Adie (1971) and Thomas Moore (1971) on the one hand, and the

negative unemployment effects estimated by Lovell (1973) on

the other in response to a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage.

     Yet, excluding these studies, the unemployment effects for all

teenagers of the remaining nine studies reported in Table 3 are within

a relatively narrow band --   ranging   from very small negative effects

(virtually zero) to 0.75 percentage point. Implicitly or explicitly,

studies finding disemployment effects but little or no unemployment

impacts are finding labor-force withdrawal in response to minimum

wage increases.

     "Wrong-signed"   coefficients are somewhat more comon among the
demographic subgroups in Tables 2 and 3     for   the unemployment effects

than was true for the employment effects. Because many of the unem-
ployment effects are calculated from employment and labor force equa-

ttons, their statistical significance could not be determined.

     It is extraordinarily difficult to determine a few critical

specification choices which explain the range of results. The over-
                           -
   Page 36




  whelming majority of the studies in Tables 2 and 3 contain no sensiti-

  vity analyses whatsoever. Moreover, the limited evidence available

  suggests that the effects of various choices are not necessarily

  additive —- how the results are affected by one choice
                                                         may depend on
  how   another   choice has been resolved.

         The sample period chosen seems to have relatively minor effects

 on the estimated employment impacts. Both Hamermesh (1981) and Charles

 Brown, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen (1981) report that the esti-

 mates are not appreciably affected by extending the sample period from

 1954-69 (roughly the sample period of the eight earliest studies in

 Table 1) with more recent data. However, Betsey and Dunson (1981) find

 considerably smaller effects over the full sample period than in the

 earlier period alone. There is a tendency for unemployment effects to

 be smaller in studies using data which includes the experience of the

 1970s, although the differences between the three largest estimates

 (Moore, 1971; Adie, 1971 and 1973) and the others in Table 3 is prob-

ably due to other differences as well (see below).

        The treatment of coverage has led to some interesting, if dis-

turbing, results. Of those studies which allow for separate estimates of

the effects of changing the level of the minimum and the proportion of

workers covered, the general tendency is for coverage effects to be

weaker, both in statistical significance and magnitude (Moore, 1971;

Gramlich, 1976; Boschen and Grossman, 1981; Brown, Gilroy and Kohen,

1981; an exception is Al-Salam, Quester, and Welch, 1981). The m-

precision of the estimates does not allow for confident rejection of
Page 37




the Kaitz restriction, or of the hypothesis that coverage effects are

zero. Studies which ignore coverage altogether in creating the minimum

wage variable (Freeman, 1979; Wadter and Kim, 1979; and Abowd and

Killingsworth, 1981) tend to report larger estimated employment ef-

fects, but we can see no justification for this omission.21 Harnermesh

(1981) concludes that his refinements of the Kaitz index have little

impact on the estimated effect of the minimum wage.

     Given the wide variation in control variables which reflect the

supply or composition of teenage labor, relatively few confident

judgments can be made about the impact of these supply-side control

variables on the estimated effects of the minimum wage on employment.

Betsey and Dunson (1981) report that controlling for welfare benefits

reduces estimated minimum wage impacts, although the resulting esti-

mates are not very stable across sample periods.22 Al-Salarn, Quester,

and Welch (1981) note that the estimated minimum wage effects are

higher (by about -0.5 in the measure in Table 3) when three 11potenti-

ally endogenous" factors (fraction of teenagers in training programs, in school,

or in the armed forces) are not held constant. Abowd and Killings-

worth (1981) find little impact of including or excluding training

enrollments, while Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen (1981) find that the

estimates are insignificantly affected by adding or deleting these or

similar variables, at least with a double-log functional form.23 Ragan

(1977 and 1981) and Mattila (1978 and 1981) control for school en-

rollment, either directly or with exogenous variables thought to
  Page 38




 affect the enrollment decision, and their estimates are among the

 smaller ones in the literature.

      Control variables appear to be mere of a factor in t.fe unrnploy-

 ment equations. Lovell (1973) reports that nearly the entire differ-

 ence between his estimates and those of Moore (1971, pp. 534-5) are

 due to his including the teen population share as a control variable.

 In general, the results of others confirm this conclusion. Four of the

 five largest unemployment estimates appear in studies which exclude

 the population share (Adie, 1971 and 1973; Moore, 1971, who includes

 the share variable only in the nonwhite equation; Hashimoto and

Mincer, 1970) while the five smallest estimates are all found in

 studies which include it (Kaitz. 1970; Lovell, 1972 and 1973; Freeman,

1979; and Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen, 1981). However, the results appear

less sensitive to this specification choice as the sample period is

extended. 24

     Table 3 also reveals few differences between those studies which

assume that the effect of the minimum wage is instantaneous and those
                                                               25
which assume a lagged response (usually of the Almon lag form).

Soschen and Grossman argue that responses to the minimum wage should

depend on future values of the minimum wage and coverage, both in-

creases which are announced in advance and the expected values of the

minimum when increases have not been announced. Empirically, they

assume that next year's value of the minimum is known, and beyond one

year, the ratio of the minimum wage to average wages is expected

to equal the average value of this ratio over the
     Page 39




     sample period.   The combined effect of a change in current and

    next—year values can be calculated from their coefficients; it

    is shown in Table 3, and is not very different from the median value

    in the table. The "long-run" impact of a "permanent" change is not

    calculated.

         Because it is difficult to explain the range of estimates in the

    literature by a few critical specification choices, it is not easy to

    produce a "best' estimate of the employment and unemployment effects.

    We are inclined to assign greater weight to those papers which include

    a significant portion of the experience of the 1970s in the sample,

    include coverage (either separately or in the Kaitz form) as well as

    the level of the minimurr wage nd control for exogenous factors gov-

    erning the relative supply of teenagers. The impact of that preference

    is to concentrate the "preferred estimates at the lower end of the

    range found in the literature, for both employment and unemployment

    effects.

         The theory suggests that the disemployment effects would be

    larger for those whose wages would otherwise be the lowest --   blacks,
    women, and young teenagers. Tables 2 and 3 show some tendency for

    disemployment and unemployment effects to be more serious for 16-17

    year olds than older teenagers; unemployment effects are more often

    larger for females than males, but disemployment effects vary the
l
    opposite way.

         The most often discussed differences among teenagers are the
  Page 40




  black—white comparisons. A narrow majority of the comparisons in Table

 3 show larger employment and unemployment effects for blacks. But the

 patter is reversed among studies which include the 1970s: Wachter and

 Kim (1979) and Iden (1981) find larger minimum wage effects among

 blacks than whites; Ragan (1977), Betsey and Dunson (1981) and Brown,

 Gilroy and Kohen (1981) find the opposite. Ideri's black and white

 equations are not strictly comparable since the time trend variable

 (generally significant in minimum wage studies) is not the same in

 both equations. These mixed results erode much of the confidence we

 place in a black-white or even male-female comparison of minimum wage

 effects.

      There may also be a problem with the reliability of some of these

estimates because of the relatively small sample size of the popula-

tion and labor force estimates of nonwhites (Welch, 1976, p. 13). More

generally, many of the disaggregated effects cannot be calculated

precisely, and the differences in such effects are likely to be esti-

mated with even less precision.

     Since the size of the CPS sample has grown over time, weighting

the observations by the estimated number of nonwhite teenagers

ally surveyed seemed desirable. This would place greater weight on the

more recent observations, which are presumably subject to smaller

sampling errors. Having done this, we found the resulting estimates

to beonly slightly closer to the white teenage results (Brown, Gilroy

and Kohen, 1981).
Page 41




     While it is often asserted that blacks are more adversely af-

fected than whites by the minimum wage, previous studies provide

conflicting evideice on the issue. In any case, while these studies do

not disprove the claim that nonwhites are more adversely affected, we

would conclude from the body of literature that such an assertion must

rest on theoretical rather than empirical grounds, at least insofar as

the time-series evidence is concerned.

     In sunulary, our survey indicates     a reduction of between one and

three percent in teenage employment as a result of a 10 percent increase

in the federal minimum waae. We regard the lower part of this range as

most plausible, because this is what most studies which include the

experience of the 1970's and deal carefully with minimum-wage coverage

tend to find. The other consistent finding is a notable withdrawl from

the labor force by teenagers in response to an increased minimum, to

the extent that unemployment effects of the higher minimum are considerably

weaker than the disemployment effects.
                         -
 Page 42




                  III.    CROSS-SECTION STUDIES OF TEENAGERS

      The studies reviewed thus far have relied on differences over

 time to estimate minimum wage effects —- how did employment of teen-

agers change when the minimum wage changed? An alternative approach is

to rely on cross-section data, usually by making comparisons between

states or metropolitan areas which differ in the importance of the

minimum wage.

     A basic question which must. be confronted with the cross-section

approach is how one can identify differences in degree of importance

of the minimum wage when, at one point in time, a single Federal mini-

mum wage law applies to all states? If all the observations have the

same value for the "minimum wage variable,' one cannot estimate the

minimum wage's effect. Several answers to this question have been pro-

vided in the literature on youth. Early studies, using 1960 Census

data, asked whether state minimum wage laws lowered teenage employ-

ment. With the extension of Federal minimum wage coverage in retail

trade and services in the 1960s, the importance of state laws was re-

duced, and later studies relied on the argument that the impact of the

Federal minimum depends on average wage levels in the area (high-wage

areas being less affected) and on the extent to which the area's in-

dustries are subject to the Federal law.26

    Studies which focus on differences in state laws generally deter-

mine the impact   of   these laws on (average) wages of teenagers, and the

Impact of higher wages on teenage employment. The latter impact Is    of
   'Page 43




   greater interest for studying effects of Federal minimum wage in-

   creases.

        Generally speaking, the three studies surveyed (Edward Kalachek,

   1969; Arnold Katz, 1973; Paul Osterman, 1979) found that higher wages

   reduced teenage employment; these effects were fairly small for white

  teens (a 10 percent increase in average wages reducing their employ-

  ment by a few percentage points), but perhaps larger for black teens.

  The lack of precision in this summary reflects the large differences

  in estimates among studies.

       Cross-section studies of the effect of the Federal minimum wage

  are a recent addition to the literature (Table 4). As in the time-

  series studies, youth employment is assumed to depend on the minimum

  wage, the demand for labor (as reflected in the area unemployment

  rate) and other factors. As can be seen from Table 4, there are sig-

  nificant differences between studies in the extent of attempts to con-

 trol for these other factors. Studies which
                                               distinguish between student
 and nonstudent employment, or part-time and full-time employment (Ronald

 Ehrenberg and Alan Marcus, 1979; James Cunningham, 1981) include a

 more extensive list of control variables.2?

      Estimates of the employment effects of a 10 percent change in the

 minimum wage based on these cross-section studies are presented in

 Table 5. These estimates vary much more widely than the time-series

• results in Tables 2 and 3.

      Unfortunately, it is difficult to determine which differences
 Page 44




 among studies are responsible for the different results. As was true

 of the time-series analyses reviewed in Section II, the studies rarely

 report how their estimates of minimum wage effects are altered by

 modifying the list of control variables, or other changes. The one

 generalization which appears to be supported by Table 5 is that stud-

 ies which attempt to control for many other determinants of youth

 employment (Ehrenberg and Marcus, 1979; and Cunningham, 1981) find

 smaller minimum wage effects than those which include few controls

 (Welch and Cunningham, 1978; Freeman, 1979) for all teenagers (or all

white teenagers). However, this relationship does not hold for indi-

vidual race-sex groups, and there are no indications which control

variables are primarily responsible for these changes.28

     Because most of the variation in the 'minimum wage' variable (usually the


fraction of workers covered times the ratio of the minimum wage to average wages)

comes from variation in wage levels across states or areas, one is

usually not certain whether the estimated effects are "minimum wage"

effects or "state average wage effects." As a result, Freeman (1979,

p. 8) concludes that the cross-section approach provides "at most a

weak test of the effect of the minimum." Cunningham (1981) and John

Cogan (1981) provide more reassurance on this score than do the other

studies, because they include the value of the dependent variable from

the previous Census as a control variable.29

     Two cross-section studies of teenage employment are not included

In Table 4 because they used quite different approaches to the problem

of estimating the effects of the Minimum wage. Karl Egge !.t !.L. (1970)
   Page 45




  used cross-section data to analyze changes in the employment status of

  young wen before and after the 1967 increase in the Federal minimum

  wage. They compared those whose 1966 wage was below the mandated

  minimum with other young men who were, presumably, not affected by the

  minimum, Their hypothesis was that if the minimum wage reduced employ-

  ment opportunities, those earning less than the new minimum should

  have less favorable changes in employment status. They did not con-

  sistently find such a pattern.

           Robert Meyer and David Wise (1981) use a quite different

  approach to estimating employment effects of the minimum wage,

  inferring them from the distribution of wages at one point in

  time, They assume that, in the absence of the minimum wage, the wage

  distribution for out—of-school teenagers would be given by



                £n(w)   BX +   e,


  where X 'is a vector of worker characteristics and e is a normally dis-

  tributed error term. Assuming that P1 of those who would have wages

  less than the minimum remain in subminimum wage jobs while P2 are

  raised to the minimum and
                                    (1-P1-P2) are disemployed, they estimate

      and B using maximum likelihood methods. They find that a 10 per-

 cent increase in the minimum waqe would reduce employment of nonen-

 rolled teenagers by 3.6 percent.

       This estimate depends on t.he assumed functional form relating the

 wage to the personal characteristics and on the assumed distribution
• of the
            error term. Perhaps the main concern is that even if the Meyer

 and Wise model correctly specified the "uncensored wage distribution,
 Page 46




censoring of low-wage workers for reasons unrelated to the minimum

wage might distort the distribution in a way which looked (to the eye

and, presumably, to a maximum-likelihood algorithm) like a minimum-

wage induced thinning of the 'ower tail. Teenagers who receive the

lowest offered wages deciding not to work would potentially have

this effect.

     It is more difficult to neatly summarize the principal findings

of the cross-section studies than those of the time-series studies.

The range of estimates is wider, and the number of studies smaller. On

the basis of the cross-section studies alone, one is able to say

little with confidence. The broader range of estimated employment

effects does, however, roughly center on the 1—3 percent range which

we found in the time-series studies. In that sense, one can fairly say

that the cross-section evidenc' is not inconsistent with the time-

series estimates.
  Page 47




                   IV.   THE MINIMUM WAGE AND ADULT EMPLOYMENT

        When we turn from teenagers to other population groups, we find a

  dramatic reduction in the number of studies of minimum wage effects on

 employment and unemployment, Those studies which provide estimates of

 the effect of the minimum
                               wage on young adults (those aged 20-24) show

 fairly consistent negative employment effects and positive unemploy-

 ment impacts (Table 6). They tend to find smaller effects than those

 estimated for teenagers (e.g., generally less than a 1 percent reduc-

 tion in their employment in response to a 10 percent increase in the

 minimum) although the effects vary somewhat across sex-race groups.

 Mincer (1976) and Wachtec and Kim (1979) find larger effects for black than

 white males, but Wachter and Kim find large positive effects for black females.

       The three available cross-sectional studies of young adults

 (Freeman, 1979; Cunningham, 1981; Meyer and Wise, 1981) also find

smaller disemployment effects for young adults than they find for

teenagers. However, the range is once again somewhat wider(froni 0.2 to

2.2   percent)   than in the time-series studies.

      As noted in the discussion of the theory of the minimum wage, one

expects to be able to detect effects of the minimum wage most readily

if the group studied contains a relatively large fraction of workers

who would have earned less than the mandated wage in the absence of

minimum wage legislation. While teenagers and, to a lesser extent,

young adults fit this description, adults generally do not. As a re-

suit, the minimum wage could increase or reduce adult
   Page 48




  employment and in either
                             case, the effect may be so small

  cajnpared to total adult employment that it will not be detected with

  precision.

         Time-series studies on the subject produce quite mixed results.

  Mincer (1976) reports statistically significant employment reductions

  among white males over age 65 and white female adults but not for

  other age, sex, and race combinations. Gramlich
                                                    (1976 pp. 438-443)
  finds statistically insignificant reductions for adult males and no

 effect for adult females. Hamermesh's
                                         (1981) results imply a small and

 statistically insignificant increase in adult employment because the

 minimum wage raises the wages of competing teenagers. Boschen and

 Grossman (1981) find that employment of adult women is significantly

 increased as the level (but not coverage) of the minimum wage is

 raised. The only conclusion emerging from these studies is that it is

difficult to estimate the effect of the minimum wage on adult employ-

ment with any precision from time-series data.

     A       cross-section Study by Peter Linneman (1980) adopts    a

quite different approach to estimating adult disemployment effects.

Given data on wages and other characteristics such as age and educa-

tion of workers in 1973, he estimate5 the wage such workers would have

earned in 1974, had the minimum wage not been increased. He argues

that those directly affected by t.he minimum wage are those whose

predicted wages would have been less than the new 1974 minimum and

that the negative employment effects should be greatest for those
 Page 49




 whose predicted wage was furthest below the minimum. Linneman finds

 that this was indeed the case. While he does not estimate the overall

 reduction in adult employment due to the minimum wage increase, his

 results permit the inference that it is substantial.3° However,

 Linnernan also finds that those with wages well above the minimum

 suffered lower employment than they would have with a

constant minimum wage, while most theoretical predictions would

have yielded the opposite result. This raises the possibility that his

results reflect the fact that low-wage workers are less likely to be

employed without convincingly implicating the minimum wage as a cause

of this problem.31
Page 50




            V. EVIDENCE FROM   LOW-WAGE   INDUSTRIES AND AREAS

     In contrast to the studies reviewed thus far, which focus on the

effect of the minimum wage on subgroups of the population classified

by individual or demographic characteristics, a smaller set of studies

focuses on the effect of the minimum wage on different industries or

areas. In line with the observation that such effects will be most

reliably detected when a significant fraction of workers in the sample

studied are directly affected by increases in the minimum wage, these

studies focus on low-wage industries or low-wage areas.

     Most studies isolate the impact of the minimum wage by comparing

changes in employment, over a period which brackets an increase in the

minimum, between units of observation which differ in the extent to

which wages initially fell below the new minimum. Implicitly, this

assumes that, in the absence of the minimum wage increase, observa-

tions with high concentrations of workers initially paid less than the

new minimum would have experienced roughly the same employment growth

as observations with fewer low-paid workers. As noted below, this

assumption is often open to challenge. Compared to the studies re-

viewed earlier, the studies in this section tend to have fewer ex-

plicit control variables to capture the effect of factors besides the

minimum wage, and so lean more heavily on pre-increase employment to

implicitly control for these differences.
  Page 51




 A.    Employment Effects in Newly Covered Sectors

       Most of the six amendments to the FLSA have included changes in

 cA.werage of minimum wage workers. The 1961 and 1966 amendments, in

 particular, resulted in coverage increases for retail trade and ser-

 vices, while the 1966 amendments provided for significant increases

 among agricultural workers. Studies which have focused on these low-

 wage industrial sectors are reviewed below.

       Agriculture. The statutory minimum wage for covered farm workers

 has risen in seven steps from $1.00 per hour in February 1967 to

 eventual parity with other covered workers at $2.65 in 1978. The

 studies which measure the impact of minimum wages on employment in the

 agricultural sector build upon earlier econometric analyses of the

 farm labor market (G. Edward Schuh, 1962; and Edward Trychniewicz and

Schuh, 1969) and tend to support the competitive hypothesis that

increases in the minimum wage result in adverse employment effects.32

      In an aggregate time-series study of U.S. agriculture over the

1946-78 period, Bruce Gardner (1981) finds significant disemployment

effects, with the minimum wage reducing the number of hired farm

workers by 60,000 (about 5 perrent of its 1979 level). He also reports

that disaggregated regional estimates, although not statistically

significant, exhibit some adverse employment effects. Unfortunately,

the individual regional estimates are not reported making it impos-

sible to compare their relative sizes.

      Earlier time-series analyses are based on fewer years experience with the

minimum wage in agriculture1 during a period when that minimum was lower

relatiye to other wages. These studies find larger reductions in employment
   Page 52




  due to the minimum than Gardner's five percent estimate. For example,

  4ardner (1972), using annual data over the 1947-70 period, estimates

  that the 1966 FLSA-extended minimum wage coverage reduced hired farm

  employment by about 18 percent from what it would otherwise have been

  in the 1967-70 period. Theodore Lianos (1972), studying twelve south-

  ern states forming three regions over the 1950-69 period, finds that

  both total and hired farm employment decreased with the imposition of

  a Federal minimum wage on the agricultural sector. Over the years 1967

  to 1969, the reduction in employment under various assumptions is

  estimated to have been between 24 and 51 percent. F.H. Gallasch

  (1975), using pooled cross-section data, also finds significant dis-

  employment effects associated with the imposition of a minimum wage,

  i.e., that over the 1951-71 period, a 10 percent increase in the

 agricultural minimum wage resulted in a 6 percent decrease in the

 employment of hired farm workers.

      In a more specialized study, John Trapani and J.R. Moroney (1981)

 estimate the effect of the 1966 FLSA amendments on employment of

 seasonal cotton workers, as the difference between actual employment

 and that predicted (based on 190-66 data) to have occurred in the

 absence of the 1966 introduction of a minimum wage. Using pooled

 cross-section data on 14 cotton-producing states, they find that

• extended minimum wage coverage accounts for 65 percent of the decline

• in peak-month cotton-farming jobs between 1967 and 1969. With em-

 plovment on cotton farms plummeting from 193,000 to 47,000 between
  Page 53




 these years, the authors' estimates indicate tht the minimum-wage-

 nduced employment decrease would be about 40 percent. As might be

 expected, the greatest effects are found in regions where wages, on

 average, are lower -—   the   south central and southeastern states.

      Although the results of these studies are consistent in finding

 significant disemployment effects, they must be interpreted with care.

 First, the effects of the agricultural minimum wage are made difficult

 to interpret by the heterogeneity of the farm labor force, which in-

 cludes low-skill manual laborers and high-skill managers, children and

 retired persons, full-time workers and seasonal/part-time laborers.33

 Additional problems arise with both the measurement and classification

of agricultural employment. Although nearly all studies use the number

of hired farm workers as the dependent variable, there is evidence

that a number of family farm workers (for whom data are also collected

in the agricultural survey) should be included as hired labor. This

exclusion could lead to an overestimate of the proportionate minimum

wage effects. The distinction between self—employed and hired labor is

also sometimes difficult to make. Sharecroppers, for example, are

counted as self-employed, but may work for wages at certain times, and

many farm owner-operators work for wages on other farms.

     Second, the minimum wage effects are difficult to interpret be-

cause of the exempt status of many employers and employees, serious

doubts about the degree of FLSA enforcement, and the questionable

knowledge of the legal requirements among both farmers and farm work-
Page 54




ers. For example, immediate family members of a farm operator are

exempt, but more distant relatives often do farm work on the 11family"

farm. Formally, they are subject to the provisions of the FLSA, if

they are paid a wage, but there is doubtless great temptation to

forego the formality in such cases. There is also reason to believe

that the formality is ignored in the case of nonrelative neighbors

with whom there are long-standing work relationships.

          Third, although all studies include one or more trended

variables (e.g. ,   ttimeI   or nonfarm wages) which should yield more

confidence in the interpretation of the effects of the minimum wage

variable, the specification of the minimum wage variable itself is

open to question. Trapani and Moroney (1981) do not include an ex-

plicit minimum wage variable in their study, Lianos (1972) uses a

crude dummy-variable proxy, and Gardner (1972) employs the nominal

value of the minimum wage. Gallasch (1975) and Gardner (1981)

deflate the nominal minimum by economy-wide (not agricultural)

price indices, although the reason for this specification

is unclear. Although coverage data are not rich, none of the studies

attempts to account for changes in coverage, nor is there any mention

in the studies of its potential impact. This omission may have rela-

tively minor consequences, however, because coverage has not varied

greatly since agriculture was first covered in 1967.
  Page 55




      Finally, apart from Gardner's 1981 paper, no study includes

 more than five observations in the post-1966 period. Pooling

 cross-section data is one way to circumvent this problem

 (Gallasch, 1975).

      On balance, these problems do not lead one to conclude that the

 estimates are biased in a known direction. Rather, they raise ques-

 tions about the reliability of the estimates in that the problems

 could lead tOejther over- or under-estimates of the "true" minimum-

 wage effect.

      In a descriptive study of the extension of coverage to certain

 hired farm workers, the U.S. Department of Labor also acknowledges a

sharp drop in agricultural employmenton covered farms after the intro-

duction of the $1.00 minimum in 1967 (U.S. Department of Labor, 1972,

p. 23). However, the relative drop was smaller among covered than among

uncovered farms. The analysis is weakened by the failure to disen-

tangle the comparison of covered and uncovered farms from that of

large and small farms. Thus, if employment on larger farms would have

grown more rapidly or fallen less rapidly than on others in the ab-

sence of minimum wage coverage, the comparisons between covered and

uncovered farms will understate any negative employment impact of the

minimum wage.

     Retail Trade. There are several published studies of the impact

of extending (partial) minimum wage coverage to the heterogeneous,

low-wage retail trade sector. According to a U.S. Department of Labor
 Page 56




analysis (U.S. Department of Labor, 1963, p. 40), employment in covered

establishments in the South (where the impact of a $1.00 mthimum lip-

posed i, September 1961 was greatest) fell by 10.6 percent between

June 1961 and June 1962, while employment in uncovered establishments

rose by 4.8 percent. Analogously, another Department of Labor study

(U.S. Department of Labor, 1966b, p. 49) reports that nationally uncov-

ered employment grew slightly faster than covered employment during

this period. However, the same study indicates that the covered sector

grew more rapidly in the succeeding three years, during which there

were two increases in the minimum applicable to retail trade.

     In a later study of a large segment of the retail trade indus-

try--eating and drinking establishments--the degree of impact of the

1966 extension of minimum wage coverage is measured by the increase in

average wages necessary to bring all workers in an establishment up to

the minimum (U.S. Department of Labor, 1968a). Establisments are cate-

gorized as either °high-, low_,Pt or "no-impact.0 In this case, the

Department of Labor finds no clear correlation between the degree of

impact and the employment changes that followed the 1966 extension

of coverage.

     Subsequent studies of the retail trade industry have reached

conflicting conclusions. William Shkurti and Belton Fleisher (1968)

conclude that while the adverse effect of the minimum wage on the

economy as a whole was probably small, some segments have experienced

subctntially less employment growth than would otherwise have oc-
  Page 57




  curred. Analyzing employment changes from 1961 to 1965 (a period which

  Includes the effective dates for the $1.00 and $1.15 minima in retail

 trade), they find that employment grew most slowly in those 'lines of

 business (e.g.   ,   variety   stores) in which the wage impact of the

 minimum was the largest. Moreover, within some lines of business, the

 rate of increase of employment was smaller in the South (where the

 impact of the minimum wage was the largest) than elsewhere. However,

 Jack Karlin's (1967) analysis of the 1961-1966 employment changes

 (which included the September 1965 increase to $1.25) reaches very

 different conclusions. Specifically, he finds that covered retail

 trade employment rose more rapidly in the South than elsewhere and

 that the larger increases in employment occurred in those lines of

 retail trade where the wages of a considerable fraction of the work-

force would have to have been raised to the level of $1.25 per hour.

These divergent conclusions appear to reflect differences in judging

whether two columns of numbers (minimum wage impact and employment

growth) are or are not related, as well as differences in the time

periods studied and other differences in the data utilized. Neither of

these studies presentsformal measures of statistical association to

support the qualitative inferences; neither controls for pre-existing trends.

     In partial response to the shortcomings and inconsistencies of

these studies of retail trade employment, we have applied conventional

regression techniques to the same data. Two alternative dependent

variables (percentage change in hours and persons employed) were
Page 58




regressed on a minimum wage variable (the percent of workers in cov-

ered establishments in 1961 who were earning less than the 'new"

minimum wage) for three alternate time periods (1961-62, 1961-65, and

1961-66). In addition, alternate specifications of the equation con-

tain differing combinations of the following control variables:

region of the country, line of business, and percentage change in

employment in the uncovered sector (coefficient constrained to 1.0).

Because the number of observations is limited to 26 (seven lines of

business x four regions, minus two cells too small to report), none of

the coefficients can be estimated with much precision and none of the

minimum wage effects would be judged statistically significant by

conventional standards. However, in all versions of the equation

containing the full complement of control variables, the minimum wage

variable's coefficient carries a negative sign. Nonetheless, as noted

in assessing the studies of agriculture, the value of even careful

statistical anaysis is weakened to the extent that the covered-uncov-

ered comparison really reflects an underlying "large-small" compari-

son. If larger retail trade establishments would have grown more

rapidly than others in the absence of minimum wage coverage, then

comparisons between covered and uncovered firms will understate any

negative impact of the minimum wage, unless size of establishment is

held constant.

     Based on annual data covering the period 1948-1979, Boschen and

Grossman (1981) use time-series regressions to estimate a significant
  Page 59




  disernployment effect of the minimum wage in the retail trade sector.

 Although their results do not present an estimate of disemployment due

 directly to the 1961 imposition of the minimum, their methodology does

 produce an estimated (short-run) elasticity of employment with respect

 to the minimum of -.03. For comparison purposes, this is about one-

 fifth as large as their estimated elasticity of employment of all

 teenagers.

      Instead of focusing on the effects of the minimum wage on the

 level of employment, Janice Madden and Joyce Cooper (1981) ask whether

 the minimum wage affected states' share of output and employment in

 wholesale and retail trade. To the extent that firms' decisions on

where to locate are based on labor costs, increases in the minimum

wage should make states with larger concentrations of low-wage workers

or a larger fraction of workers subject to minimum wage laws less

attractive locations. Low-wage states may be growing because their wages

are low, and this would increase their share of wholesale and retail trade

employment. Madden and Cooper deal with this to some extent by controlling

for the growth of state population and income. They report no consistent

evidence of the hypothesized effects in either industry. They note, however,

that limitations of the state—by-industry data base they constructed back

to 1958 may have obscured such effects.

     In a study of the age composition of retail trade employment, Philip

Cotterill and Walter Wadycki (1976) use 1967 Survey of Economic Op-

porturiity cross-section data to analyze the effect of minimum wage

coverage on the substitution between teenage and adult labor. Although

they conclude that there Is no evidence that employers substituted for
 Page 60




 teenage labor, the study clearly suffers from the inability to measure

 what would have been the utilization rate of the two groups in the ab-

 sence of the minimum wage. In addition, their conclusion runs counter

 to the findings in David Kauns (1965) study of substitution in low-

wage manufacturing industries. He is able to show that as a result of

a change in relative factor costs, due to a minimum wage increase,

firms         alter relative factor inputs, with the greatest change

taking place where the minimum wage requires the greatest upward wage

adjustment (most notably among small producers).

        In probably the most thorough statistical study of a specific

industry, Fleisher (1981) concludes that employment in retail trade

has been significantly curtailed as a result of the 1961 imposition

and the subsequent increases in the Federal minimum wage. Using an

admixture of time-series regressions, forecast relative wages in

retail trade, and estimates of consumer demand equations for retail

trade services, he infers that during the 1960s retail trade employ-

ment was about 5 percent lower than it would otherwise have been for

each 5 percent that the averaqr' hourly labor cost in retail trade was

raised by increases in the minimum wage. Further, he finds that em-

ployment measured by hours of wrrk was reduced in greater proportion

than was employment measured hy persons working. It should be noted

that this implied 'elasticity' with a value approximately equal to

one, is not comparable to the economy-wide minimum wage elasticities

of employment discussed in preceding sections of this paper. In fact,
 Page 61



 Fleisher opts for a minimum wage variable different from any of

 those utilized in other time-series studies; namely, 'the proportionate

 increase in the forcast wage needed to bring all workers at least to

 the minimum wage'   (p. 85).

     Despite the general confirmation of significant disemployment in

retail trade resulting from the imposition of the legal wage floor,

Fleisher finds notable variation within the industry. Specifically,

his disaggregated results point to a negligible (nonsignificant) ef-

fect on department store employment and particularly strong effects on

variety stores and food stores, although in the latter case, the

impact on hours of work is much weaker than on number of persons work-

ing. This nonuniformity of findings and their consequently limited

generalizability is compounded by the omission from the multivariate

analyses of eating and drinkinq places, many of which are major em-

ployers of minimum wage workers.

     Service Industries. Analogous to its study of eating and drinking

establishments in the retail trade sector, the U.S. Department of

Labor has issued reports on several service industries in which mini-

mum wage coverage was extended by the 1966 FLSA Amendments; namely

hospitals, hotels and motels, and laundries and cleaning establish-

ments. In each of thesethree cases the report finds no clear evidence

of a correlation between the degree of impact of extending minimum

wage coverage (i.e., the increase in average wages necessary to

bring all workers in an establishment up to the minimum) and the

employment changes following the extension (U.S. Department

of Labor, 1970, P. 27; U.S. Department of Labor, 1968b, p. 18;

U.S. Department of Labor, 1969, P. 18). The conclusion in the
 Page 62




 laundry and cleaning services study, however, is incorrect.34 It is

noteworthy that these studies are focused only on determining whether

high-impact establishments had smaller employment increases (or larger

employment declines) than low-impact establishments. There are addi-

tional important, if subtle, questions that might be addressed with

these data: (1) Is it likely that any observed relationship between the

degree of impact and employment changes could be due to chance alone?

(2) How large is the relationship (if any) between degree of impact

and employment change?

     Both questions can be answered by combining the data for various

industries from these studies and computing the average 'elasticity"

of employment to minimum wage impacts. The basic assumption underlying

this procedure is that, apart from the minimum wage increase, employ-

ment in high-, medium-, and low-impact establishments in a particular

industry would have grown or declined by approximately the same pro-

portion. We allow     growth rates in different industries to differ.

Because we are computing an average elasticity, differences in degree

of responsiveness among establishments are ignored.

     Our preferred estimates of the employment elasticity are in the

-.05 to —.12 range, implying that a minimum wage increase which had a

           wage impact of 10 percent would reduce employment by about 1

percent.35 However, these estimates are not very precise, owing to the

small number of observations (four industries times four impact

groups) and would not pass conventional tests of statistical signifi-
 Page 63




 cance, i.e. ,   estimates of this size could arise due to chance alone
 when the "true" elasticity was zero. On the other hand, it is well to

 bear in mind that these estimates are probably biased downward by

 virtue of the low-wage high-impact establishments being concentrated

 in the South, where employment would have grown more rapidly in the

 absence of extended minimum wage coverage.

      In a descriptive study, Kenneth Gordon (1981) focuses on the

private household service sector's response to the 1974 minimum wage

coverage extension by comparing the rate of change in employment of

 private   household workers (defined to exclude employees of firms offering
 cleaning or similar services) before and after 1974. He finds that since
1974 the long-term decline in the absolute number of household workers

has slowed dramatically, precisely the opposite of what one would

expect to observe if the minimum wage were having an adverse effect on

employment in this sector. 36 Gordon does find that black women in this

industry experienced large employment losses over the 1974-78 period,

although he concludes that this is probably not related to the exten-

sion of minimum wage coverage since wages for blacks are considerably

higher than those for whites. Nevertheless, he points to other ways in

which a disemployment effect of the extension of coverage has been

manifested. There is some evidence that hours of work have been

slightly reduced and that the amount of involuntary part-time work has

increased. Gordon concludes that one principal reason for the modest

observed effects in this sector is the even more modest levels of

compliance with and enforcement of the law.
 Page 64




 B.   Employment Effects in Low-wage   Manufacturing
      In connection with the 1956 increase in the minimum wage, the

U.S. Department of Labor studied several manufacturing industries in

which it could reasonably be expected that employment effects would be

discernible. The analyses are based on establishment-level employment

data from before and after the date of the increase in the minimum

wage, as is described above in the discussion of newly covered service

industries. Twelve low-wage industries have been studied, and in some

cases the industries are further subdivided according to geographic

region. In general, the studies focus on the Southern portion of

low-wage industries, because the greatest impacts were expected to

occur there. In each industry, establishments are categorized into

"high-," "medium-," and "low-impact" groups according to the increase

in average wages needed to bring all workers in the establishment up

to the minimum, relative to other establishments in that industry. In

general, the percentage change in employment is found to be more

positive (or less negative) in the low—impact than in the high-impact

establishments.3? On average, the increase in employment in high-

impact firms is 5 percent lower than that in low-impact firms (U.S.

Department of Labor, ].959a, p. 9).

      Once again, the failure to fully exploit the available data

prompts us to reanalyze them in search of somewhat more precise

answers to the question of the employment impact of the change in the

minimum wage. Unlike the case of the service industries, analysis of
  Page 65




 the low-wage manufacturing sector is complicated by the fact that

 employment was measured in different months in different industries.

 On the other hand, more observations in the manufacturing data in-

 creases the precision of our estimates in comparison to the service

 industries. Our preferred estimate38 is -0.24, suggesting that a

 minimum wage increase with a direct 'impact' of 10 percent would

 reduce employment by 2.4 percent. The alternate specifications of the

 equation suggest employment losses which are larger than the preferred

 estimates, but not dramatically so (the median estimate is -0.36). The

 preferred estimate is statistically significant, i.e., it is quite

 unlikely that the result would arise from chance alone.

      In the broader context of estimating labor demand equations,

Zucker (1973) uses quarterly Ume-series data to analyze the impact of

minimum wage changes on employn'ent. in seven low-wage, nondurable-goods

manufacturing industries during the period 1947-1966. By and large, the

empirical results are in conformity with the theoretical expectations

that increases in the minimum wqe (relative to the actual average

wage) lead to reductions in employment. This disemployment impact is

found to prevail for both number of workers and number of hours

worked, and the results imply that the latter were adjusted both more

rapidly and to a larger extent than was the former.39

     Mixon (1975) also uses time-series data to investigate the impact

of minimum wage changes on employment in twenty (three-digit) low-wage

manufacturing industries during the period 1958-1969.° Using the
      Page 66




   length of the average (regular) workweek as the measure of employment,

   the minimum wage is found to have the expected effect in but 6 of the

  20 industries. Moreover, in only 2 of the 20 is there evidence that

  increasing the minimum resulted in a significant decrease in the

  average amount of overtime worked per week.

          Similarly mixed but somewhat stronger results are reported in

  Boschen and Grossman's (1981) study of eight low-wage manufacturing

  industries based on annual data for the period 1948-1979. The com-

  posite minimum wage effect on employment is found to be negative in

  six of the eight industries and, in half of these cases, the coeffi-

  cient is statistically significant. On average, the results imply that

 a 10 percent increase in the mnimum wage would diminish employment by

 just less than 1 percent.



 C.      Evidence from Low-Wage Areas

         In pursuit of the impact of the increase in the minimum wage to

 $1.00, effective March 1956, the U.S. Department of Labor also col-

 lected data on employment before and after the increase in seven

 low-wage areas. Comparisons of the change in covered employment with

 the "degree of impact" of the increased minimum show (1) larger em-

 ployment gainin high-impact areas when comparing February 1956 with

 April 1956 and (2) no relationship when comparing April 1956 with

• April 1957 (U.S. Department of Labor, 1959b, pp. 250 and 254).' A

 later analysis compares the growth of covered employment relative to
     Page 67




    uncovered employment. Covered employment 5 found to have grown faster,

-   although   the reverse is found when the analysis is restricted to those

    establishments included in both the pre- and post-increase surveys

    (U.S. Department of Labor, 1959a, p. 11).

         Similar data have been collected to study the effects of the 1961

    and 1963 increases in Southern metropolitan, Southern nonmetropolitan,

    and North Central noninetropolitan areas. An early analysis (U.S. De-

    partment of Labor, 1965, p. 14) of the Southern nonmetropolitan areas

    uses the high- versus low—impact comparison and finds no employment

    effects.

         A later report which analyzes data for all three types of areas

    places much less reliance on the degree-of-impact comparisons (U.S. De-

    partment of Labor, 1966a, pp. 64, 97, 130-131). While some problems

    are noted in newly covered retail trade establishments (U.S. Department

    of Labor, 1966a, pp. 66-67, 98, 131), the general conclusion is that

    there were no harmful employment effects. But this conclusion rests

    largely on the (virtually irrelevant) fact that covered employment

    generally rose after the minimum wage increases.

         Marshall Colberg (1960) anlyzes the growth of manufacturing

    employment in Florida from January 1956 to April 1956 by studying a

 matched sample of plants, but the data are aggregated so that the

 county is the unit of observation. He finds a negative relationship

• that is marginally statistically significant between the rate of

    increase in hourly wages and employment growth.42 Generally, there
 Page 68




 are, however, some hints that high-wage counties would have grown more

 rapidly even in the absence of the minimum wage (p. 114).

      In a time-series study over the 1970-1977 period, Charlie Carter

 (1978) finds that increases in the minimum wage have adverse effects

 on unemployment rates, with the degree of impact greater in low-wage

 regions like the Southeast. Specifically, his equation implies that a

 10 percent increase in the minimum wage (Kaitz) variable would raise

the jobless rate in the eight Southeastern states together by half a

percentage point.

     The most methodologically sophisticated study of the effect of

the minimum wage in low-wage industries and areas is that of Heckman

and Sedlacek (1981). They apply their model (discussed in Section I)

to manufacturing employment in South Carolina from 1948-71. They esti-

mate the employment effects of the minimum wage separately for the

four race-sex groups, but do not. report estimates for black fe-

males.43 They find that the "direct" effect of a 20 percent increase

in the minimum wage would be to reduce employment by 22, 36 and 34

percent for white males, white females, and black males, respectively.

The "indirect" effects of risinq skill prices on employment are posi-

tive, but small (no more than 3 percentage points for any group).

     As noted in Section I, the assumption of the model that all those who

remain employed in the covered sector experience the same proportional

wage Increase is questionable. Moreover, the wage distribution pre-

dicted by the model does not have the spike at the minimum wage we
 Page 69




observe in real world data. These issues are worrisome because Heckman

and Sedlacek (unlike nearly all other papers on this subject) use these

teoretjcal models in deriving rather than in interpreting the re-

sults. The highly nonlinear model makes it impossible, for us at

least, to trace through the consequences of these specification

choices for the estimates.
 Page 70




                             VI. CONCLUSIONS

     Our survey has focused on the effects of the minimum wage on

employment and unemployment. These effects are relevant to, but

do not uniquely determine, its efficiency and distributional

consequences. Thus, one cannot easily infer the deadweight loss

due to the minimum wage from its effects on labor force status."

Moreover, the effect of the minimum wage on the distribution of

income depends on its impact on the wage distribution and the

position of low—wage workers in the income distribution, as well as

the employment effects we have surveyed. The impact on wages includes

both the relatively straightforward raising of the wages of some

workers up to the minimum and the effect on wages above the minimum

(which is presumably positive for those just above the minimum, who

are good substitutes for minimum-wage workers). The impact on wages

would itself be the subject of a separate (though shorter) survey.

The relatively weak correlation between low wages and membership in low-

income households (Granilich, 1976; Kelly, 1976) weakens the impact

of the minimum wage on the distribution of household income, whatever

its effect on the distribution of earnings.5

     Theoretical analysis of the relationship between the minimum wage

and employment and unemployment has been extended considerably in the

last decade. A major development has been the formal treatment of a

minimum wage with partial coverage, and of workers' decisions to search

for covered employment rather than work in the uncovered sector. Ex-

tending that theory to deal with continuously variable labor quality

is a rather recent addition to the literature and has many applica-
     Page 71




     tions beyond the minimum wage. Thus far, at least, theoretical models

     which take account of continuously variable labor quality are relatively

     complex, and that complexity is a decided drawback in empirical work

     based on these models. An unanswered question is whether this complexity

     can be reduced without losing much of the realism of the models.

          The most frequently studied group in the empirical literature is

     teenagers. Time-series studies typically find that a 10 percent in-

i    crease in the minimum wage reduces teenage employment by I to 3
                                                                     per-

    cent. This range includes estimates based on a wide range of specifi-

    cations and on different sample periods, but all used the same basic
    data source, the CPS. We believe that the lower half of that range is

    to be preferred; to the extent that differences in results can be

    attributed to differences in the specification chosen, the better

    choices seem to produce estimates at the lower end of the range. There

    may well be problems comon to all the studies which lead to under-

    stating this impact, but that possibility remains to be shown. Cross—

 section studies of the effect on teenage employment produce a wider

range of estimated impacts, which are roughly centered on the range

found in the time-series research. Estimates of the minimum wage

effect of a 10 percent increase on
                                      teenage unemployment rates range
from zero to over three percent, but estimates from 0 to .75 percentage

points are most plausible.

        The effect of the minimum wage on young adult (20-24 years) em-

ployment is negative and smaller than that for teenagers. This con-

clusion rests on much less evidence than is available for those 16-19

years. The direction of the effect on adult employment is uncertain in

the empirical work, as It is in the theory. While some adults are un-
 Page 72




doubtedly displaced by the minimum wage, others may be employed because

the minimum wage protects them from teenage competition. Uncertainty

about the effects on adults is a serious gap in the literature, since

half of all minimum wage workers (and, of course, a larger fraction of

all workers) are adults.

     Less can be said with confidence about the effect of the minimum

wage on employment in low-wage industries and areas. In part, this

reflects a smaller number of studies and the fact that there is less re-

cent work (and therefore less work with now-common statistical tools)

to survey. Negative employment effects are a consistent feature of the

studies of low-wage manufacturing and agriculture, but findings are

quite mixed elsewhere. In several studies, minimum wage effects are

reported as the ratio of the percentage change in covered employment

to the percentage increase in average wages due to the minimum wage.

This elasticity of covered-sector labor demand is about -1.0 in some

cases, and less than one in absolute value in others.

     With few exceptions, the theoretical developments of the last

decade have had relatively little effect on the estimation of minimum

wage effects. It is difficult to distinguish a 1970 paper from a 1980

paper from the empirical work alone. While the theory is useful in

interpreting the results, its integration into the empirical work is,

at this point, incomplete.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (c:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C-c-,




                                                                                                                                                                         Table    I



                                                                                                                                          Time-Series Studies                by M.ijor Characteristits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                  -'                                                                                                         •0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I

                                                            •
                                                  1         1         5                I•                                                                                                                                                                                                         —

P1,1.1                            i44I          lANa-NI   NIM-7O     lA4-AI lAM-Al 1Ai4-IS       lAM-NI           NAS4-74         lAds-iS     NASa-hg      lASI-Il I%)-?7        1941-Ph    1,5175 1945-il        IAIP-!?     l%1-7I 1*1-7N 1954-79 1954-il 1954-79'                  1145-79 lAM-lA'   1954-IN
N.e.                                  •            N            N      q      q      p                                q              q           Q                                    a       i.
                                                                                                                                                             q       q                                  a                         q          g                      I)        I)           A
lhqri,.tIs.                           U
   551                                             U                              N                                   N              N'                                  N
                                                                                                                                                 I                                    I                 N            I            I          N
        S..                           I            N            I      I          I     N                             N               N          N                                    N                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                       II                                                                I                                           N            I          N             N
       U...                                        *                   I          N     N               N                                        I                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I
       Sibar                                                                                                                          1°                                                                                                                                      I                   N
                                                                                                                                                             N"          I'           N''     X                      N''
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iNI
N.p.s.tVa.-N.eI.
   I/P                                U                                                                                                          N                       N            I                 U            N
       N/P                            I                                                                N                  I                      N                       N            N           N                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                        N            N            N                        N                  N
       I/P                            N                                           N                                                                                                                                                          I                                                   I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
       WI                                          N            N                       I                                                                                                               N            N
       5%p                                                                                                                                                    N'                                                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N''                   N°              N'
I fi__       I 5r1.eNn
       N$a1                           S            I                   a          •A    C                                 a          C'          a            .          a            a       I         I            a            a          d             a         c        a            II     a
                                      N            N                   N           U                                      N
                                                                IN                                     IN
       I.niCycNs                                                                        I                                             N          N            *          N            I           N     N            N            N          N             N         N        N            N      N        N
       PNatIs.    $h.n,               N            N1                             N                    N                                                                 0                        0     N                         N          N"            N          I
       Armed    F..-t.g               N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                       N                  N'          N''        N                                    N           N                  N                       I'            N                  N                   N
       kNus,l(',r.IliiI               I                                                                N                  N                                                                       N
                                      N                                                                N
       Ia.Nsg.,sLP.-rA                                                                                                                N'1                                N                        N
       Nl                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N                        N                                      I
                                                                                                                                      N          N            I          N"           N           N     N                         N"         N"            N          N       N            N      N        N
       N.Is,                          NN                                                               N                N             N''                                             N''                            N°'                                                     N'                   N
YuucINss•l P..,                     II.,.,        Lh.a., leg                  [Ii,.,   La,        [Na,..-            tin...-         log       II,....-      to         La,      tine..
                                                                      t                                                                                                                       in...- S.ml-loq       toqit        Log        to,        tinner        log    Lio.n.         Lag   Lag     Log
                      •
lag    SI,ts.,                                                                         At              At                 IL          Al         AL                     oI            At                             AL          N-N                       At                              °
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AL

P11..
liP • N.esr Amer. pticNp.tN.as rat,                                                         a                                                     s$oN
                                                                                                S snanme. ArtIned I, ratio of                                e.q. I. average                          AL         Ala.., lag
                                                                                                                                              cone,-.,..
NIP • .agNage.st-pap,NaIN,, estis                                                                        earning, oeIhtrdby                                                                            I-I• •ieI.o negn Nagged on.               gn,-Iod
S/P • (N1/P)                                                                                      CeograIf ogp.eated ont a, bOth..- ,.,-)able
S/I    • AMaglagmeal      1ata
                                                                                            Ic •. hooeNy
                                                                                                  roaN .Ini,,,. onqe                                                                                   (.9 do..le loqa.Ilhok
                                                                                                •
                                                                                             I rat to of .InI.. neqe to averageneqe
'fNtk.t.s an.,unseal             INAA.n.a,l    tim. fln'iid,.                           'Pa.n150 000farm ea.loo,.ot                                                                                   '°I.an.gn on.lny500t/populatio,, ratio, total and rat IN of
'55rIc.Nte.'aI agN.ag,st          .iabi. t. rotloot ewaN-erIa., pogoNatloo                  1°TN,ros
                                                                                                                                                                                                      biaot-to-oI,I)r
IN,!
   ft.                                                                                          d.p ,ari.IIN., No ancona.t                       for coosraqe CA..5.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                       "N.te .1 return to college, overall tb.,., of toryice and
                                                                                            •19gn           aoly,geaolIon,                                                                            agrlcoit,,ral 00l,IOo,.nI pr000r(inn of
'fo,   ..Nt. r.gr.neIss snip.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on il-Il aith   chlld,-rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (female eqo,t on, ot, fyi
                                                                                            r              of   CIII ide.,      I-S yearn lo heal. r.5tonloo, only
tsagp   a.p.r.t.d set I,..            Its     .ini..,osgn narlali.    I, ts..Nl                                                                                                                       '°Yo.ath pnpolat inn        -   total popolatlo,, in.t.ad of
(NA??).                                                                                     '0NNOØ propo.(Ioo             of    teenager,    to total     raploped by                                 total 000uia(inn
                                                                                            N.doolry       (lOll year,)
'1s11a (Is Uslip, •Na ognatIsos           snip).                                                                                                                                                      0'I,enogs n.ployn.nt
'UNiter   ulsi                                                                              '°f.voag. eq,loyo.nt odolt .apIoy..nl
                    n.ge UarIalN., ii,. ,o.d.                                                                                                                                                         "Teenage eepleo..nt             total ooployn.nt
                                                                                            "FnnolNeontStatu, by                  labor     fnrc,sl.to,      popolallon.
Na)a sgest$an, s..Np.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      '°Mivl..      eaqe    In   current period toqelhrr .110                      nab..
                                                                                            "f..al.        eq.a.tloe, only                                                                                                                                           ..t   year,
'f..a.gnp-,,adolt saNs., and .daNt fsa.Ne, by               foil- and part-time
Itato,.                                                                                     ''Uyeeftt,          Cr00 SI       (Ill
                                                                                                                                                                                            0)
                                                                                                                                                                                            (0
                                                                                                                                                                                            (0
                                                                                                                                                                                            —4

                                                                                     Table   2


                                           Estimated   Impact of a 10 Percent Change in the Minimum Wage, by Sex, Age, and Race


                                     Percent Change In Emp1oent (lOx[lasticitX)                               Change In Unemployment Rate (in percentage points)
                        White Hales      Nonwhite Males  White Females   Nonwhite Females               White Males   Nonwhite Males   White Females   Nonwhite Females
                       16—17    18-19       16-11      18—19    16—17    18-19    16-17      18-19     16-17       18-19     16-17    18-19    16-17          18-19       16-17    18-19

Kaitz (1970)          .1.700*               -.075      1.988   .2.072*    .077    1.236       .002      •   344a     073a _1445a      1529a            181a   -.           .6098    4578

lovell (1972)b                  ---          ---       ---       ---      ---      ---        ---      - .043      -.087     -. 191   -. 224       .049        .019        .165    1.147*

Lovell (1973)b                                                            ---      ---        ---                                              -
                                                                                                       -.381       -. 555*   -.824    1. 152       .839            225    1.567     .701

kelly (1975)          .2.185* .1.164* ..3g57* -.326            _1.548*   - .174   -.149       .069

kelly (1976)C           .07                                    -1. 33*   -. 59*

Ragan (1977)                                                    —. 13a   -. 018              1.158     1.   1?      .688       98a     •73a            36a                  84a    _.318

Nattila (1978)C        -. 73a   -.   71a                       -1. 178   -. 908                        -. 068       •04a               -- -        .   328     •   178

Wachter and Kim
    (1979)            .2.777* -1.192       -4.458 -2.566 .3.578* -2.166                   -4.784        .6118       .3048      901a   11598            628a        099a   3171a    1.1538

Mattila (1981)C                                         ---              -.                                          14a                                      .028

Ragan (1981)             06a    •78a        4,40a                         •30a                   92a


Notes:

    =   Statistically significant (t-statlstlcs in parentheses below coefficients).
a       No significance tests available because reported coefficients were calculated from disaggregated data or (for unemployment effects) from employ-
        ment and labor-force effects.

        Equations are based on the unemployment/populationratio; while they have been converted to unemployment rate impacts, they are not strictly
        comparable.

c = Estimates are not disaggregated by race; Impacts shown in "white" columns are for all members of that column's age-sex group.
                                                                                    Table 3
                                                                                                                                                                         (p
                           Estimated Impact of a 10 Percent Change in the Minimum Wage on leenagers 16-19 Years,
                                                                                                                 by Sex and Race
                                                                                                                                                                         01
                                                Percent Change in Employment (lOxElasticity)              Chanae In Unemolovment Rate (in Dercentaae ooints)
                                              White     White    Nonwhite Nonwhite      All               White      White    Nonwhite    Nonwhite     FlI
                                              Males    Females    Males    Females
                                                                             ______   Workers             Males     Females    Males
                                                                                                _______                                   Females    Workers
kaitz (1970)                                                          1165a              433a              •190a          _034a       1556a              519a    006a
Adle (1971)
                                                                                                            731a          3256a       5793a         12761a      2525a
Moore (1971)
                                                                                                                   2.960*                       8.901*          3649a
Kosters and Welch (1972)                    3. 31                    -3. 56*        3. 01       -2. 96a
lovell (1972)b
                                                                                                          _067a                030a        210a          793a    001a
AdIe (1973)
                                                                                                           .160            .700*      1.925*           2.787*   .518*
Lovell (1973)b
                                                                                                          _415a           -.   181a        494a          505a    249a
kelly (1975)                                                                             080a
Kelly (1976)C                                      35a        96a
Gramlich (1976)                                                                                  _94a
Hashimoto and Mincer (1970) & Mincer (1976)              _2.05*                  -4.65          _2•31a             412a                           693a           •445a
Welch (1976)
                                                                                                _1.78*
Ragen (1977)                                  -             -. 09a    —.   35a         -. 10a    -. 65a     91a                        .83                10a    75a
Mattila (1978)C                               —.   72a     1.008       --   -                    -          00a                23a                               10a
Freeman (1979)                                                                                  2•46a                                  -   --            ---
Wachter and Kim (1975)                                      2722a                                2519a      431a               306a        265a        1814a     •512a
Iden (1980)                                                                                      226a
                                            _2.31*                   _3.81*
Abowd and Kllllngsworth (1981)                                                                  -2.13
Al-Salem, Quester & Welch (1981)C           -1. 19a

Betsey and Dunson (1981)                                 _1.50*                 —0.33           _139a
Boschen and Grossøan (1981)                                                                     -1.50
Brown, Gilroy and Kohen (1981)                           _1.08*                  .16             -.96              .12                          -.74             .02
Hamermesh (1981)                                                                                -1.21
Nagan (1981)                                  _41a            35a    _351a               51a     _52a
Notes: See notes, Table 2.
Page 76
                                                Table 4

                        Cross-Section Studies of the Federal Minimum Wage
                                    by Major Characteristics




                                      .
                                      E
                                      w
                                                   n
                                                   Li
                                                   L
                                                   v
                                                             U
                                                             I.
                                      .,-                    E'0
                                                   D         W

                                      .
                                      L.)          0
                                                   -O
                                                             '0

                                                             cI_
                                                             )         .
                                                                       E
                                                                       •0

                                                             c
                                                             -
                                      '0 —
                                                  .—'                  a—
                                      UN.
                                                   ca
                                                   )N.
                                                  .c—
                                                             JN.
                                                             C
                                                                       C
                                                                       S——
                                                                                   N.
                                                                                 i c.
                                                                                         C—
                                                                                         '0
                                                                                         o    —
                                                                                              C.,
                                      QJ_                              L)--      I..-,
                                                                                         Li
                                      a—
 Year                                 1970        1970       1966      1970      1970    1960-70
 Unit of Observation                 State        State      mdiv.     State     SMSA     State

 Disaggregation:       Sex                              x          x        x
                       Race                             x          x        X
                       Age                  x           x          x        x      x

 Dependent Variable                   E/P          E/P1                E/P2      E/P!         E/P
 Minimum Wage Variable
    Adjusted for Federal and
    State Coverage Variations               x           x          x        x                  x

 Other Independent Variables
   Youth/Adult Population                   x           x         x                x          x
   State or Area Unemployment Rate      x               x         x         x      x
   Urban/Total Population               x               x                   x
   Family Income                                        x         x         x
   State Youth
     Minimum Wage Differential                          x         x
   Compulsory Schooling Laws                            x
   Other                                                X4        Xs        x6                x8


Notes:     E/P = employment/population ratio
                 dummy variable for individual employment status
           E1

 'Four employment by enrollment statuses distinguished.

2Ful 1-time/part-time and covered/uncovered employment distinguished.

3lncluded in construction of minimum wage variable; not included as a separate variable.

4School expenditures per pupil; farm/total population; 1'female—headed"/total families with
children; nonwhite/total population; adult female education.

Proportion of teenagers enrolled in federal training programs; individual's urban resi-
dence (yes/no), schooling, armed forces, family size, etc.

6Unionization; median adult schooling; school expenditures per pupil; p, an estimate of
the dependent variable based on its 1960 value, adjusted for (non-minimum wage) trends.
All independent variables except p' expressed as proportional 1960 to 1970 changes.

'Also labor force participation and unemployment rates.

1Demand for agricultural workers; retail sales (as proxy for nonfarm labor demand; propor-
tion of nonwhite teenagers in school; duimiy variable for Southern states; E/P from pre-
vious Census, constrained to have coefficient of one.
  Page 77



                                      Table 5

                 Impact of a 10 Percent Change in the Minimum Wage
                               on Teenage Employment


                                Percent Change in Employment (lOxElasticity)

                                               16-19 Year Olds
                              White      White      Nonwhite   Nonwhite      All
                              Males     Females      Males     Females      Workers

Welch and Cunningham (1978)                                                   4828
Ehrenberg and Marcus (1979)
   Census Data                  15a        30a
                                                           b
   NIS Data                   65a
Freeman (1979)

Cunningham (1981)
   Employment                 -.07                  -.54          .00        -.
   Full—time Equivalent
                                                                        a
     Employment                .41                                .07             15a

Cogan (1981)


Notes:

*statistically significant.

acomputed from disaggregated estimates; no significance tests available

bNot reported. From reported coefficients, an estimate of 5 to 8 percent (posi-
tive) can be inferred.

CFu11_time equivalent calculated as (Full-time) +   (Part-time)
                                                                 Table                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                       (O
                                                                                                                                       Co

                                 Estimated Impact of a 10 Percent Change in the Minimum Wage
                                                                                                                                       03
                                            on Youth 20-24 Years, by Sex and Race




                    Percent Change in Employment (lOxElasticity)                Change in Unemployment Rate (in percentage points)

                    White        Nonwhite White       Nonwhite       All          White     Nonwhite White      Nonwhite       All
                    Males         Males   Females     Females     Workers         Males      Males   Females    Females      Workers

Moore (1971)                                                                           .271

Hashimoto and
Mincer (1970)   &
Mincer (1976)       _1.84*        _354*                                             •613a     1118a
Mattila (1978)C                                      24a                               •23a                    00a

Freeman (1979)                                                      1.0*                                             - --
Wachter and Kim
(1979)                   -.443    -2.109   _1.333*      2.973*           719a        558a     1178a                   016a     345a

Brown, Gliroy and
.Kohen (1981)                                                       -.26                                                      .23*


Notes

See notes, Table    2.
    Page 79




     Wa




                                         S


W
 m




              -J
 0


               I




                          I




              .L         .1.
                                             Employment
              E         E0      S
                                    in
               in




                    Figure 1.
    Page 80




        Wage




                                   .




               —   ———
Wi




W         -    ——
    0




                                         D




                                             Employment
                         E
                          0




                              Figure 2
Page 81




   1Converse et a]. (1981, p. 282) based on interviews with employers,

   report that only 12 percent of the disemployment due to the 1980 in-

   crease in the minimum wage took the form of discharges.


   2One "test" of the monopsony model is to determine whether it is com-

  mon for a small number of employers to employ a majority of the work-

  ers in a labor market. Robert Bunting's (1962, p. 101) study of 1,774

  labor markets (most "labor markets" being counties) found that the

  four largest employers employed at least half of the semi- and un-

  skilled workers in less than 3.7 percent of the labor markets.


 3lncreased effort is just one potential offset to a minimum wage.

 Other working conditions or fringe benefits, especially opportunities

 for on-the-job training, have been considered by Martin Feldstein (1973),

 Wilson Mixon (1975), David Luskin (1979), Walter Wessels (1980),

 Masanori Hashimoto (1981), Jacob Mincer and Linda Leighton (1981), and

 Edward Lazear and Frederick Miller (1981).


   41t is even possible that employers would gain from a minimum wage,

   though Pettengill does not emphasize that possibility. In effect, the

  minimum wage would lead employers to confront workers with a level-of-

  effort requirement that a competitive market would not otherwise

  permit.


  5the statement in the text ignores worker risk aversion. Allan King

  (1974) and Gramlich (1976) relax this assumption, though in a one-

 sector model context.
Page 82




   6 In the conventional theory of labor demand in competitive markets,

   the (constant-output) elasticities of demand are



                  = n(E)/ 2fl(W) =           k1   01   j
   where k is group j's share of total costs and                is the elasticity
                                                           o.
   of substitution of inputs i and j. The elasticity of total employment

   with respect to        is



                     =
                         h1 + (l-h)2


   Let j=3 index a composite nonlabor input. The substitutability

  assumptions in the text are that 012 and 013 are positive. Since 012

   and thus       is positive,   12 >              Using the fact that
                                         hn1.


                  kc =     0,
              3



  013>0 implies


                                  =
              012 < —a11(k1/k2)        _0iWmh/[W2(l_h)i

  Substituting k11 for each            in the expression for             and then sub-

  stituting the above inequality for 012 yields



                                         =
              1+2 < k1h11(1—t/W2)               h(1—/W2)1
Page 83




    7Converse, et al. (1981, p. 299) report, based on employer interviews

    that "Of establishments giving a wage increase to maintain differen-

    tials (after the 1980 increase in the minimum wage to $3.10), approxi-

    mately 47 percent indicated that the differential increases stopped

    at a wage of $4.00 per hour or less.'


    8Gilroy (1981, p. 162) reports that roughly half of all those receiv-

    ing the minimum wage or less received a wage equal to the minimum

    wage. "Equal to" the ninimum wage was defined as within a 10 cent

    interval centered on the minimum, but the overwhelming majority of

    these workers reported receiving exactly the minimum.



    9Robert Meyer and David Wise (1981) suggest another explanation --

    workweeks are adjusted until the ratio of marginal product to hours

    worked is equal to the minimum wage.


   '°For the economy as a whole, minimum wage workers (those earning the

  minimum wage or less) account for only about 4 percent of labor costs,

  and therefore an even smaller fraction of total costs (Brown,

  1 981 ).




  11The increase which took effect in March 1956 was approved in August

  1955; those which took effect in September 1961 and September 1963

  were approved in May     1961; those which became effective in Febru-

  ary 1967 and 1968 were approved late in September 1966; the May 1974

  and January 1975 increases were approved in April 1974; and the most
Page 84



   recent increases, which became effective in January 1978-81 were en-

   acted in November 1977. Thus, the first increase mandated by each

   amendment to the Fair Labor Standards Act was approved an average of

   3 months in advance of its effective date, while remaining increases

  were announced more than a year before they became effective.


    12Welch (1976) contains modifications to Welch (1974) as suggested by

    Frederic Siskind (1977). See also Welch (1977).


   13Gramlich (1976) finds that among teenagers (and to some extent among

   adult men) there is a rise in part-time employment and a decline in

   full-time employment due to increases in the minimum wage. Mattila's

   (1981, p. 77) results are consistent with those of Gramlich for 18-19

   year olds but not for 14-17 year olds. In studies of low-wage manu-

   facturing industries (not limited to young workers), Albert Zucker

   (1973) finds relatively small reductions in weekly hours worked by

   production workers due to the minimum wage, while Mixon (1975) finds

   some evidence that the minimum increased regular hours of work (over-

   time effects were weak and inconsistent among industries).



   14Comparisons of .pjyment estimates from the CPS and a special test

   sample utilizing the more restrictive but objective procedures were

   well within the expected sampling error; unemplqyment estimates under

   the new definition, however, were about 100,000 lower in 1966 than the

   official CPS figure. Unemployment among teenagers averaged 65,000 or 1

   full percentage point less than the CPS estimate.
Page 85


    15Brozen report5 changes in unemployment rates in months spanning

    minimum wage changes. This is formally equivalent to a dummy-variable

   approach.




   '6Kelly (1976) uses two other specifications: one which weights. the

   variable by the industrial distribution of adults, and another which

   assumes that the equilibrium (market-clearing) wage of teenagers has

   risen one-half as fast as average hourly earnings in manufacturing.



   17Wachter and Kim also use teen earnings in their relative wage term

   but, unlike Harnermesh,exclude coverage and do not include the teenage!

   adult wage ratio. This leads to the debatable restriction that doub-

   ling both average teenage wages and the minimum wage leaves teenage

   employment unaffected.


   18Note that virtually all of the studies discussed above estimate em-

   ployment equations whose dependent variable is the employment-to-

   ppulation rato. Thus, even studies which appear not to introduce

   supply side variables in the list of independent variables have ef-

   fectively included such factors in the dependent variable. If employ-

  ment of teenagers is really demand determined, the proper dependent

  variable would be employment, not the employment-to-population ratio.


 19The above argument might suggest an interaction of the minimum wage

 with relative teenage population in determining teenage unemployment.

 Given the difficulty in estimating even first-order effects precisely,

 the interactive approach has not been pursued. Note, however, that
Page 86


   equations which use the logarithm of the unemployment rate as the

   dependent variable implicitly impose a multiplicative interaction

   between relative supply and the minimum wage.


    20The only case where the estimates are dramatically affected by such

    a choice is Abowd and Killingsworth (1981). They present one equation

    based on a constrained nonlinear estimation, and another approximate,

    but still constrained, estimate.    We      include the former in the

    table; the approximation produces a larger estimated effect, -4.28

    (1.99). The constraints depend on the identification of teenagers with

   minimum wage workers and adults with above-minimum wage workers. Since

   about half of all teenagers earn the minimum wage, and less than half

   of all minimum wage workers are teenagers, we find the constraints

   quite debatable.

   21Wachter and Kim are quite cautious about the interpretation of their

   "minimum wage" coefficients in light of the failure of coverage to

   contribute to the equation. They argue that their coefficients can be

   seen as reflecting changes in government social welfare expenditures

   during the 1960s, as well as the minimum wage.



   22Kelly (1975 and 1976) also includes a welfare variable in equations

   explaining female labor force status. However, his "residualization"

   of this variable effectively guarantees that the estimated minimum

   wage impact will not be appreciably affected by the welfare variable's

   inclusion.
Page 87



    23We find that the two specification choices with the largest impact

    are including a measure of welfare benefits or the young adult (20-24)

    population share. Both tend to increase the estimated impact of the

    minimum wage by about one half of a   percentage point, compared with the Table
    3 value. However, in each case the added variable has a significant

    but wrong-signed (positive) effect on teenage employment.


   24Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen (1981) find no significant effect of the

   decision on whether to include the teenage population share in an

   equation which runs the entire 1954-79 sample period and which also

   includes most of the previously mentioned control variables.



   25The only papers which compare lagged and unlagged forms of the same

   equation show relatively small differences. Hamermesh (1981) reports

   slightly larger disemployment effects with lagged responses, but

   prefers the unlagged estimates because the a flriori case for lags is

   weak. Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen (1981) add an Almon lag to an equation

   which includes the current-quarter value but cannot reject the hypo-

   thesis that there is no lagged response. For a discussion of the diffi-

   culty in estimating distributed lag models in this context, see

   Wachter (1976).



  26Differences in average wage level prove far more important than dif-

  ferences in Federal coverage (Welch and Cunningham, 1978, p. 144).
Page 88


   27Unfortunately, adding additional control variables need not bring

   the minimum wage effect closer to its "true' value. For example, mea-

   surement error in the minimum wage variable 'ould tend to reduce the

   absolute value of its coefficient; adding variables correlated with

   it (i.e. ,   correlated   with average wage levels) would further depress

   the estimated minimum wage effect.

  281n the early section of his paper, Freeman also includes a broader

  set of control variables, but the minimum wage coefficients for these

  equations are not reported.



  29Cogan's results may be distorted by the form chosen for several of

  the control variables. For example, in explaining the change in the

  proportion of nonwhite male teenagers in each state who are employed,

  his variable controlling for changing agricultural demand is the num-

  erical change in such labor demand (e.g., -20,000 workers) rather than

  the change in (agricultural demand/population).



   30Linneman reports that, when wage gains and employment reductions

   are both taken into account, earnings of adultswho would otherwise

   earn less than the minimum wage are reduced by the minimum wage in-

   crease. This finding would imply at least a 1 percent reduction in employ-

   mcnt of these      adults in response to a 1 percent increase in the

  minimum.
Page 89



   31.Jf   workers with predicted wages slightly above the minimum are the

   only above-minimum workers to experience employment reductions, the

   result could be easily rationalized. -If W is the offered wage for a

   worker at the lower minimum wage, W is the predicted wage, BndWm the

   minimum wage,then WW ,the condition that the worker would be displaced

   by the minimum, would still occur with nonzero probability even if W*

   exceeded W.In fact, Linneman's actual disemployment estimates run too

   far up the predicted wage distribution for this to be a likely explan-

   ation.



   32An example of earlier agricultural research that is   consistent   with
  4iis position is Frank Maier (1961).



   33See Gardner (1981) for an extended discussion of this.



  341n the other two studies, as well as in the study of eating and

  drinking places, the conclusion is based on the average percent change

  in employment in 'thigh-," "medium-, "low-," and "nu-impact"establish

  ments. In the study of laundry and cleaning services, however, the

  conclusion rests on a cross-tabulation of the degree of impact and

  the direction of change in employment (no change, increase, decrease).

  Using Appendix Table 35 of the report, we calculated the average em-

  ployment change by impact group. the measure used in the other studies.
Page 90



    There is a clear negative relationship between degree of impact and

    employment change:


          pct                None      Low     -

          Percent Change
          in Employment      1.5       -1.0        -2. 0        -4.6




   35The choice of weights makes a considerable difference to the

   estimates. If the less plausible establisirnient weights are used,

   the employment effects would be considerably larger and "significant"

   statistically. As noted in footnote 34, there is a consistent negative

   relationship between impact and employment growth in laundry and dry

   cleaning (an industry with many small establishments) but not in other

   industries, so that the establishment weighting gives greater weight to

   the industry with the strongest negative relationship.


 36This is in accord with the findings by Yale Brozen (1962), but for a

 very different reason, under different circumstances. When the minimum

 wage rose, Brozen finds that the number of persons employed as house-

 hold workers actually rose. Apparently, some of the persons who lost

 jobs in the covered sectors as well as those who would normally have

entered and failed to find work, took jobs in the then-noncovered

household sector.
Page 91




  37Depending on how "industry" is defined, and the time after the in-

  crease when the increase was measured, this pattern was observed in

  eight industries out of twelve (U.S. Department of Labor 1959a, p. 9),


  ten out of eleven (George Macesich and Charles Stewart, 1960, p. 286),

  nine out of fourteen (John Peterson and Charles Stewart, 1969, p. 78),

  or thirteen out of fourteen (Peterson and Stewart, 1969, p. 79). See

  also H.M. Douty (1960).


   38The "preferred" estimate uses all of the available data and weights

   the observations by initial employment. The number of industry dummy

   variables included and the inclusion or exclusion of average establish-

   ment size make almost no difference, given the choice of dependent

   variable and weighting.



   39Zucker's estimates of the elasticity of employment with respect to

   the minimum wage (relative to the one-period lag average wage) is -0.91

   for hours of work and —0.79 for number of workers (p, 275).



   40This study actually attempts to focus attention on other economic

   effects of the minimum wage using such dependent variables as the

   average amount of overtime work per week, the layoff rate and the

   quit rate. All in all, the empirical results for those measures are

   no more regular than those for the length of the regular workweek.

   Nixon enters the real minimum and average wages as separate variables,

   so his estimate of the effect of the minimum wage would not be affected

   by changes in employment due to the average wage level per Se.
Page 92



   41The latter comparison is somewhat strange, since the base period' of

  ...the comparison Is one month after the minimum became effective. Pre-

   sumably, the intention is to determine whether there are any "extra"

   effects that occur after the first month at the new minimum.



    42Each 1 percent increase in average wages is associated with a .12

    percent reduction in employment when all counties are included. Among

    low-wage counties, the estimated relationship is much larger (.92 percent

   versus .12 percent) but the estimate is less significant statistically

   (.15 versus .10 level) (Colberg. 1960, p. 113).


   3They found it impossible to obtain reasonable estimates of the

   parameters of the skill distribution for black females. They attribute

   this to the enormous increase in black female employment in

   manufacturing (a 791 percent increase from 1960 to 1971),

   presumably due to factors not captured by the model

   Since their model is overidentified, the exclusion of a demographic

   group has no effect on the identification of the remaining parameters

   of their model.


   Effects on labor force status depend on but often do not identify

   the underlying supply and demand elasticities. Moreover, the offsets"

   mentioned in footnote 3 would greatly complicate the measurement of

   deadweight loss.

   5For recent studies on the effects on the wage and income

   distributions, see Report of the Minimum Wage Study Commission

   (1981), vol. VI and VII.
Page 93




                                 REFERENCES



 Abowd, John ft and Killingsworth, Mark R. "Structural Models of the

      Effects of Minimum Wages on Employment by Age Groups,' in Report

      of the minimum wage study commission, volume V. Washington, D.C.:

     U.S. Government Printing Office, 1981, pp. 143-69.

Adie, Douglas K. "The Lag in Effect of Minimum Wages on Teenage Unem-

     ployment." Proceedings of the Industrial Relations Research

     ciation. 24th Annual Meeting, New Orleans, December 27-28, 1971,

     pp. 38-46.

________________   "Teenage Unemployment and Real Federal Minimum
     Wages." J. Polit. Econ. ,   March/April   1973, 81, pp. 435-41.

________________ and Chapin, Gene. "Teenage Unemployment Effects of

     Federal Minimum Wages," Proceedings of the Industrial Relations

     Research Association. 23rd Annual Meeting, Detroit, December 28-

     29, 1970, pp. 117-38.

_______________ and Galloway, Lowell. "The Minimum Wage and Teenage

     Unemployment: A Comment," Western Econ. J., December 1973, 11,

     pp. 525-28.

Al-Salam, Nabeel, Quester, Aline, and Welch, Finis. "Some Determinants

     of the Level and Racial Composition of Teenage Employment," in

    The economics of legal minimum wages. Edited by Simon Rottenberg.

    Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1981, pp. 124

    54.
Page 94




Barth, Peter S. "The Minimum,Wage and Teen-Age Unemployment,"

      ings of the Industrial Relations Research Association. 22nd An-

     nual Meeting, New York, December 29-30, 1969, pp. 296-310.

Betsey, Charles L. and Dunson, Bruce H. "Federal Minimum Wage Laws and

     the Employment of Minority Youth." Papers and Proceedings of the

     American Economic Association. 93rd Annual Meeting, Denver, Sep-

     tember 5-7, 1980, pp. 379-84.

Boschen, John F. and Grossman, Herschel I. "The Federal Minimum Wage,

     Employment, and Inflation," in Report of the minimum wage study

     commission, volume VI. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing

     Office, 1981, pp. 19-43.

Brozeri, Yale. "Minimum Wage Rates and Household Workers," J. Law

     Econ. ,    April   1962, 5, pp. 103-9.

_____________     "The Effect of Statutory Minimum Wage Increases on Teen-

     age Employment," J. Law Econ. ,      April   1969, 12, pp. 109-22.

Brown, Charles. "Estimating the Effects of a Youth Differential on

     Teenagers and Adults," in Report of the minimum wage study

     mission, volume V. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing

     Office, 1981, pp. 389-427.

Brown, Charles, Gilroy, Curtis, and Kohen, Andrew. "Time-Series Evi-

     dence of the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Youth Employment and

     Unemployment," Unpublished paper, 1981.

Bunting, Robert L. Employer concentration in local labor markets.

     Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1962.
  Page 95




  Burns, Arthur. The management of pçsperity. New York: Columbia Uni-

       versity Press, 1966.

  Carter, Charlie. "The New Minimum Wage: A Threat to Southeastern Jobs?'

       Econ. Rev. (Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta), March/April, 1978,

       pp. 30-4.

  Clark, Kim B. and Summers, Laurence H. "The Dynamics of Youth Unem-

      ployment." Forthcoming in Youth Unemployment: Its Nature, Causes,

      and Consequences. Edited by Richard Freemand and David Wise.

 Cogan, John. "The Decline in Black Teenage Employment: 1950-1970."

      Working paper No. 683. National Bureau of Economic Research, May

      1981.

 Colberg, Marshall. "Minimum Wage Effects on Florida's Economic Develop-

      ment," J. Law Econ. ,   October 1960, 3, pp. 106-17.

 Cotterill, Philip 0. and Wadycki, Walter J. "Teenagers and the Minimum

      Wage in Retail Trade," J. Human Res. ,   Winter   1976, 11, pp. 69-85.

 Cotterman, Robert F. "The Effects of Federal Minimum Wages on on the

      Industrial Distribution of Teenage Employment," in The economics

      of legal minimum wages. Edited by Simon Rottenberg. Washington, D.C.:

      American Enterprise
                            Institute, 1981, pp. 42-59.


Converse, Muriel, et al. "The Minimum Wage: An Employer Survey," in

     Report of the minimum ge study commission, volume VI. Washing-

     ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1981, pp. 241-341.

Cunningham, James. "The Impact of Minimum Wages on Youth Employment,

    Hours of Work, and School Attendance: Cross-sectional Evidence

    from the 1960 and 1970 Censuses," in The economics of legal mini-
Page 96




     mum wages. Edited by Simon Rottenberg. Washington, D.C.: American

     Enterprise Institute, 1981, pp. 88-123.

Douty, H.M. "Some Effects of the $1.00 Minimum Wage in the United

     States," Economica, May 1960, 27, PP. 137-47.

Easely, James E. and Fearn, Robert M. 'Minimum Wages and Unemployment

     of Teenagers," Unpublished paper, North Carolina State Univer-

     sity, 1969.

Egge, Karl, et al. "Changes in the Federal Minimum Wage and the Em-

     ployment of Young Men, 1966-67," in Youth unemployment and

     mum wages. Bulletin 1657, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of

     Labor Statistics, 1970, pp. 55-67.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. , and Marcus, Alan J. "Minimum Wage Legislation

     and the Educational Outcomes of Youth." Mimeographed. February

     1979. Forthcoming in Research in labor economics. Edited by

     Ronald Ehrenberg. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Feldstein, Martin. "The Economics of the New Unemployment," Public

     Interest, Fall 1973, 33, pp. 3-42.

Fisher, Alan A. "The Minimum Wage and Teenage Unemployment: A Comment

     on the Literature," Western Econ. J., December 1973, 11, pp.

     514-24.

Fleisher, Belton M. Minimum      regulation in retail trade. Washing-

     ton, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1981.

Folk, Hugh. "The Problem of Youth Unemployment," in The transition

     from school to work, A report based on the Princeton manpower
 Page 97




      symposium, May 9-10, 1968, pp. 76-107.

 Freeman, Richard B. "Economic Determinants of Geographic and Indivi-

      dual Variation in the Labor Market Position of Young Persons."

      Paper presented at National Bureau of Economic Research Confer-

      ence on Youth Unemployment, March 1979. Forthcoming in Youth

      unemployment: its nature, causes, and consequences. Edited by

      Richard Freeman and David Wise.

Gallasch, H.F. "Minimum Wages and the Farm Labor Market," Southern

     Econ. J., January 1975, 41, pp. 480-91.

Gardner, Bruce. "Minimum Wages and the Farm Labor Market." Amer. 3.

     Agr. Econ. ,    August 1972, 54, pp. 473-6.

_______________     "What Have Minimum Wages Done in Agriculture?" in The

     economics of legal minimum wages. Edited by Simon Rottenberg.

     Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1981, pp. 210-

     32.


Gavett, Thomas. "Introduction" to Youth unemployment and the minimum

     wage. Bulletin 1657, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor

     Statistics, 1970, pp. 1-29.

Gilroy, Curtis L. "A Demographic Profile of Minimum Wage Workers," in

     Report of the minimum         study commission, volume II. Washing-

     ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1981, pp. 153-213.

Goldfarb, Robert S. "The Policy Content of Quantitative Minimum Wage

    Research." Proceedings of the     Industrial   Relations Research As-

    sociation. 27th Annual Meeting, San Francisco, December 28-29,
