                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             WAGES AD PRICES ARE NOT ALWAYS STICKY:
        A CENTURY OF EVIDENCE FOR THE U.S., U.K. ND JAPA1



                        Robert J. Gordon



                      Working Paper No. 847




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          January 1 982




This research was supported by the National Science Foundation, and
is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to George
Kahn, Stephen King, and Joan Robinson, for their devoted and
inspired assistance, and to participants in seminars at the
Cambridge (U.K.) Department of Applied Economics and the SSRC Labor
Seminar at Queen Mary's College, London, for helpful suggestions
and provocative questions.
                                                   NBER Working Paper # 847
                                                               January 1982


             WAGES AND PRICES ARE NOT ALWAYS STICKY:
       A CENTURY OF EVIDENCE FOR THE U.S., U.K., AND JAPAN

                             ABSTRACT


     Arthur M. Okun's last book, Prices and Quantities, contributes a theory
of universal wage and price stickiness, but provides no explanation at all of
historical and cross country differences in behavior. The core of this paper
provides a new empirical characterization of price and wage changes over the
last century in the U.S., U.K., and Japan, in order to demonstrate the wide
variety of historical responses that have occurred. Equations for changes in
the GNP deflator, in the hourly manufacturing wage rate, and in the real wage
rate are estimated, with attention to the influence of both demand and supply
disturbances. Because of the long sample period involved, extending back to
1875 for the U.K. and to 1892 for the other two countries, there is extensive
attention to shifts in parameters.
     My description of U.S. data differs from Okun's framework by rejecting
his wage—wage formulation of the postwar U.S. inflation inertia process, by
allowing the impact of demand disturbances to depend on both the level and
rate of change of aggregate demand, by allowing demand to influence price—
setting as well as wage—setting behavior, and by stressing the fact that in-
ertia in the U.S. adjustment process is purely a postwar phenomenon rather than
the universal fact implied by Okun. The results for the U.K. and Japan com-
pound the conflict with Okun's analysis, since in these two countries wages
have been far from sticky, even in postwar years. Prices and wages were
particularly flexible in the U.S. during World War I and its aftermath, in
Japan since 1914, and in the U.K. since the mid—1950s.
     The last half of the paper provides an analysis of behavior in labor
markets and product markets. The unique nature of the U.S. postwar adjustment
reflects its unique institution of three—year staggered wage contracts, and
the analysis attempts to explain why we do not observe perfect insulation of
nominal wages from shifts in nominal demand. The section on the product mar-
kets examines the factors that explain why prices are often pre—set, and why
the speed of adjustment to demand shocks is sensitive to the nature of ag-
gregate information available.
                                              Robert J. Gordon
                                              Department of Economics
                                              Northwestern University
                                              2003 Sheridan Road, Room G—l80
                                              Evanston, IL 60201
                                              (312) 492—3616
                           TABLE OF CONTENTS

  I. INTRODUCTION                                                  2


     Wage and Price Stickiness: The Central Issue in
        Macroeconomic Theory                                       2
     Unanswered Questions in Okun's Analysis                       4
     Comparative Macroeconomic History as a Stimulus for New
        Answers                                                    5

 II. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON PRICE AND WAGE RESPONSIVENESS           8


     The Basic Specification                                       8
     Estimates of Price and Wage Equations for the U.S.           12
     Table 1                                                      16
     Estimated Price and Wage Equations for the U.K.              21
     Table 2                                                      22
     Estimated Price and Wage Equations for Japan                 25
     Table 3                                                      26
     Comparison with Okun's Theoretical Framework                 28
     Limitations of the Results                                   30

III. WAGES, CONTRACTS, AND THE MYSTERY OF THE MISSING ESCALATOR   32

     Explaining Cross—Country Differences in Nominal Wage
        Flexibility                                               32
     The Missing Escalator                                        33
     Indexation and Product—Market Adjustment                     38

IV. THE RESPONSE OF PRICES TO DEMAND SHOCKS WHEN PRICES ARE PRESET 40

     Why Prices are Pre—Set                                       40
     Modeling the Demand Responsiveness of Prices as a Varying
        Rather than Fixed Parameter                               44

 V. CONCLUSION                                                    49

     FOOTNOTES                                                    51,

     DATA APPENDIX                                                56
                                    2




            "In   dealing with suppliers, says Gale Frank, purchasing
            manager for Aro Corp., 'the worst problem in purchasing today
            is the attitude that the supplier has a right to automatically
            pass along cost increases. We're trying to combat    that."




                                I. INTRODUCTION


       Macroeconomic research needs to be reoriented away from a search

for the theoretical underpinnings of wage and price stickiness, and

toward an explanation for the enormous differences in the degree of

stickiness observed over ;itne and across countries. This paper begins

by criticizing Arthur Okun's book for contributing a theory of universal

wage and price stickiness, and for providing no explanation at all of

histor1cal and cross—country differences in behavior. It then provides

a new empirical characterization of price and wage changes over the last

century in the U.S., U.K., and Japan, in order to demonstrate the wide

variety of historical responses that have occurred. Finally, it lays

out a series of issues that must be treated in theoretical models, if

this historical experience is to be adequately explained.


Wage   and Price Stickiness: The Central Issue in Macroeconomic    Theory


       Economists have been   obsessed with sticky wages for almost 50
years,   an occupational disease that can be traced back to Keynes' deci-

sion in the General Theory to embed stickiness in his labor market's

rigid nominal wage. An initial generation of Keynesian models joined

rigid nominal wages to a traditional classical treatment of the product
                                3




market that retained perfect competition and price flexibility, as in

the General Theory. This competitive product market assumption was

retained in most postwar macroeconomics textbooks; in Milton Friedman's

verbal treatment that gave rise to the Friedman—Lucas supply function;

and in the large new literature on labor—market contracts for firms that

are price—takers in product markets and wage—setters in labor

markets 2

     Early in the postwar years, however, "mainline" macroeconomics

diverged from the competitive product market assumption, by shifting to

a stress on "full—cost pricing" that made the price level mimic the

sticky wage level, with little if any role for a flexible price response

to changes in aggregate demand. This view of the wage adjustment proc-

ess as a slowly crawling tortoise, and the price level as the slowly

crawling shadow beneath the tortoise, led several prominent economists

to develop the "fix—price" model of macroeconomic behavior, in which

output is viewed as a residual that reflects the interaction of variable

nominal demand growth with sluggish wage and price adjustment.3 At the

same time, frustrated with the failure of mainline macroeconomists to

provide an adequate theoretical explanation of stickiness, the "new

classical macroeconomists" in the 1970s reverted to the market—clearing

paradigm, in which there was no distinction between wages and prices——

both could move rapidly enough to clear markets and to allow agents to

remain on voluntary (or "notional") supply curves. Neoclassical agents

were pushed off their voluntary schedules not by the effective demand

constraints of the mainline models, but only by expectational errors

having a duration roughly equal to the publication lag of the St. Louis

Federal Reserve Bank weekly financial statistics.
                                  4




Unanswered Questions in Okun's Analysis

      Arthur Okun's last book can be viewed as an attempt to provide the

missing theory needed to explain the mainline assumption of macro-

economic wage and price stickiness.4 While initially dazzled by Okun's

common sense, insight, and expository skill, however, I have become

convinced that this great man wrote a book that is more satisfactory as

a description of microeconoinic behavior than as a contribution to the

macroeconomic debate on the causes of output fluctuations.5 The basic

problem is that Okun treated the postwar U.S. economy in isolation from

its own past history and from the development of labor— and product—

market institutions In other industrialized nations. The book contains

no ref ererce to any event in U.S. history prior to the post—Korean era,

other than a single reference to World War II price controls and another

to the implauibility of the search model as an explanation of worker

behavior during the Great Depression. The book's index contains only a

single reference to another country and that, to the U.K., Involves

in'comes policy rather than cross—country differences in macroeconomic

behavior. These omissions are serious, for neither Okun's "career"

long—term attachments model of the labor market, nor his cost—plus

"customer" model of the product market, is able to explain historical

and cross—country differences in behavior. Each model emerges from

reasoning on the situation of a universal homo economicus floating free

in time and space.

      Historical and cross—country differences raise questions that must

be addressed by any reasonably complete theory of price adjustment and

inflation. Okun, with his sluggish wages and sticky prices, seems to be

the   source for the view that in the current year output responds by 90
                                5




percent and prices by only 10 percent of a change in nominal GNP.6 Yet

in the U.S. in World War I and its aftermath, the division was much

closer to 10—90 than 90—10 (see below). In the hyperinf1aons that

Sargent has proposed as a counterexample to current mainline thinking,

the division was more or less 0—100 within the current month.7 What

factors explain the ability of customer markets to shift from sluggish

to speedy price adjustment in these cases, and could those factors

recur? Similarly, wages in the postwar U.S. have responded more slug-

gishly to nominal GNP changes than in most other countries, yet long—

term career attachments between workers and firms are as important, if

not more important, in Japan, Germany, and elsewhere, as in the U.S.

     Okun's labor and product markets not only lack a historical or

cultural dimension, but they also provide almost no room for interaction

between agents and policymakers. Wage behavior in Germany in 1973—74 or

Japan in 1979—80 may be hard to explain in isolation from the expecta-

tions of workers and firms about the likely actions of monetary policy—

makers; reverse causatIon is relevant as well, if the different

"propensity to accommodate" apparent on the part of, say, the British

vs. the German central bank, can be traced to their different expecta-

tions about the likely behavior of individual wage and price decisions

in response to their own monetary initatives.


Comparative Macroeconomic History as a Stimulus for New Answers


     In three previous papers I have suggested economic and noneconomic

factors that might help partially to explain historical and cross—

country differences in macroeconomic behavior. The first began as a

critique of those monetarists whose explanation of inflation consisted

of little more than a time—series chart showing a high historical
                                  6



correlation   between prices and money, without any explanation of why the

rate of monetary expansion had differed across time and between

countries. Although my analysis involved wartime finance, fixity of

exchange rates, and the political independence of central banks, its

main point was that central banks were less likely to "supply inflation"

in response to fiscal or supply—shock pressures if wage— and price—

setting institutions allowed a rapid and complete response of prices to

monetary restriction.8 This then required an explanation of differences

in those institutions. The second paper suggested that shifts in the

degree of price flexibility over time might be fruitfully explained by

embedding Friedman's and Lucas' distinction between local and aggregate

information in a model of price—setting by monopolists.9 The most

recent exercise documented the unusual sluggishness of U.S. postwar

nominal wage adjustment compared to that in Britain and Japan,

attributed this difference to the form of labor—market contracts, and

suggested that contract form and length was related in part to cultural

attitudes toward social and class conflict.'0

     The core of this paper, contained in Part II, consists of an

empirical   analysis of historical shifts in the degree of price and wage
flexibility in the U.S., U.K. and Japan. These results develop a set of
puzzles that form a research agenda for macroeconomic theory. Part III

develops a few ideas to explain historical and cross—country differences

in labor—market behavior. A central issue in any macroeconomic

discussion of labor markets is the extent of the contingencies, if any,

to which labor—maricet contracts are indexed; the forces working against

full indexation of labor markets are the same as those that prevent

firms from fully insulating their own real outcomes from nominal

shocks. Part IV investigates the economic forces that distinguish
                                    7




auction markets from customer markets where prices are set, and

addresses the most difficult issue, the determinants of shifts in the

speed of adjustment by firms which have access to aggregate information.

       This paper does not develop mathematical theorems, or firm solu—

tions to tractable, narrowly defined problems. Instead, it         contains
conjectures   and suggestions about a broad area in which microeconomics
and macroeconomics overlap. Although some of the themes developed here
echo those of   my   recent treatment of   the product market in the Journal

of   Economic Literature, this paper differs by including    a   more extensive
empirical   treatment of parameter shifts across time and countries, by

forswearing any systematic survey of related papers and ideas, and by

attempting to include some specific suggestions about the problems that

must be faced in developing formal models of product—market behavior.
                                 8




        II. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON PRICE AND WAGE RESPONSIVENESS


     This section presents estimates of simple reduced—form equations

that describe the response of price and wage changes to demand disturb-

ances and supply shocks. A single equation, using an identical

specification, is estimated from annual data for the U.S., U.K., and

Japan over a period beginning in the late nineteenth century and extend-

ing to 1980. The main purpose of the econometric work is to

characterize shifts in the responsiveness of wages and prices to changes

in aggregate demand over this long historical period. The results

provide the basis for my claim in the introduction that wages and prices

are less sticky and inertia—bound in postwar U.K. and Japanese data than

in the postwar U.S., and that inertia in U.S. wage and price behavior is

purely a postwar phenomenon.


The Basic Specification

     In the notation used here, upper—case letters designate logs of

levels, and lower—case letters designate rates of change. The basic

hypothesis to be tested emerges from separate equations for changes in

wages (w) and prices        in both of which the explanatory variables

include the level and change in real aggregate demand, and a vector of

supply shift terms. In both equations the demand effect is proxied by

the level and change in the "output ratio," that is, the ratio of actual

real GNP to "natural" (or "potential") real GNP    =    — Q).     In the

postwar U.S. this output ratio concept has a high negative correlation,

through Okun's Law, with the demographically adjusted unemployment rate

that George Perry introduced into the U.S. Phillips curve literature a

decade ago.1'
                                         9



        The rate of wage change (w), then, is written as:



                                     +
(1)
             w      a1(a0 +              a2Q + a3Q + a4z + u,

where         is a vector of supply shift variables relevant for wage
behavior, and 1-'wt is an error term. Here a1 =         1   would be consistent
with a vertical long—run Phillips curve, and in this case a0             could   be
interpreted as the equilibrium growth rate of the real wage when the log

output ratio is zero and supply shocks are absent (zt =            0).    The

parallel price markup equation is:



             Pt = b1(w   —
(2)
                              b0) + b2Q + b3Q + b4z + u,


where         is a vector of supply shift variables relevant for price

behavior, and u is an error term. The constant term b0 can be inter-

preted as the rate of productivity growth relevant for price—setting

behavior, e.g., "standard productivity," so that w — b0 is the growth

in "standard unit labor cost."

        When the wage change equation (1) is substituted for w in equation

(2), and when we relabel coefficients, we obtain the following reduced

form price—change equation:



             Pt = c0 + c1p1 + c2Q + c3lxQ + c4z + Ut,


where

        c0    b1(a1a0—b0);     c1 = b1a1;           + b1a2; c3 =
                                              c2 = b2                    b3 + b1a3;
          z =bz
        c4t
              4pt+ba z
                   l4wt          ;       and tu =u
                                                 Pt
                                                    +bu
                                                      lwt
                                 10




Several simplifications are introduced into (1) and (2) in order to

allow this simple version of (3) to emerge. First, lagged wages are

excluded from both (1) and (2), and thus do not appear in (3).      Second,

only a single lagged value of price change is entered ti' rather

than a polynomial in the lag operator as in my more detailed studies of

quarterly U.S. data. Next, the growth in the equilibrium real wage and

in standard productivity are introduced as constants rather than varia-

bles, allowing estimation to proceed without the introduction of data on

productivity change. Two obvious advantages of combining (1) and (2)

into (3) are evident immediately——no data on wages need be collected,

and no attempt need be made to decide in advance which supply shifts

(tax changes, programs of government intervention) are relevant for

wage—setting as opposed to price—setting behavior.12

      It is possible to derive an alternative version of (3) by defining

"adjusted nominal GNP growth" as the excess of the growth rate of

nominal GNP over that of natural real GNP ( =      — q).   We can sub-

stitute the identity



(4)
                Q] +Y —     Pt


into (3), and after simplifying, obtain:




(5)      Pt =              + c1p1 + (c23); + c2Q_1 +
                i+c3k0                                     c4z + ut].


In this framework the significance of the estimated coefficient on the

lagged output ratio indicates the presence of an output "level effect,"
                                11




while the difference between the coefficient on adjusted nominal CNP

growth and the lagged output ratio indicates the relative size of the

"rate of change effect."3 If the coefficients on lagged price change

and on adjusted nominal GNP change sum to unity, then the "acceleration—

ist" hypothesis is validated, in the sense that a positive output ratio

(Qt_i>O) or an adverse supply shift (z>O) causes an acceleration of the

inflation rate relative to its past value.'4

     Questions may be raised about the appearance of nominal GNP change

in equation (5), an equation explaining price change. Nominal GNP

change is indeed an endogenous variable, although no more so than the

current unemployment rate that has traditionally been used in Phillips

curve studies. The choice, then, between the alternative specifications

(3) and (5) comes down to whether nominal or real GNP is "more

exogenous." The advantage of using equation (5) for estimation becomes

clear when considering a period like 1915—22, when prices responded

extremely rapidly to changes in nominal GNP, with little residual effect

on real GNP. The exogenous event in this instance was an upsurge in

money—financed nominal spending. In a world of complete and contempo—

raneous price responsiveness to serially correlated nominal GNP move-

ments, as in some models in the tradition of the "new classical

economics," an investigator who forced all of the price adjustment to be

explained by real variables and lagged price change, as in (3), would

find his results plagued by positive serial correlation and an upward

bias in the coefficient on lagged price change.

      Another alternative to (3), which would involve replacing nominal

GNP change by the change in a monetary aggregate, has the quite

different disadvantage that the resulting coefficient on money mixes up
                                   12




aggregate   demand and aggregate supply effects; that is, it reflects the

combined influence of the response of velocity to monetary changes, and

the response of prices to nominal GNP changes. The most obvious source

of bias in the coefficient on nominal GNP change, stemming from the

simultaneous increase in prices and in nominal GNP that would occur if

supply shocks were accompanied by an accommodating monetary policy, can

be mitigated by careful attention to the specification of the supply

shift variables (zr).

     The tables presented below include not only estimates of (5) with

price   change as the dependent variable, but also estimates of the same

specification with wage change as the dependent variable. A reduced—

form wage change equation containing the same variables as in (5) can be

derived by solving (2) for w, substituting out        using identity (4),

and, finally, substituting (5) for p. Differences in the coefficients

on the same variables in the wage change and price change equations

provide evidence regarding the response of the real wage to demand and

supply disturbances. Since wage changes and nominal GNP changes are

measured   independently, and   are not linked by a simple identity, the

coefficient   on nominal GNP change in the wage change equation is less
subject    to simultaneous equations bias and may provide a more reliable

estimate of the "rate of change effect" of aggregate demand.


Estimates of Price and Wage Equations for the U.S.


        In this paper, the estimates of (5) for the U.S. attempt to capture

the impact of seven supply shifts, of which six are dummy variables to

capture the impact of separate episodes of government intervention in

the price—and wage—setting process, and the seventh is the annual change
                                 13


in   the relative price of food and energy. Except for the "Wagner Act"

variable,   the dummy variables are not of the usual "0,1" form. My own

previous    research on the Nixon controls and the National Recovery Act

finds that both programs not only shifted the price level during their

official period of impact, but caused a shift in the opposite direction

after their termination.'5 The five dummy variables listed in Table 1,

lines 5a, 5b, 5d, 5e, and 5f, are defined to sum to 1.0 during the

period of a program's impact, and to —1.0 during the period after its

termination, thus constraining the impact and rebound efforts to have

exactly the same absolute value. The resulting coefficients on those

dummy variables indicate the cumulative displacement of the price level

during the period of the program's impact. This method implies that,

because these five dummy variables sum to zero, collectively they do not

explain any of the eleven—fold increase in the GNP deflator that

occurred between 1892 and 1980. The sixth dummy variable, representing

the impact of the 1935 Wagner Act on unionization in 1936—37, is of the

usual "0,1" form, and measures the permanent increase in the real wage

achieved by unionization.'6

      One obvious method to provide information on parameter shifts would

be to estimate separate versions of (5) for each major sub—period within

the available data set. Most previous investigators have followed this

approach and have concentrated on "normal" peacetime periods, often

omitting the years of the Great Depresssion and World War II. An alter-

native method involves estimating a single equation for the entire

available data period, and then searching for parameter shifts. If

additional variables are defined as the product of the individual

economic variables of interest              etc.) and "0,1" dummy
                                       14




variables for each sub—period, then the t—ratios on the additional

variables provide estimates of the statistical significance of parameter

shifts.

      In developing the equations displayed in Table 1, I followed

this search procedure in an attempt to locate parameter shifts in both

the price and wage equations during the following sub—periods: 1892—

1914, 1915—22, 1929—41, 1942—49, 1950—53, 1954—66, and 1967—80. Only

six shifts could be located; as shown in the table, all six of these are

statistically significant in the wage equation, of which four are also

significant in the price equation.

      In the equation for price—change in column (1), the elasticity of

changes in the GNP deflator to current changes in nominal CMI' is stable

at about one—third throughout the sample period, except for significant

upward shifts during World War I (0.34 + 0.54 =       0.88)   and during World

War   II   (0.34 + 0.18 =   0.52).   Once the effect of price controls is taken

into effect by the method outlined above, it appears that the first—year

division of nominal GNP change between output and prices ranged from

roughly 50—50 to 10—90 in the two wars, considerably above the peacetime

division of 66—34, and far from Okun's estimate of 90—10.

      The other variables listed In lines 2 through 4 are all lagged one

year. The coefficient on lagged nominal CNP         change   is quite stable.

There is a significant impact of the lagged output ratio——the

traditional Phillips curve "level effect"——except during the Great

Depression years, 1929—41, when the "level effect" was zero.

      Onlya small and insignificant "inertia effect" of lagged price
change is evident until 1950, when the coefficient exhibits a
significant     jump from 0.05 to 0.45. I have previously suggested two

explanations for this shift:
                               15




          "it seems quite consistent with a change in attitude in the

          first postwar decade toward recognition of a fundamental

          change in the stabilizing role of government policy

          (initiatives based more on the automatic stabilizers and new

          institutions like F.D.I.C. than on countercyclical policy).

          The shift also emphasizes the crucial role of three—year

          staggered wage contracts, a unique American institution that

          dates back to the first postwar decade."17


Unfortunately I can provide no easy explanation for the disappearance of

the Phillips—curve "level effect" during the Great Depression; this

result both describes, and results from, the mysterious absence of

downward price pressure emanating from the huge decade—long real output

gap. It may suggest an asymmetric price response, with more downward

than upward rigidity, but careful testing does not confirm any such asymmetry.

     The supply—shift coefficients indicate that World War II price

controls cumulatively held down the price level by almost 20 percent,

and World War I price controls by almost 10 percent, while the NRA

boosted prices by 8 percent.'8 The effects of the Korean war and Nixon

episodes were more modest, but nonetheless large in relation to the

small year—to—year variance of price change during the postwar era. The

Wagner Act had no significant impact on price changes. The effect of

food and energy prices is a marginally significant 0.55.

     Taken as a whole, the price—change equation in column (1) has

important implications for current macroeconomic debates. If the sum of

coefficients on nominal rate—of—change variables t' i' and p1)

were unity, the equation would be consistent with the "accelerationist

hypothesis" that a permanent acceleration in nominal GNP growth leads to
                                         16



                                       TABLE 1




                       Equations Explaining Annual Changes in Prices,
                                   Wage Rates, and the Real Wage
                             in the United States, 1892_1980a,b




                                                                   Hourly         Real
                                                   GNP              Wage        Product
                                                 Deflator           Rate         Wage



1. Adjusted Nominal GNP      (y)
     a. Entire Period                              0.34***           0.3 2      —0.02
     b. Extra Effect, 1892—1914                   —0                             0.19*
     c. Extra Effect, 1915—22                      0.54                         —0.02
                                                           **
     d.    Extra Effect, 1942—49                   0.18*                         0.07

2.   Lagged Adjusted Nominal CNP                   0.09**            0.19        0 •     10

3.   Lagged Real GNP Ratio
                                                       ***                                    *
     a. Entire Period                              0.18              0.01       —0   •   16
     b. Extra Effect, 1892—1914                   —0.0l***          0.30::       o.31:*
     c. Extra Effect, 1929—41                     —0 .16           —0.04         0 •     12

4. Lagged !!iet!! Price Change
     a. Entire Period
     b. Extra Effect, 1950—80                          :*            0.12
                                                                     0
                                                                                 0.07
                                                                                —0 • 08


5. Supply Shiftsd
                                                                                              ***
                                                                    —l.36        7.36
      a. World War I Controls, 1915—22            -8.72
                                                   7.66             18.7
      b.    NRA, 1933—36                                                        11.04::
      C. Wagner Act, 1936—37                       1.61             11.54
                                                           **
      d. World War II Controls, 1943—47          —l9.00            —10
      e. Korean War Controls, 1950—52            —2.44              —1 • 74
                                                                                 0.70k
      f. Nixon Controls, 1972—75                  _4 77***          —l •   12    3.65k
                                                                                —1 • 01
      g. Relative Price of Food                    0.55             —0.46
            and Energy, 1947_80e
6.   Constant Term                                 0.61**            l.82***     1.20***

       R2                                          .924              .878        .471
       S.E.E.                                      1.66              2.42        2.80
                                       17




                                    NOTES TO TABLE 1



       a. Asterisks indicate that coefficients are statistically

significant at the 10 percent level (*), 5 percent level (**),                or   1


percent level (       ).
       b.    Data sources are described in the appendix.

       c. Lagged price changes are computed by netting out the influence

of the supply shift variables. Thus if                   is the level of dummy

variable i, and d1 is its coefficient, the net lagged price change is

calculated as:



                  =                                     FE
                      —i          1=1dD1,t_1
                                                 —
                                                     dOPt..l,


where d0 is the coefficient on the relative food—energy price variable

(FE)
       d. All dummy variables, except for the Wagner Act, are defined to

sum to unity over the period when           a   program of government interventIon

was in effect, and to —l during the period of its termination. The NRA,
World War II, and Nixon dummy variables are defined exactly as in
Gordon, "Consistent Characterization," footnote 10. The World War I,
Wagner Act, and Korean dummy variables are new:

World War I
____________             NRA       Wagner Act
                                   ___________       World War II        Korea
                                                                         ______           Nixon
1918        1.0   1933      0.4 1936 0.5             1943       0.5   1950 —0.5        1972    0.5
1919    —0.5      1934      0.6 1937 0.5             1944       0.4   1951 —0.5        1973    0.5
1920    —0.5      1935     —0.4                      1945       0.1   1952   1.0       1974   —0.3
                  1936     —0.6                      1946 —0.6                         1975   —0.7
                                                     1947    —0.4
                                  18



                        Notes to Table 1 (continued)

     e. The variable used to represent changes in the relative price of

food and energy is the difference between the annual rates of change of

the deflators for, respectively, personal consumption expenditures and

personal   consumption expenditures net of expenditures on food and
energy. This variable is available only for 1947—80 and is set equal to
zero before 1947.
                                  19




a permanent acceleration of inflation with no residual impact on real

output. For the 1950—80 period the relevant sum of coefficients is 0.89

(0.33 +   0.10 + 0.05 + 0.41), which is not far from unity, and this sum

becomes 0.97 when the constant is omitted. Another important implica-

tion is contained in the finding that the coefficients are stable for

the 1950—80 period, leading me to question the unsupported conjectures

by Robert Lucas, William Feilner, and others that a credible return by

monetary policymakers to the regime of the l950s would lead to substan-

tial shifts in parameters.19

      An equation explaining annual changes in average hourly earnings is

presented in column (2). All the right—hand variables are identical to

those in column (1). The wage equation exhibits few differences from

the price equation in the coefficients on nominal GNP change (lines 1

and   2), and lagged price change (line 4). The nominal GNP responsive-
ness coefficients in the wage equation exhibit the same overal1 value of
roughly one—third, with the same large and significant upward shift In
World War I and World War II. Further, the coefficients on lagged price

change (line 4) are similar, while lagged nominal GNP change seems to be

somewhat more important in the wage equation.

      Perhaps the most surprising result, however, is that the pattern of

wage response to the output ratio is completely different. While the

wage equation shares with the price equation the absence of any impact

of the output ratio in the interval between 1929 and 1941, it differs in

the absence of any impact of the output ratio on wage change over the

"entire period" (line 3a).   I would have guessed on the basis of postwar

U.S. evidence that the "rate of change" effect was relatively more

important in the price—change equation, and the "level" effect of the
                                     20




output ratio was more important in the wage—change equation. In fact,

the opposite appears to be true.

       Finally, both the rate—of--change and level effects of aggregate

demand on wages appear to have been substantially more important in the

1892—1914 period than thereafter (lines lb and 3b). This would seem to

be the sole evidence in this paper that, at least for the U.S., the

first—year responsiveness of wages has become more "sticky." Prices, on

the other hand, have exhibited no important peacetime change in behavior

except for (a) the mysterious disappearance of the "level effect" in the

1930s and (b) the emergence of inertia beginning in 1950.

      The difference between the coefficients in the wage and price

equations, respectively, indicates the effect of the demand, inertia,

and   supply   variables on changes in the real product wage. These real—

wage responses are shown separately in column (3), where an equation for

the annual change in the real wage has been estimated in order to pro-

vide measures of statistical significance of the coefficients. Perhaps

the most important finding is that changes in the real wage behave

countercyclically; this is a different relationship than Keynes'

assumption in the General Theory that there is a negative relation

between the level of the real product wage and the level of output. For

Keynes' relation to be validated, we should find a significant negative

impact of the change of real aggregate demand on the change in the real

wage, whereas in fact this coefficient is positive. We can use equation

(5) to recover the reduced form parameters as follows:
                                        21

                                              Price       Wage       Implied Real
                                             Equation   Equation    Wage Response

      Output "level effect" (c2)               .32         .02         —.30

      "Rate of change effect" (c3)             .43        1.02           .58

      "Inertia coefficient" (c1)

             Pre—1950                          .09         .24           .15

             Post—1950                         .79         .88           .09

       The   other   important finding in column (3)    is that several of the
supply   shift variables have a significant impact on changes in the real

wage. Controls in World War        I,    World War II, and the Nixon era, as well

as the NRA, all raised the real wage temporarily (recall that these are

dummies of the l,—l form), while the Wagner Act appears to have raised

the real wage permanently. These coefficients, indicating that govern-

ment intervention has rather consistently operated to shift the

distribution of income toward workers, may help to explain why controls

continue to be popular in public opinion polls. The coefficient in line

5g indicates a unit—elastic negative response of the real wage to the

relative price of food and energy, achieved in part through a positive

response of the price level, and in part through a negative response of

the nominal wage rate.


Estimated Price and Wage Equations for the U.K.


      The specification of the U.K. price, wage, and real wage equations

in Table 2 differs from the U.S. equations in only two respects. First,

the lagged change in adjusted nominal GNP (y..1) is insignificant, and

so does not appear in Table 2. Second, there are obvious differences in

the   particular programs of government intervention that require the
introduction of dummy variables. Three periods of freeze or restraint
are included, and in each case the dummy variable is of the "1 ,—l"
form. The choice of timing for the "rebound" or "unwinding" effect of
                                            22

                                         TABLE 2

                     Equations Explaining Annual Changes in Prices,
                              Wage Rates, and the Real Wage
                     in the United Kingdom, 1875—1938 and 195580a,b




                                                              Hourly          Real
                                                 GNP           Wage         Product
                                            Deflator           Rate           Wage




1. Adjusted Nominal GNP
                                                        ***
      a. Entire Period                        0.45
                                                               0.41k        —0.04
      b. Extra Effect, 1914—23                0.13
                                                               0.l6          0.28
      c. Extra Effect, 1955—80               —0.13             0.17          0.30

2. Lagged Real GNP   Ratio   (Q)
      a. Entire Period
                                                 O.24                       —0.07
      b. Extra Effect, 1914—23                   0.45                        0.23
                                                               O.67         —0.14
      c. Extra Effect, 1924—38
      d. Extra Effect, 1955—80               —0.l0
                                              0.89
                                                              —0.25
                                                              0.86          —0.03

3. Lagged Price Change (pt_l)c
     a.  Entire Period
                                                        **
                                                               0.35
                                                                      ***
      b. Extra Effect, 1955—80
                                                 0.ll
                                                 0.45          0.05         —0.36

4. Supply Shifts d
     a. Late 1960s Intervention (1967—72) —l.72               —5.05
      b. Early 1970s Intervention (1973—75) —5.39             —3.12
      c. Social Contract (1977—80)
      d. Foreign Exchange Ratee              —0.67
                                             —0.08
                                                              —10.33
                                                              —0.16
                                                                            —9.65
                                                                            0.09
                                                                                  *


5.   Constant Term
     a. Entire Period                                                        0.34
                                             —0.l8
     b. Extra Effect, 1955—80                    1.60          1.91          0.31

       R2                                        .932          .938          .536
           S.E.E.                                1.91          1.95          2.07
                                    23

                            NOTES TO TABLE 2

     a, b, c. Same as Table 1.

     d. All dummy variables are defined to sum to unity over the period

when a program of government intervention was in effect, and to —l

during the period of its termination. The variables are defined as

follows:

            Late 1960s              Early l970s               Social
           Intervention             Intervention             Contract

       1967          0.33          1973         1.0   1977           1.0
       1968          0.33          1975        —1.0   1978          —0.6
       1969          0.33                             1979          —0.2
       1970         —0.33                             1980          —0.2
       1971         —0.33
       1972         —0.33



     e. The foreign exchange rate included in percentage change form, is

the pound—dollar rate for 1900—70, and the effective exchange rate of the

pound for 1971—80. See data appendix.
                                    24




 the control programs is based on the same iterative method used in my

 research for the U.S.; residuals from a first iteration were used to

determine the length of time required for the control effect to wear

off.

       The U.K. price—change equation In column (1) displays a number of

similarities to the corresponding U.S. equation, and a few interesting

differences. The similarities begin with the stable coefficient on

nominal GNP change         with a TJ.K. coefficient in the current year of

0.45, compared to U.S. coefficients in the current and first lagged year

summing to 0.43. The "entire period" coefficient on the lagged output

ratio, as well as the shift toward increased inertia in the postwar

period, seem to be consistent with U.S. behavior. The major differences

are the absence of a significant upward shift on the y coefficient for

the U.K. during World War I, and the enormous upward shift in the U.K.

output ratio coefficient in the postwar years (line 2d).

       It is the wage equation where U.K. behavior contrasts dramatically

with the U.S. First, there is a substantially larger impact effect of

nominal GNP changes on wage changes in the postwar U.K. than in the

postwar U.S. My more detailed analysis of wage responsiveness, based on

bivariate Cranger causality tests for quarterly data, reached the same

conclusion.20 In Table 2 the contrast shows up not just in the higher

U.K. nominal GNP coefficient (line la plus. ic), but even more strongly

in the large upward shift in the U.K. postwar coefficient on the output

ratio (line 2d). Another contrast is in the inertia effect, which

shifted upward substantially in U.S. data in the postwar years, but

which shows no upward postwar shift in the U.K. from its "entire period"

coefficient of 0.35. Overall, the U.K. results are consistent with the
                                    25




long—run neutrality of nominal    CNP changes in the postwar period; the

relevant sums of coefficients on the nominal GNP and lagged price varia-

bles are 0.88 in the price equation (0.45—0.13+0.11+0.45) and 0.98 in

the wage equation (0.41+0.17+0.35+0.05).

        The supply shift variables introduce another interesting contrast

with    the U.S. , since the "Late 1960s" and "Social Contract" interven-
tions    reduced the real wage temporarily, in contrast to the U.S. inter-

vention    programs that consistently increased the real wage. Another

interesting contrast is the peculiar response of the real wage to

exchange rate changes——a devaluation (treated as a negative change In

the exchange rate) increases U.K. wage change more than price change,

leading to an increase in the real wage. Exchange rate effects for the

U.S., although important in quarterly data for the 1970s, do not have a

significant impact on the annual data and thus are omitted from Table

1.21 In the opposite direction, changes in the relative price of food

and energy, although important in the U.S. equations, did not make a

significant contribution in the equations for the U.K. and Japan, and

are thus omitted in both Tables 2 and 3.


Estimated Price and Wage Equations for Japan

        The equations for Japan in Table 3 have fewer variables than those

for the U.S. and U.K., both because fewer significant parameter shifts

were    identified, and because no significant impact was found for changes
in the relative price of food and energy nor in the exchange rate. The
price—change equation for Japan in column (1) suggests substantially
                                           26


                                       TABLE 3

                Equations Explaining Annual Changes in Prices,
                            Wage Rates, and the Real Wage
                          in Japan, 1892—1940 and 1961_80a,b




                                                                       Hourly          Real
                                                        GNP             Wage         Product
                                                     Deflator           Rate           Wage

                                                        (1)             (2)            (3)

1.   Adjusted Nominal GNP
                                                         ***
                                                        0.77            0.37
                                                                               ***    —0.40
                                                                                              ***
     a. Entire Period
     b. Extra Effect, 1892—1913                 .
                                                      -0.53                            0.21**

2. Lagged Real GNP        Ratio
                                                               ***             ***
     a. Entire Period
     b. Extra Effect, 1892—1913
                                                        0.64                           0.13
                                                                                      —0.22
                                                       —0.52*          —0.75           0.63
     c. Extra Effect, 1914—22                           1.46            2.10

3. Lagged Price Change
     a. Entire Period                                   0.05            0.22***        0.17*
     b. Extra Effect, 1914—22                          —0.03            0.38***        0.40**

4. Constant Term
                      .                                        ***             ***            ***
     a.  Entire Period                                  2.06k
      b. Extra Effect, 1961—73                         —1.78            5.52           7.30

          R2                                            .811            .813           .468
          S.E.E.                                        3.34            3.58           4.46




                                                    NOTES TO TABLE 3

          a,b      Same as Table 1.
                                     27




greater price flexibility than in either the U.S. or U.K., with large

and significant "entire period" coefficients of price change on       both
current    nominal GNP change   and on the lagged output ratio. The upward
shift in price responsiveness during World War I, which was reflected in
a higher coefficient on nominal     GNP change   for the IJ.S., is reflected
here   in a higher coefficient on the lagged output ratio for Japan (line

2c). There is no evidence of price inertia in the price equation in the

entire    period nor in any subperiod.
       Japan,   unlike the UK. and U.S., exhibits virtually no responsive-

ness of prices (nor wages) to changes in nominal GNP nor to the lagged

output ratio before 1914 (lines lb and 2b). This fact, together with

the high standard errors in these equations compared to those for the

U.S. and U.K., suggests to me that there may be substantial measurement

errors in the early Japanese data. Controlling for this low responsive-

ness before 1914, as in Table 3, there seems little doubt that the price

deflator in peacetime periods after World War I was considerably more

flexible and less inertia—bound in Japan than in the U.S. or U.K.

       There   are two differences between the wage and price equations for
Japan, and these show up as significant coefficients in the real wage
equation   in column (3).   First, the rate of change effect in the wage
equation   is negative, reflecting the fact that an expansion in the

economy is associated with a decline in the real wage. Second, there

seems to be a somewhat larger impact of lagged prices in the wage equa-

tion than in the price equation. The extremely high significance level

of the constant shift term for 1961—73 in the wage and real wage

equations demonstrates the importance of allowing every parameter to

change, including the constant. The implication, of course, is that the
                                     28



explosive productivity growth enjoyed by the Japanese economy was a
temporary phenomenon, since after 1973 real wage growth returned approx-
imately    to the average rates experienced before 1940.


Comparison with Okun's Theoretical Framework

     The characterization of historical price and wage behavior in the

three tables differs substantially from Okun's algebraic theory, as

presented in his equations (7) and (8) on p. 259 (renumbered here for

convenience):



      (6)        w = (l—s)w_i + sy

      (7\
      '.   /    tC   =   '
                              .C
                             —s/pt_i +


where the "C" superscript on price change refers to non—auction or

"customer" market sector. Otherwise, Okun and I both use the same

notation.

     To simplify the discussion, I first compare (6) and (7) to the

results for the U.S. obtained in Table 1, since this was the nation that

most concerned Okun, and subsequently comment on the relation of (6) and

(7) to the results for the U.K. and Japan. At least four important

differences are immediately apparent between Okun's framework and ray

description of U.S. data. First, the wage equation (6) embodies Okun's

basic theme, that the inflation process is propelled by "wage—wage"

inertia. In contrast, the wage equation in Table 1 reflects my long—

standing empirical finding that wage changes in the postwar U.S. exhibit

feedback from lagged product prices, not lagged wage rates.22 When a
single lagged wage change term is added to the equation in column (2),

its coefficient is 0.05 with a t—ratio of 0.4. Additional shift; terms

for 1929—41 and 1950—80 are also insignificant.

     The second difference is that Okun's model allows only a "rate—of—

change effectt' in the influence of aggregate demand on wage and price

change, whereas the equations in Table 1 also include the traditional

Phillips curve "level effect." Third, Okun obtains a relationship

between price change and lagged nominal CNP change in (7) by assuming

that p =   w_1.    This specification is strongly rejected by the U.S.

data; when current and lagged wage changes are added to the price equa-

tion, their coefficients range from 0.05 to 0.08, with t—ratios below

unity, and with no evidence of significant structural shift param-

eters. This is a finding that is directly relevant to our subsequent

discussion of the product market, since the U.S. results in Table 1,

column (1) indicate that there is a strong contemporaneous effect of

nominal GNP change, with an added impact of the lagged level of real

GNP, implying that product prices are not simply set as a mark—up over

labor cost. Finally, there is no room in Okun's model for the major

parameter shifts that occurred during the two wars, nor any explanation

of the shift from zero to positive inertia in the inflation process

after World War   II.
     The results for the U.K. and Japan compound the conflict between

Okun's analysis and the facts are presented in the tables. In those two

countries, wages are far from sticky, and at least for the postwar

years, the main impact of aggregate demand on wage behavior works

through the output ratio variable that is omitted from (6) and (7).

There is no evidence at all of wage—wage inertia in the postwar results
                               30



for the U.K. and Japan, relatively little feedback from lagged prices to

wages, and no evidence of Okun's mechanical unit—elastic markup relation

between current changes in customer market prices and lagged changes in

wage rates. Yet all of the features involved in Okun's theory——the

Ittollit that produces career labor markets and the information lags that

generate the shopping model of customer markets——are shared on common by

all three countries and most historical eras.


Limitations of the Results

     There are numerous questions that may be raised about the results

displayed in Table 1. There are good reasons to think that the coeffi-

cient on current nominal GNP change is biased upward. When the U.S.

equation is re—estimated for the postwar years with the fixed—weight

deflator rather than the implicit deflator as dependent variable, the

coefficient on nominal GNP change drops from 0.34 to about 0.20,

indicating that part of the current—year nominal GNP impact may be a

spurious weighting effect. Table 1 retains the implicit deflator

throughout, simply because the fixed—weight deflator is not available

for the prewar years, and a shift in the concept used as dependent

variable would prevent any analysis of historical shifts in

coefficients. Similarly, the U.S. wage rate series used in columns (2)

and (3) is average hourly earnings, not the postwar index that adjusts

for changes in overtime and interindustry employment shifts. Thus part

of the response of wages to current nominal GNP changes in Table 1

represents a change in overtime and the employment mix, not a change in

actual wage rates. Again, comparability prevents a shift in indexes for

the postwar.
                                31




     The possibility that the demand responsiveness coefficients may be

biased upward in the results for the U.S., and possibly for the U.K. and

Japan as well, limits the usefulness of the empirical results for the

analysis of hypothetical future policy changes. The point of the

analysis is to use relatively homogeneous data sources across time and

to identify shifts in parameters; we are interested in the fact that

U.S. prices were more flexible during 1915—22 than before or after, for

instance, not the precise quantitative values of the responsiveness

parameters. The results are intended to pose a challenge for theorists,

not to be used as they stand for short—term forecasting. A better job

of identifying the crucial parameters for short intervals, e.g., 1954—

80, can be performed with quarterly data and a more complex specifica-

tion.23
                                       32




                             III. WAGES, CONTRACrS, AND
                         THE MYSTERY OF THE MISSING ESCALATOR


        Okun's book contains many insights about microeconomic behavior in

labor and product markets, but lacks a theoretical explanation for some

of the phenomena        described in the preceding empirical analysis. The
rest    of the paper contains some conjectures and speculations about the

lines that theorists might fruitfully pursue, with Part III devoted to

labor markets, and Part IV devoted to product markets.


Explaining Cross—Country Differences in Nominal Wage Flexibility

       The previous section provided evidence that wage changes in the

U.S., U.K., and Japan, have not been characterized by wage—wage inertia,

and    that   nominal   aggregate demand influences wage changes through three
channels——through the impact of (1)         current   changes in nominal spending,
(2)    the output ratio, and (3)     the   feedback from lagged product prices,
which   may represent the combined impact       of labor demand on the value of
labor's   marginal product, and of COLA       escalation   on previously

negotiated union wages.24

       Wage adjustments in postwar Britain and Japan have been more

responsive to aggregate demand, and less characterized by inertia, than

in the postwar U.S. If the U.S. institution of three—year overlapping

wage contracts is cited as an explanation of some or all of this differ-

ence in behavior, then an explanation must be provided as to why

contract form and length differ among countries that all share long—term

labor—market attachments. The fact that Japan can simultaneously

achieve lifetime employment (at least for males under 55 in large

firms), together with relatively flexible nominal wages, presents a
                                 33




powerful challenge to proponents of the "career—labor—market--wage—wage—

inertia" theory.25

     My explanation of differences in contract form and length is based

on the simple idea, developed by Joanna Gray, Ronald Dye, and others,

that the choice of contract length, like most economic choices, involves

a balancing of costs and benefits.26 Long contracts allow a greater

period for the amortization of negotiation and strike costs, while short

contracts allow agents quickly to adjust to unanticipated nominal and

real events. This balancing act will tend to lead to a long contract

length in a society like the U.S., with its history of labor strife

(particularly between 1935—41 and 1946—48), and a short contract length

in Japan, with its tradition of conflict avoidance, on—the—job social

equality, and the non—occupational nature of attitudes toward

hierarchy.27

     But both short and long contracts may be fully indexed to a nominal

variable like consumer prices, nominal GNP, or a monetary aggregate.

The literature on contracts, in fact, views short contracts as a viable

substitute for long—contracts—cum—indexing, when low negotiation costs

allow short contract lengths to evolve as the dominant form. Thus a

central issue in the origin of macroeconomic fluctuations is the absence

of full indexation of wages and the product prices of individual firms.


The Missing Escalator28


     What range of possible contingencies will be written into

contracts? Asymmetric information mitigates against contracts contin-

gent on "local" variables specific to the firm, e.g., firm sales,

product price, or worker productivity. Any informational advantage on
                                     34




the part of the employer leads to a moral hazard problem, that the firm

has    an incentive to understate the realization of the variable on which

the wage is contingent, in order to minimize wage cost. Contracts are

thus more likely to be contingent on aggregate nominal variables, i.e.,

the consumer price index and/or the money supply. But as Gray has

shown, indexation to a consumer price index rigidifies real wage growth

over the life of the contract. While this is an optimal outcome if all

disturbances are nominal, and the growth of productivity is perfectly

predictable, full consumer—price indexation imposes an efficiency loss

when an unpredictable supply shock (e.g., OPEC) changes the equilibrium

real wage.

       Since full indexation to the consumer price index has the fatal

defect that it rigidifies the real wage, an appealing alternative is

indexation to nominal GNP, for this allows the real wage to adjust

automatically to unexpected changes in productivity growth (the advan-

tages and disadvantages of indexation to a nominal monetary aggregate

are treated below). Adopting the notation in Part I above, with changes

in nominal GNP, prices, actual real GNP, and equilibrium real GNP desig-

nated respectively as y, p, q, and q*, we have the identity:



        (8)       y — q*   =   ÷ q — q*•



Let us assume for convenience that equilibrium labor input is constant,

so labor productivity growth in equilibrium is the same as equilibrium

real GNP growth (q*)• Then indexation of the wage rate to nominal GNP

(w =   y)   implies, when substituted into (5):
                                    35




      (9)       w - p   =   q* + (q - q*)•


Thus growth in the real wage (w —        p) automatically reflects equilibrium
productivity growth (q*) as long as       there   are no fluctuations in real

output relative to its equilibrium value (q —        q*   =   0).
     No matter how superficially attractive, nominal GNP indexing of

wage contracts has never been observed. This occurs, I suggest, because

four sets of barriers prevent agents from making the comfortable assump-

tion that real business cycles have been vanquished (q —                 =   0) and
                                                                    q*
therefore in (9) that the growth of the real wage mimics the growth of

productivity. The barriers are (1) pre—set prices and wages, (2)

foreign trade, (3) information imperfections and delays, and (4)

velocity shifts.

     (1) Pre—set prices and wages. Firms have a legitimate reason to

fear that nominal GNP fluctuations will, at least initially, take the

form of real GNP fluctuations. First, in many markets it is efficient

for prices to be pre—set rather than established in auction markets, to

save on the time and transportation costs that centralized auctions

impose (see Part IV below). Second, prices that are preset for even a

short interval imply that firms will initially experience a nominal

fluctuation as a real event——a decline in real purchases at the

initially pre—set price. Their expectation that the real demand shock

will soon be eliminated depends on the speed with which costs of inputs

purchased from other    firms mimic the iioveiaent in nominal demand. If
information   on the nominal shock is imperfect, firms may, at least

initially, interpret it as local rather than aggregate in nature and may

believe that there is no reason for their input costs to move in propor—
                                36




tion to the demand shift. Once it is admitted that individual product

prices, and hence the aggregate price level, may adjust gradually to

changes in nominal CNP, then workers will fear the consequences of

nominal—indexed wage contracts. Consider a 20 percent decline in

nominal CNP, accompanied initially by only a 10 percent decline in the

aggregate price level. Workers having a wage contract indexed to

nominal GNP would experience a decline in their real wage of 10

percent. Eventually prices would adjust fully in proportion to the

nominal GNP change, but workers, particularly if they are risk averse,

would object to the instability of real wages implied by nominal—GNP

indexation in a world of gradual price adjustment.

     The preceding paragraph is unconventional in that it deduces

nominal wage stickiness from price stickiness, while it is more common

to do the reverse. But in fact the argument works boh'ways. If

nominal wages do not adjust instantly, then firms face nominal marginal

costs that are less than unit elastic with respect to nominal GNP

changs. The problem is properly treated as dynamic rather than static,

in which several sources of resistance to full nominal iridexation inter-

act and reinforce each other.

     (2) Foreign trade. When firms observe an increase or decrease in

their real sales at the initially pre—set price, their choice of a new

price depends on a guess about the fraction of the demand shift

representing a nominal aggregate shock, as opposed to a real aggregate

or real local shock, and, a guess about the extent to which suppliers of

inputs recognize the aggregate component of the shock. As will be,

recognized by economists in Britain, Japan, and other open economies,

the perceived stickiness of marginal cost is a rational response when
                                   37




agents recognize that a substantial fraction of their inputs is imported

from abroad, where suppliers may have been unaffected by an aggregate

nominal demand shock that is national rather than international in

origin. Full insulation of real sales from a perceived nominal national

disturbance would require that each agent (a) assumes his national

suppliers immediately perceive the same shock and (b) ignores the fact

that suppliers of imports are unaffected by a national demand shock.

Both (a) and (b) surely strain credulity.

       (3) Information imperfections and delays. Prior to the postwar

development of monetary aggregates and national income accounts, timely

measures of nominal aggregates did not exist, as good a reason as any to

explain why nominal aggregate indexation has never occurred. Even

today, nominal GNP indexatlon would require a two—month average delay in

the U.S. (data for the second quarter, centered on May 15, become avail-

able in the third weelc of July). Lags are considerably longer in some

other countries. Wage contracts indexed to nominal GNP thus cannot

prevent a short—run reduction in hours worked in situations when nominal

GNP growth suddenly decelerates, as In the U.S. in l980:Q2 and

1981:Q2. Profit—maximizing firms   naturally   resist the Implications of

nominal GNP indexation that, because of information lags in situations

of temporary fluctuations of nominal GNP growth, they reduce prices just

when the economy is recovering and raise prices just when it is collaps-

ing.

       (4) Velocity shifts. Information on monetary aggregates is

available fairly promptly, but indexation to a particular monetary

aggregate cannot insulate real variables even if information is contem-

poraneous. Stochastic disturbances In commodity and money demand
                                   38




functions,   which may be serially correlated, lead to serially correlated

fluctuations in the velocity of money. A price—setting agent choosing

to index his product price to Ml in the U.S. would find that a slump in

real sales would occur in any week or month in which velocity grows more

slowly   than the average written into the indexation formula.
     Contractual arrangements cannot obviate fluctuations of hours
worked in response to fluctuations in real supply or in nominal

demand. Firms and workers are both unwilling to accept the risk implied

by a contract that is fully indexed to nominal spending or money. If it

is impossible to eliminate fluctuations in nominal demand, then labor—

market contracts should be of relatively short duration. Frequent

contract renewals can partially substitute for the absence of nominal

GNP indexation, by allowing the latest information on both real and

nominal shocks to be incorporated into wage—setting and price—setting

decisions.


Indexation and Product—Market Adjustment

     The preceding discussion, which has emphasized the obstacles to

full indexation of labor contracts, would appear to apply with much more

force to product markets. Yearly, monthly, and even daily adjustments

in relative prices must be accomplished by the price system if it is to

perform its traditional job of efficient resource allocation. Thus

long—term product contracts that index the nominal price to an aggregate

index, while maintaining fixed relative product prices, are rarely

observed. Because in most historical eras the variance of relative

prices has been greater than that of the aggregate price level, agents

have relied on short contract lengths to perform required adjustments in
                                   39




relative prices, and have been able to eschew formal indexation to

aggregate variables, in the   knowledge that a near—term contract revision
would allow incorporation of any relevant aggregate information.

     The cost—benefit approach to explaining contract length would also

point out that, while there are much greater disturbances in product

markets that would warrant a short contract, there are also much smaller

negotiation costs. While strikes are a frequent event in labor markets,

there are no "strikes" by suppliers who are unwilling to provide inter-

mediate goods. If a final goods producer is unwilling to accede to a

supplier's price "demand," then the supplier will either make a price

concession or take his goods elsewhere, depending on his expectations

about future demand. Other reasons for the absence of supplier strikes

may be legal institutions that prevent supplier collusion but encourage

worker collusion, and the fact that most suppliers produce multiple

products while most workers do not.

     The absence of complete indexation of product prices to nominal

demand disturbances opens the way to output fluctuations. This would

not matter if all product prices were set in auction markets, with

supply and demand equated continually. Nor would it matter if firms

could "see through" the fog of information on nominal aggregate demand

provided every day by the newspaper, and could believe with certainty

that eachsupplier and customer could "see through" to the same true

state of affairs. Thus the operational tasks for product—market theor-

ists are, first, to explain why prices for all products are not set on

auction markets, and why firms do not and cannot insulate the real

economy from nominal disturbances. Okun's book makes a good start on

these two questions, but there is more to be said on each one.
                                40




  IV. THE RESPONSE OF PRICES TO DEMAND SHOCKS WHEN PRICES ARE PRESET


Why Prices are Pre—Set

     My analysis of product market behavior rests firmly on the same

foundation as Okun's; the prices of at least some products must be pre—

set for a finite period of time. When combined with the shopping model

that Okun formulated, the need to form expectations about the costs of

goods provided by suppliers (a factor I have stressed), and the lack of

complete Indexation, the assumption that prices are pre—set can explain

the sluggish adjustment that we sometimes observe in product markets.

While some commentators find that the need for pre—setting of prices is

too obvious a phenomenon to warrant serious attention, two arguments

persuade me that there is a need for a careful analysis. First, a whole

tradition has developed in macroeconomics in the last decade that is

based on the behavior of "yeoman barbers" who, like ttyeoin farmers,"

are price takers who receive signals from some distant auction market

and who, like barbers, produce a service. However attractive for its

tractability, this analytical approach impedes understanding by provid-

ing no explanation of price tags, and by ignoring the consequence of

decentralization in breaking the link between common information and

firm behavior.

     Heterogeneity is crucial for the theory of price adjustment,

because it explains the coexistence of auction markets and price—setting

markets. In describing auction markets, Okun (p. 134) states "those

commodities traded on auction markets have a large number of producers

and of potential buyers; they are homogeneous or readily gradable; and

typically they are storable at relatively low cost." My explanation of
                                   41




price—setting differs from Okun's only by placing more emphasis on

heterogeneity of time and space in product markets, and less on the

homogeneity of the product itself. Retail transactions are

characterized by a large number of customers making brief individual

visits to different locations, in contrast to the Board of Trade, where

each trader remains continuously at his post throughout the day. In

contrast to the empty supermarket, the essence of a spot—auction market

is its liquidity, which can only be achieved if many buyers and sellers

are present simultaneously. When price tags are pre—set rather than

continually changed, as in an auction, goods and services can be made

available at conveniently dispersed locations and with a purchase time

that is at the discretion of the buyer.

     How might a theorist go about building a model to explain the

prevalence of price—setting practices? Leaving aside for a moment

markets involving manufacturers and wholesalers, he might begin by

adopting Gary Becker's treatment of consumption goods as a combination

of marketed items and time.29 For an analysis of markets, the crucial

contribution of time is not in the need for time in actual consumption,

as when watching television, but rather in the requirement for time to

make purchases. On this issue, I like Alan Blinder's subjective

reflection   of why, when he goes to get stationery from the office supply
cabinet, he does not "take just what he needs for the next day (or hour
or minute). It is not because there is a large transportation cost, nor
because   there is bookkeeping to do, nor because the office secretary

charges you a 'toll' for the privilege. Rather, it is because each trip

to the cabinet occupies some of your time——valuable time that you could

spend on something else."3° Although Blinder was interested in
                                  42




managerial costs of adjusting inventories by retail firms,   time   is just

as relevant in the shopping decisions of their customers. Our theorist

might do well to begin with an explicit niodel of the resource costs of

the shopping process, including both time and distance. The distingui-

shing feature of retail markets, as compared to centralized auction

markets, is that the ratio of the value of shopping time to the value of

the average transaction is relatively large. Further, the fact that

people arid their furniture do take up space, even when crammed closely

together as in Manhattan, means that a costly trip is required to buy

anything.

     Space and time may be convincing as factors requiring decentraliza-

tion of retail markets, with the resulting loss of liquidity that is an

essential prerequisite for an auction market. But these considerations

should be less important in sales by manufacturers to wholesalers, and

by wholesalers to retailers. Here the contrast between the vegetable

market and auto—parts market is instructive. Heterogeneity of product

must be the key element that explains the existence of price—setting,

for how else are we to explain the central role in most wholesale firms

and purchasing departments of the printed catalogue detailing the

myriads of available products? The market for a rear trunk lid for a

1969 Plymouth four—door sedan delivered on a Wednesday in 1981 in

Evanston, Illinois, is a rather thin one, lacking the liquidity and

central location necessary for an auction to take place. Pre—set prices

in a catalogue allow transaction times and locations to be freely chosen

and thus increase economic efficiency. In the case of the 1969 Plymouth

trunk lid, printed prices help the Evanston body shop and the State Farm

insurance adjuster located ten miles away to base their allocative
                                  43




decisions on the same information.

     Some theorists might insist that the parts catalogue should be

indexed to some nominal aggregate number, so that prices can be marked

up each day or month by a fixed parameter that Is announced in the

newspaper. Recent visitors claim that they have seen this done in

Tel Aviv restaurants. But to search so far for an example of this

practice is to identify the phenomenon that prevents it from becoming

widespread, and this is the low historical variance of aggregate nominal

indexes as compared to relative prices. Phillip Cagan's charts document

the wide dispersion of price changes in recessions for WPI commodity

categories; presumably the dispersion of price changes for individual

products is even greater.3' Because relative prices change all the

time, fixed—parameter indexation does not obviate the reprinting of

catalogues. And if catalogues must be reprinted (and this is done

separately, page by page, in the wholesale business), why should firms

bother with indexing except in extraordinary macroeconomic conditions?

     Specialists in industrial organization may be surprised to learn

that such elementary phenomena as price—setting practices are still

under discussion by macroeconomists. Industrial organization, at least

as I learned it,32 would collapse as a sub—discipline if it were

stripped of product heterogeneity and pre—set prices. Product hetero-

geneity, which is ruled out in the new classical "yeoman barber" models,

is central not only to an understanding of price—setting, but also of

the basic economic concepts of the industry, the firm, and the

product. Classic definitions of industries rest on distinctions that

revolve around the similarity of products or production processes. The

existence of the firm has been explained as a way of economizing on
                                   44




transactions costs when heterogeneous labor, capital, and materials must

be brought together to produce a given range of products. And anyone

involved in antitrust cases knows that the ability of firms to pre—set

prices is assumed from the beginning, while some of the arguments depend

on the definition of product classes or individual products within a

vast sea of heterogeneity.


Modeling the Demand Responsiveness of Prices as a Varying Rather than
Fixed Parameter


     The shopping model and kinked demand curve that play the central

role in Okun's chapter on product markets constitute only the beginning

of an adequate analysis. Okun has no explanation for a varying

responsiveness of prices to changes in nominal aggregate demand, as is

exhibited above in Part II, and has occurred in Latin America, Israel,

and in various hyperinflations. When provoked, business firms are

capable of changing prices very fast. A step forward can be made when

we allow the firm to become Janus—faced, looking not only forward in the

input—output table toward its customers, but also at the same time

backward toward its suppliers. The one—sided forward—looking nature of

Okun's analysis is symbolized by his Figure 4—2 on p. 177, which has the

demand curve shifting along a constant cost curve. For macroeconomic

analysis the central question is, "what factors can be invented to

provide a rigorous explanation of the fact that, in the face of public

information on nominal aggregate demand, the demand and cost curves

faced by a firm do not generally move in proportion?"

     The key ingredients in an explanation are, first, a distinction

between aggregate and local shocks, and, second, a multiplicity of

pieces   of available information about nominal aggregate demand that
                                       45




creates ambiguity about the exact value of current changes. A third

ingredient is decentralization combined with imperfect information. The

one—good yeoman barber model misses the main point if, through the usual

methods of solving models with rational expectations, every agent can

casually assume that everyone else is just like him. John Anderson

called Reaganomics "economics with mirrors." Yet homogeneous one—good

structures are really "models with mirrors," in which agents look around

and see only themselves.

       In   thinking about the sources of gradual price adjustrnert in a
recession, in which agents have a lot of current information about
nominal aggregate demand (information which is dispersed around an ever—
changing    mean), it has always seemed to me    that the fundamental source
of   stickiness involves input costs. For a moment let's ignore labor

input and concentrate on materials. Our Janus—faced firm must pay for

materials, and this must limit its flexibility in lowering its product

price in the face of a perceived drop in nominal demand. In 1980,

Chrysler could have offered rebates of 50 percent, instead of 10

percent, if only the cost of steel and other materials had cooperatively

dropped by 50 percent in the second quarter of 1980. But our firm          looks
back   into the murky recesses of the input—output table and sees only

risk. If the steel firm      doesn't   cut price because it perceives a sticky

price   of coal or oil, then a unilateral 50 percent cut in the price of
Chrysler    autos would lead to bankruptcy even faster than would occur

with a smaller price cut.

       In contrast to models with mirrors, the essence of the price adju-

stment problem comes closer to models of public goods, with their

prisoner's dilemmas and free—rider problems. Each agent must realize
                                       46




its fundamental vulnerability, in the absence of a central coordinating

authority, because an initial move to cut price——if followed by com-

petitors but not by suppliers——may lead to bankruptcy. The problem is

the same in labor markets. No single agent will be willing to agree to

a unilateral wage cut when he knows that the cost of its market basket

depends on the wages of everyone else.

       One reaction to the cost—based story points to an alleged "sunk"

nature of input costs. If Chrysler has already bought the steel, the

fact that the steel was constructed at the higher cost level of an

earlier period is irrelevant. Only demand considerations should govern

the price. In the limit, this view must regard all costs as fixed over

the discrete length of time during which prices are pre—set, and it thus

ignores the numerous day—by—day adjustments to input quantity that a

firm   can   achieve. More basically, it ignores the speculative element

involved in holding inventories. The firm may choose to hold the steel,

rather than converting it into autos at distress—sale prices, if it

believes that conditions will improve next period. This "reluctance to

produce"     might be interpreted as voluntary underproduction In a model
with mirrors. But it      translates    into sticky final—goods prices in fact,
and is just enough to     create the wedge between effective and notional

demand curves that Barro, Grossman, and Malinvaud need to carry out

their "fixprice" analysis.

       The   story about sunk costs makes it   clear that a formal model of

this   problem must specify quite carefully     the kinds of precommitments

that firms must make as regards input prices and quantities. And it

must specify the timing of firm output and price decisions in relation

to the availability of information about nominal demand. Since real—
                                    47




 world firms with pre—set prices must initially learn of a demand

 surprise through real events——the non—appearance of expected customers

 and the unexpected buildup of inventories——the model must require firms

 to set the price before they learn the "news." Without costless

communication to every supplier, and every supplier's supplier (both

here and abroad), the firm is likely to respond in the next period with

an adjustment that partly takes the form of lower production, and partly

of lower sales prices. With nothing special on the front page of the

daily newspaper, the adjustment may be weighted toward production, but

with screaming headlines that a wartime enemy has surrendered, the

adjustment may be weighted toward prices.

       I suspect that some progress may be possible in building models of

a Janus—faced firm   by   careful specification of the sequential learning

process. Imagine that a firm presets its output price and purchases

materials one week at a time. At the end of week 1 it receives initial

information about its local demand shock, in the form of a buildup or

reduction in inventories (and/or unfilled orders) compared to its

initial plan. At the same time it may receive a new price list from one

or more suppliers arid can begin to form an inference about the state of

aggregate demand. News about the state of aggregate demand Is not

received   as a neat package, but rather in the form of bits of informa-
tion   arriving week after week. Our firm   might learn at the end of week
2 of the Business Week index for week 1, and at the end of week 3 the

unemployment   rate and index of industrial production for week 1.
Because all of these information sources about both local and aggregate
demand are noisy, several weeks are likely to be observed before major
changes in plans are made. Sluggish price adjustment may     emerge from
                                48




this process under normal peacetime conditions if firms wait for price

cuts by suppliers before feeling that it is safe to cut prices substan-

tially in response to a perceived dip in aggregate demand, while

suppliers wait to cut prices until their assessment of the current

aggregate demand situation is confirmed by a reduction in orders from

final goods producers. The more rapid adjustment of prices during

wartime may stem from the role of dramatic political and military news

in cutting through the normal drawn—out sequential learning process.
                                    49




                                V. CONCLUSION


       This paper has shown that the historical experience of the last

century reveals a number of different patterns of price and wage ad just—

ment. In the postwar U.S. prices and wages respond modestly to the

level and   change in aggregate demand, with a substantial role for
inertia. In    other   times and places, however, prices and wages have

responded   in greater degree to the change and level of aggregate demand,
and have been less influenced by inertia. Prices and wages were
particularly   flexible in the U.S. during World War I and its aftermath,

in Japan after 1914, and in the postwar U.K.

       Some of these changes in behavior seem to have plausible explana-

tions. For instance, the theoretical ideas sketched in the last section

may   have some potential for explaining the   greater degree of price

responsiveness in the U.S. during World War I. The postwar inertia in

the U.S. as contrasted with the U.K. and Japan, seems consistent with

the interpretation that the unique U.S. institution of three—year

staggered wage contracts plays a central role in price and wage

dynamics. Other changes in behavior are more mysterious. The "output

level" impact of aggregate demand on price and wage changes seems to

have disappeared in the U.S. between 1929 and 1941, and in the U.K.

between 1924 and 1938. This merely restates what we already knew, that

high unemployment in those episodes did not lead to the expected down-

ward adjustment in prices and wages. Yet tests not reported here

decisively reject the hypothesis of asymmetric adjustment.

      Neither the empirical estimates nor the theoretical suggestions

contained in this paper are intended as final answers. Parameters

estimated from a century of annual data should not be used to make
                                   50




precise assessments of current policy issues, but rather should be

regarded as providing some rough guidelines regarding the frequency and

magnitude of parameter shifts that seem to characterize the price and

wage adjustment process in different countries. Interpretation of

policy mistakes in past historical episodes, and estimates of the impact

of   future   policy actions, requires more careful attention to shorter

periods   using quarterly or monthly data, and indexes of price and wage
changes that distinguish between shifts in output    and   employment mix

from actual changes in individual prices and wage rates. The research
agenda for econometricians and theorists seems, as always, to be a full

one.
                                        51




                                     FOOTNOTES




      1. Wall Street Journal, January 28, 1981, P. 42.

      2. Milton Friedman, "The Role of Monetary Policy," American

Economic Review, vol. 58 (March 1968), pp. 1—17; Robert E. Lucas, "Some

International Evidence on Output—Inflation Tradeoffs," American Economic

Review, vol. 63 (June 1973), pp. 326—34; Martin N. Baily, "Wages and

Unemployment Under Uncertain Demand," Review of Economic Studies, vol.

41 (January 1974), pp. 37—50.

      3. The best exposition remains Robert J. Barro and Herschel I.

Grossman, Money, Employment, and Inflation (Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1976), especially Chapter 2.

      4. Arthur M. Okun, Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic

Analysis, Washington: Brookings, 1981.

      5. My overall assessment thus coincides with Edmund S. Phelps,

"Okun's Macro—Micro System: An Appraisal," Journal of Economic

Literature, vol. 19 (September 1981), pp. 1065—77.

     6.     Arthur M. Okun, "Efficient Disinflationary Policies," American
Economic Review, vol. 68 (May 1978), pp. 348—52.
     7.     Thomas J.   Sargent, "The Ends of Four Big Inflations", NBER
Conference    paper 90, 1981.

     8.     Robert J.   Gordon, "The Demand for and   Supply of Inflation,"
Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 18 (December 1975), pp. 807—36.
     9. Robert J. Gordon, "Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price
Adjustment,"    Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 19     (June 1981), pp.
492—5 30.

    10. Robert J. Gordon, "Why       U.S.   Wage and Employment Behavior
                                    52



Differs from that in Britain and Japan," Economic Journal, vol. 92

(March 1982), PP. 000—00.

    11. George L. Perry, "Changing Labor Markets and Inflation,"

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 3, 1970, pp. 411—41.

    12. The specification in equation (3) has been tested for postwar

U.S. quarterly data, using Perry's weighted unemployment rate instead of

the output ratio, in my "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rages, and the

Natural Rate of Unemployment," NBER working paper no. 708, July 1981,

forthcoming in Martin N. Baily, ed., Workers, Jobs, and Inflation

(Washington: Brookings, 1982). That paper is the source of the

estimates of postwar natural real GNP used to generate the postwar

annual output ratio series used in the current paper; it also tests and

accepts the restrictions assumed in (3), that lagged wage changes are

absent; and, finally, it allows changes in standard productivity to

depend partially on the evolution of actual productivity behavior.

    13. The specification written as equation (2) below was first

estimated in "A Consistent Characterization of a Near—Century of Price

Behavior," American Economic Review, vol. 70, (May 1980), pp. 243—9.

Subsequently the same approach has been used with quarterly data to test

the Lucas—Sargent—Wallace policy ineffectiveness proposition in "Price

Inertia and   Policy   Ineffectiveness in the United States, 1890—1980,"

NBER working paper no. 744, September 1981.

    14. While a sum of coefficients of unity is consistent with the

accelerationist hypothesis, a sum of coefficients below unity does not

necessarily conflict with that hypothesis, an important point originally

made in Thomas J. Sargent, "A Note on the Accelerationist Controversy,"

Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 3 (August 1971), pp. 721—5.
                                53



    15. The most recent evaluation of controls is contained in Jon Frye

and Robert J. Gordon, "Government Intervention in the Inflation

Process: The Econometrics of 'Self—Inflicted Wounds'," American

Economic Review, vol. 71 (May 1981), pp. 288—94. Econometric estimates

of equation (3) for the interwar period are presented in Robert J.

Gordon and James A. Wilcox, "Monetarist Interpretations of the Great

Depression: An Evaluation and Critique," in K. Brunner, ed., The Great

Depression Revisited (Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981), pp. 49—107 (see

especially Table 8 on p. 88).

    16. The dummy variables are defined in note d to Table 1. The odd

timing of the Korean war variable reflects my verdict that the Korean

war controls did no more than consolidate the unwinding of the specula-

tive commodity boom of 1950—51. This interpretation is supported by the

fact that the variable is significant in the price equation but not in

the wage equation.

    17. "A Consistent Characterization," p. 249.

    18. On World War I controls, see F. W. Taussig, "Price—Fixing as

Seen by a Price—Fixer," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 33

(February 1919), pp. 205—41.

    19. The major parameter shift evident in a more detailed study of

quarterly postwar data is a shortening after 1966 in the mean lag of the

distribution of weights on past inflation, which I interpret as due to

the growing importance of cost—of—living escalators. A return to a low—

inflation regime might well cause COLA escalators to become less

important, but this would not reduce the output cost of the transition

to that regime.

    20. "Why U.S. Wage and Employment Behavior Differs From That in
                                 54




Britain and Japan," Table 3.

    21. "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of

Unemployment" finds significant exchange rate effects in quarterly U.S.

data.

    22.   I emphasized the role of product prices as far back as "Infla-

tion in Recession and Recovery," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

vol. 2, 1971, no. 1, pp. 105—58. A contest between lagged product

prices and lagged wages in "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates," Table

6, p. 48, yields a coefficient on lagged wages that is both

insignificant and of the incorrect sign.

    23. This is performed in "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and

the Natural Rate of Unemployment."

    24. Although not included in Table 1 to simplify the presentation,

the difference between changes in the CPI and in the GNP deflator makes

a small and significant contribution in the U.S. wage equation,

particularly in the 1967—80 subperiod.

    25. In light of Bob Hall's recent evidence on the importance of

lifetime jobs in the U.S., it is interesting to find that in 1966, 56

percent of males aged 35 to 39 had more than ten year's seniority in

Japan, against only 34 percent of the same group in the United States.

See Robert E. Cole, "Permanent Employment in Japan: Facts and

Fantasies," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 26, no. 1, pp.

615—30 (citation from p. 618).

    26. Joanna Cray, "On Indexation and Contract Length," Journal of

Political Economy, vol. 86 (February 1978), pp. 1—18; and Ronald Dye,

"Optimal Contract Length," Carnegie—Mellon working paper, October 1979.

    27. These generalizations are supported by citations and additional

arguments in Part IV of "Why U.S. Wage and Employment Behavior Differs."
                               55




    28. This section overlaps with part of Section 111.2 of "Why   U.S.
Wage and Employment Behavior Differs."

    29. Gary Becker, "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic

Journal, vol. 75 (September 1965), PP. 493—517.

    30. Alan S. Blinder, "Retail Inventory Behavior and Business Fluc-

tuations," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 12 (1981, no. 2),

pp. 000—00.

    31. PhillIp Cagan, "Changes in the Recession Behavior of Wholesale

Prices in the 1920s and Post—World War II," Explorations in Economic

Research, vol. 2 (Winter 1975), pp. 54—104.

    32. From Carl Kaysen, with frequent interruptions by Frank Fisher,

at Harvard in 1960—61.
                                    56




                                DATA APPENDIX




 (Key to data source codes is given after the listing for each country)

UNITED STATES

    1890—1928:              All data are from LTEG.

        Nominal GNP:        Series A7, linked in 1909 to Series A8.

        Real GNP:           Series Al, linked in 1909 to Series A2.

        GNP Deflator:       Nominal GNP divided by Real CNP.

        Wage Rate:          "Total compensation per hour of work in

                            manufacturing, production workers, in 1957

                            dollars," series B70, times "Consumer Price

                            Index," series B69.

        Natural Real GNP:   1892—1953, RJGM, Appendix B.



    1929—1980:

        Nominal and Real CNP:     SCB, December 1980, page 17,-table 7,

                            and SCB June 1981, Table 1.1—1.2.

        GNP Deflator:       Nominal GNP divided by Real CNP.

        Natural Real GNP:   1954—1980, RJGI, Appendix B.

        Wage Rate:          1929—1946, "Total compensation per hour of

                            work in manufacturing, production workers, in

                            1957 dollars," Series B70 in LTEG multiplied

                            by "Consumer Price Index," series B69.

                            1947—1980, "Total private non—agricultural

                            average gross hourly earnings, current

                            dollars," Table B36, ERP, 1981.
                                     57




Key to Data Sources for U.S.



ERP       Economic Report of the President.

LTEG      Long—Term Economic Growth 1860—1970, U.S. Department of

          Commerce, 1973.

RJGI      Robert J. Gordon, "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the

          Natural Rate of Unemployment."

RJGM      Robert J. Gordon, Macroeconomics, Second Edition.

SCB       Survey of Current Business.




UNITED KINGDOM

      1870—1938:               All data from F.

          Nominal GNP:         Table 1, col. (1).

          GNP deflator

            at factor cost     Table 61, col. (7).

          Natural Real GNP     Broken   exponential trend line benchmarked in
                               1913, 1922, 1937, and 1950.
          Wage Rate:           "Average full—time weekly wage rate," Table
                               65, col. (1).
          Foreign Exchange   Rate:      see below.



      1955—1980:               From IMF (1981 and 1971), unless otherwise

                              specified.

         Nominal CDP:         Line 99b.
                                    58




          GD? deflator       Nominal GDP divided by real GDP.

          Real GD?           Line 99b.p.

          Natural Real GD?: Broken exponential trend line henchmarked in

                             1950 and 1970.

          Wage Rate:         Average monthly earnings, all industries,

                             line 65.c.

          Foreign Exchange Rate: 1900—1970 — Annual Average dollar

                                 exchange rate: BEKS 1900—1970.

                                 1970—1980 —    Effective   exchange rate, IMF

                                    line amx.

Key to Data Sources for U.K.:



BEKS      The British Economy Key Statistics, London/Cambridge Econ. Series, 1973.

F         Charles H. Feinstein, National Income, Expenditure, and Output

          of the U.K., 1853—1965.

IMF        International Monetary Fund Annual Yearbook, 1971 and 1981.




JAPAN

       1870—1940

           Nominal GNP:       011K (1957), Table 3, col. (1), linked in 1905

                              to 0111CR (1973), Table 1, col. (6).

           GNP deflator:      OHK (1957), Table 3, col. (1), divided by

                              Table 4, col. (1), linked in 1905 to OHKR

                              (1973), Table 14, col. (3).

           Real GNP:          Nominal GNP divided by GNP deflator.
                                   59


           Natural Real GNP: Broken exponential trend benchmarked in 1855,

                              1890, 1903, 1914, 1919, 1929, 1938, and 1953.

           Wage Rate:         "Wage Index," 011K (1957), Table 1, col. (1).



       1960—1980.             All data from IMF (1971, 1981).

           Nominal GNP:       Line 99a.

          Real GNP:           Line 99a,r.

          Natural real GNP: Broken exponential trends benchmarked in 1953

                              and 1971.

          GNP deflator:       Nominal GNP divided by Real CNP.

          Wages:              Line 65.



Key to Data Sources for Japan:



IMF        International Monetary Fund Annual Yearbook (1971, 1981)

OHK       K. Ohkawa, The Growth Rate of the Japanese Economy Since 1878,

          Tokyo: Kinokuniya University, 1957.

OHKR      K. Ohkawa and H. Rosovsky, Japanese Economic Growth, Stanford:

           Stanford University Press, 1973.
