                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE EFFECTS OF THE MINIMUM WAGE ON THE
                EMPLOYNT AND EARNINGS OF YOUTH


                              Robert   H. Meyer
                               David A. Wise



                      Working Paper No. 849




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1C\(\
                     .LJ_)J                    ttVLiU'
                         Cambridge MA 02138

                              January 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Stadies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NEER Working Paper #849
                                                   January 1982



                    The Effects of the Minimum Wage on
                   The Employment and Earnings of Youth

                                 ABS T RA CT




     The employment and earnings effects of the minimum wage are estimated

by parameterizing an hypothesized relationship between underlying market

employment and wage relationships versus observed wage and employment dis-

tributions in the presence of a legislated minimum.   If there had been no

minimum during the 1973-78 period, we estimate that employment among out-

of-school men 16 to 24 would have been approximately 4 percent higher than

it in fact was. Among young men 16 to 19 employment would have been about

7 percent higher and among those 20 to 24, 2 percent hi9her. Employment

among black youth 16 to 24 would have been almost 6 percent higher than it

was, as compared with somewhat less than 4 percent for white youth. Although

it is sometimes argued that the adverse employment effects of the minimum are

offset by increased earnings, we find virtually no earnings effect. Had the

minimum not been raised over the 1973-78 period, inflation would have greatly

moderated the adverse employment effects of the minimum, with approximately

two-thirds of the potential employment gains from elimination of the minimum

attained. The weight of our evidence is inconsistent with a general increase

in youth wage rates with increases in the real minimum. Our findings support

the hypothesis that the effects of the minimum are concentrated on youth

with sub-minimum market wage rates.


          Robert H. Meyer                       David A. Wise
          The Urban Institute                   J.F.K. School of Government
          2100 M Street, N.W.                   Harvard University
          Washington, D.C. 20037                Cambridge, MA 02138

          (202) 223—1950                         (617) 495-1178
                     THE EFFECTS OF THE MINIMUM WAGE ON

                    THE EMPLOYMENT AND EARNINGS OF YOUTH


                                     by


                      Robert H. Meyer and David A. Wise*


      It is often presumed that the minimum wage reduces the employment

of youth. It is also often presumed that the adverse employment effect

is moderated by a positive earnings effect. These two theoretical presump-

tions are reflected in two empirical questions: how large is the employ-

ment effect and how large is the earnings effect? The employment effect

has been the subject of considerable research, but much less attention

has been directed to the earnings effect, even though the two impacts are

integrally related. Previous analysis of employment effects have been

based largely on aggregate time series or cross section data.1 The earn-

ings effects have been neglected at least in part because traditional

methods of analysis have not allowed direct inferences about the distribu-

tion of wage rates in the absence of a minimum..., Although studies based on

aggregate data have recognized that its impact should depend on the level

of the minimum relative to the average level of wage rates, they ignore



     *   This research was supported by grant SES-8007165 from the National
Science Foundation. Part of the work was formulated under contract
number J-9-M-O-OO46 from the U. S. Department of Labor. We received
helpful comments from Charlie Brown and Steven Venti and from partici-
pants in the labor seminars at Columbia University and at Harvard
Uni versity.

     1. Most have been based on aggregate time series data (e.g. Gramlich
[1976], Mincer [1976], and Hamerniesh [1980]) and to a lesser extent on
aggregate cross-section (e.g. Welch and Cunningham [1978], Ehrenberg and
Marcus [1979], and Cunningham [1980] data.
                                    -2-




the heterogeneity among individual market wage rates and thus also that

some individuals are much more likely than others to be affected by the

minimum. To take advantage of heterogeneity across individuals, it is

natural to consider individual market wage rates. Motivated by this

observation, we use individual employment and wage data to estimate the

effects of the minimum on the labor market experiences of youth. A natural

outcome of our procedure is joint estimation of the impacts of the minimum

on employment and on wage rates and earnings, reflecting the close rela-

tionship that indeed exists between them. Our analysis relies on individual

data for several years in the 1970s. Thus it takes advantage of the differ-

ential impacts that the minimum has on different individuals at a point in

time, as well as shifts in the minimum over time.

     Our estimation procedure is based on explicit parameterization of

the effect of the minimum wage on the joint distribution of wage rate and

employment outcomes that would exist in the absence of the minimum. Thus

it emphasizes explicitly the relationship between the level of the minimum

wage and the distribution of market wage rates that individuals would

receive in the absence of the minimum. The procedure provides estimates

of a market wage function that enables us to compare expected earnings of

persons who would have been employed without a minimum with the expected

earnings of these same persons in the face of minimum wage legislation.

Both of these may be compared with the expected earnings of those who are

employed when the minimum is in effect. The procedure also allows us to

estimate the incidence of non-employment by market wage rate, with and

without a minimum. We set forth this procedure in an earlier paper (Meyer

and Wise [1981]) but based estimates only on data for one year.
                                          —3—




           In this paper, we provide estimates based on several years in the

1970s. There are at least two advantages to pooling individual data for

several years. First, it provides greater variation in the level of the

minimum relative to the market distribution. A good deal of variation is

provided by shifts in this distribution due to individual and regional

differences in wage rates, given a single national minimum. Such varia-

tion is increased by shifts over time in the real minimum. This is

important because much of the power in the estimation technique derives

from differences among individuals in their market wage rates versus the

level of the minimum. Second, and possibly most important, shifts over

time in the national minimum wage allow us to estimate possible upward

shifts in the whole youth wage distribution, with increases in the mini-
       1
mum.

           We have proposed a basic model that we believe captures the primary

effects of the minimum as described by most researchers. In particular,

we begin by presuming that the major effect of the minimum is concentrated

on persons who would otherwise be paid below the minimum. Some youth who

in the absence of the minimum would be paid below the minimum are pre-

sumed to receive the legal minimum others because of non-coverage or

non-compliance are presumed to be paid below the legal minimum. We

explicitly parameterize these possibilities and estimate the likelihood

that each will occur. Specification to allow for these outcomes is



     1.  Because many macroeconomic and demographic factors affect differ-
ences over time in youth employment, however, it is possible that the best
estimates of the effects in a given year are based on data for that year
only. It is arguable that individual year estimates are more accurate than
estimates of the effects of shifts in the minimum.
                                      -4-




motivated in large part by the empirical wage distributions presented

in Section I.   In addition to these possibilities, it is sometimes

argued that the minimum wage induces a bumping up effect that results

in an upward shift in the whole youth wage distribution; even persons

with market wage rates above the minimum are affected. Sometimes the

argument is put in the context of substitution of higher quality for

lower quality workers. With pooled time series cross-section data we

are able to estimate possible shifts in the overall wage distribution

with shifts in the minimum.

     We estimate that if there were no minimum wage, employment among out-

of-school male youth 16 to 24 would be about 4 percent higher and employ-

ment of those 20 to 24 about 2 percent higher. Among black youth, employ-

ment increases would be greater, about 6 percent for those 16 to 24, and

10 percent for those 16 to 17. We find little effect of the minimum on

the expected earnings of youth; the higher wage rates of some youth are

about offset by the non-employment of others.

     Withruit inrrpczpc .,. i-hg minimum
                  '—-—.—in            '-....rlijrinn
                                             .—.. ... th lQ7Ilc inf1tinn
                                                                    —.—— wniild


have eliminated a large part of the non-employment of the minimum.         If the

1973 minimum of $1 .60 had been maintained through 1978, about two-thirds

of potential employment gains with no minimum would have been achieved.

      We find that the market wage rates of both white and black youth

fell relative to adult wages between 1973 and 1978. These results are

in contrast to raw data that suggest that only white youth wage rates

fell. Apparently because more low wage black than white youth are with-

out work because of the minimum, mean wage rates of those working suggest

that black wages did not fall, while in fact low-wage black youth were
                                     -5-




increasingly without work.

      Graphs of wage distributions that motivate our specification are

presented in Section I.   In Section II we describe our procedure. We

begin with a two-equation model that yields joint estimates of market

wage and employment equations. Under a simplifying assumption that is

not contradicted by empirical evidence, most of the estimates from the

two-equation model can also be obtained from a single-equation model

based only on the wage rates of employed persons. To understand the

approach, some readers may want to proceed directly to a description of

this simple model, without being encumbered by the more complicated two-

equation version that uses all available information on wage rates and

employment status.

      Parameter estimates are shown in Section III. The estimates are

based on May Current Population Survey data for 1973, 1976, 1977, and

1978. These years included the two highest and two lowest minimum wage

levels between 1973 and 1978. Most of the results are presented in

Section IV in the form of simulations based on the estimates in Section

III. Concluding comments are in Section V.


I.   Empirical Distributions of Wage Rates

      Casual reasoning suggests that the impact of the minimum should be

greatest for persons who would otherwise have the lowest wages. Indeed

this is one of the presumptions underlying our analytic approach. The

graphs in Figures 1 through 6 help to demonstrate this assumption and

thus to motivate our subsequent analysis.

      The figures present histograms of empirical wage distributions by

age group for 1973 and 1978. The real minimum was about 10 percent
                                    -6—




higher in 1978 than in 1973.   (It was about 14 percent higher in 1976

and 4 percent higher in 1977, the other years used in our analysis.)

The histograms are broken into 25 cent intervals. For convenience there

is a break at the level of the minimum in each year. The 1973 data are

in 1978 dollars. The minimum was $2.65 in 1978 and the 1973 minimum of

$1.60 was about $2.40 in 1978 dollars. To facilitate graphing, the wage

interval .90 to 1.15 for 1978 includes all persons with wage rages below

1.15 and the 5.90 to 6.15 interval all persons with wage rates above 5.90.

Thus the apparent concentration of wage rates in these intervals must be

interpreted accordingly. A complete graph of the wage distribution

would approach zero gradually in both tails. The highest interval for

1973 also includes all persons above this interval and the lowest interval

all persons below. Figures 1, 3, and 5 pertain to 1978 and Figures 2, 4,

and 6 to 1973.

     It is apparent from the graphs not only that the impact is greater

for younger than for older workers, but also that the impact was greater

in 1978 than in 1973. Relative to the central tendency of wage rates,

the minimum was higher in 1978 than in 1973. While among youth 16 to 17

the effect of the minimum is very apparent, although less so in 1973, it

is much less apparent among those 20 to 24. Indeed, among youth 20 to 24

in 1973 the discontinuity at the minimum is barely perceptible.

     In short, the graphs confirm that the minimum wage impinges more on

youth who would otherwise have low wages than on those whose underlying

wage rates are higher. Additional graphs presented in Meyer and Wise

(1981), show that the impact is greater in low than in high wage areas

and also is greater among the least educated than among those with
                                    —7—




higher levels of education. Furthermore the graphs exhibit two charac-

teristics that are fundamental to our statistical specification. First,

a substantial number of youth are employed at wage rates below the

minimum. Second, there is a very substantial concentration of wage

rates at the minimum, in addition to the discontinuity at the minimum.

There is a spike at the minimum, the distributions are not simply truncated

at this point.
W6E   DIST9If3UTION FOR 16 TO            2L4    TEAR OLDS
                  SOUflCEs     MRT   1978 CPS




                  Figure   1
    NRGE DIST9IBUTION IN 1976 OLLAFIS
       FUR 16 10 211 TEAR OLE3S
                    SULJRCE; MR1   1073 CPS
S




                         330                  ge0   5.3O
                  LISURL     HURLT 1RGE

                Figure   2
              WRGE DIST9tUT1ON F09 16        S   17   TER9 OLDS
  $
                                 SCURCEI MRT 1978 CPS




   S
'I.




   8a
      S


      $
      S ___       ___

   $1             &SIO
                             11___
                           210             110
                               USUAL HURLT   RGE

                           Figure   3
                                     WPGE OtST9IBUTION IN 1976 OOLLAf5
                                        F09 16 AND 17 TERA OLOS
                      ILl
                                                                                   .)IRTCPU= 000 11   E    TOT
      C:PU=                 24 55



                  g




              I!



                  $
                              130               2Oo                         1:30
                                                   USUAL     HURLT   WAGE
                                                                                           s30
                                                                                                      ii
                                                Fiq're   4


-.


-    .-,.   -.y               -   .::-   -:
HRGE DIST9IBUTION F09 20 Ta          211    YERF OLD5
                   SOURCEi ,'IRI 1978 CPS




                                                        I.")




              Figure 5
           NRGE DISTrIIBUTION IN 1978 DOLLAfiS
             FOR 20 10 211 TERA OLOS
                             SOURCE; IIRT    1973 CR9
8


a




*
.4




'I   i3o      I
             L.SO
                    __J_1__JLLJ__j__
                      2eo           3.30   3.S0    430   IeO   5.3O   5'.SO
                            USUAL     HUHLT URGE

                       Figure   6
                                     -14-




II. The Model

     We shall begin by setting forth the basic assumptions of our approach.

Then we shall set forth the statistical details of a two-equation model

including both wage and employment equations. We shall then show that

if the disturbance terms in this model are uncorrelated——which is consis-

tent with our empirical findings--most of our estimates can be obtained

from a single-equation model based on observed wage rates only. The

single equation model is motivated and set forth independently in the

last part of this section. Because the single equation model is easier

to visualize, some readers may wish to read sections A and C without

giving much attention to the more complicated model described in Section

B.



A. Basic Assumptions

     Consider a group of youth characterized by a vector of measured

attributes X. The elements of X include individual measures such as

education and age, as well as area specific indicators of labor market

conditions and calendar year indicators. Suppose that in the absence

of the minimum wage, some of these youth would be employed. Those

employed would receive a distribution of wage rates. We shall refer

to these employment and wage rate outcomes as market outcomes.

     Now suppose that the minimum wage is set at level M. Some persons

will continue to be paid at a wage below the minimum because they work

in non—covered sectors of the economy or on jobs that are not subject

to the minimum. And indeed there may be some shifting of employment

from covered to non-covered sectors and jobs. Others may be paid below
 the minimum because of non-compliance.   For whatever reason, the net

 result is that some persons with an underlying wage below the minimum

will continue to be hired at a wage below M. To allow for this possi-

bility, we suppose that there is a probability P1 that persons with an

underlying wage below M will receive a wage below this level.    (We have

not allowed P1 to depend on the precise value of the underlying wage.)

     We also suppose that some persons with an underlying wage below the

minimum would after its introduction be paid at the minimum.1   Although

a simple application of marginal productivity theory would imply that

persons with an underlying wage below M, would not receive M, there are

several possible explanations for such a possibility. One is that

employers may pay the minimum to persons they would otherwise pay less

than the minimum, but hire fewer or hire them for fewer hours. Whereas

without the minimum, a young person may be hired on a permanent basis

for eight hours each Saturday, if the youth must be paid the minimum,

he may be hired for fewer Saturdays to do only those tasks at which he is

most productive. Employers may, for example, be iCSS prepared to pay for

'slack time.'2

     A variant of this argument, but dependent upon different types of

labor rather than different tasks, is the following:   suppose that out-

put is dependent on several qualities of labor, each with a marginal



     1. Welch and Cunningham [1978] impose an extreme form of this assump-
tion, that is, that all persons with market wage rates below the minimum
are paid the minimum when it is in effect.

     2. Hall [1979] develops a similar point within a framework based on
the theory of employment contracts.
                                    -16-



product conditional on the employment of the others. Suppose the minimum

wage is set above the marginal product of some of the groups. Within

each of these groups, employment could be reduced until the marginal

product of those remaining is equal to the minimum and thus members of

the group are paid at M. This would result in a pile-up of wage rates at

the minimum, as exhibited in the empirical distributions of Section i.'

This possibility could lead also to some upward shifting in the marginal

products of higher quality workers and thus their wage rates as well, a

possibility that is allowed for in our empirical specification.

     Another possibility is that since the minimum wage applies only to

compensation paid directly to an employee, employers can vary the level

of non-wage compensation (e.g. on-the-job training or fringe benefits)

to offset changes in direct compensation. Individuals with market wages

below the minimum may be raised to the minimum in exchange for a compar-

able reduction in on-the-job training expenditures and fringe benefits.

Individuals with market wages above the minimum will be unaffected.2

     Another explanation is that employers hire at the minimum persons

who would otherwise be hired at wage rates below the minimum, but offset

this overpayment with slower wage increases--say, with age for example--

than would be observed without the minimum.3



     1.  This version of a possible explanation was suggested to us by
Roger Gordon.

     2. See Mincer and Leighton [1980] for an analysis of the effects of
the minimum wage on investment in on-the-job training. Wessels [1980]
examines the the theoretical aspect of the minimum wage in a model that
includes fringe benefits.

     3. Lazear [1980] has investigated this possibility, but did not find
much empirical support for it.
                                       -17-




     In addition, employers may find it difficult to identify differ-

ences in the quality of young workers, particularly in view of the high

turnover in youth employment and the absence of an extensive employment

history.   If only because of this lack of precision, employers to comply

with the legislation may raise to the minimum the wage rates of some

employees who would otherwise receive an underlying wage below M.

     In reality, the explanation of the observed pattern of wage rates

is likely to reflect a combination of several plausible tendencies.

Whatever the reason, we suppose that with probability P2, a person with

an underlying wage below the minimum will be employed and paid the

minimum.

     Finally, some persons who would otherwise be employed at market wage

rates below the minimum are without work after its introduction. They are

neither employed below M (which occurs with probability P1) nor at M (which

occurs with probability P2). The probability of being without work because

of the minimum is 1 —        -
                        P1       P2.
     We believe that the major effects of the minimum are concentrated on

persons with sub-minimum market wage rates, and indeed this presumption is

consistent with the primary postulated effects of the minimum.' Nonethe-

less, some of the explanations given above are consistent with some effect

on the pay of youth with higher market wage rates. Other forms of labor



     1. We have not allowed P1 or P9 to depend--for persons with market wage
rates below M--on the differenáe between the market wage and the minimum,
although in principle we think that they would. We believe, however, that our
estimates of P and P2 are good estimates of the average values that would be
obtained if sobewhat more realistic assumptions were incorporated in our
statistical analysis. Indeed, this conclusion is supported by estimates
obtained by dividing the market distribution below the minimum into two inter-
vals and estimating P1 and P2 values for each interval.
                                     -18-


substitution arguments also could lead to an increase in wages of youth

with market rates above the minimum. Sometimes it is argued that institu-

tional hierarchical wage structures together with a minimum may lead to a

general bumping up of the wage distribution. We allow calendar year shifts

in the wage distribution to capture such shifts with changes in the level

of the minimum.1


B. A General Two-Equation Model

     We shall base our estimates on data from the May Current Population

Surveys for 1973, 1976, 1977, and 1978. For our analysis, it is important

to have accurate hourly wage rate data. In particular, we would like to

observe a true picture of the distribution of wage rates around the mini-

mum. Some respondents are not employed, however, and thus do not report

a wage rate.   In addition, a substantial fraction of those who are employed

do not report hourly wage rates.2 In a random sample of 5000 out-of-

school young men 16 to 24, the distribution by employment status and

reported versus not reported hourly wage is as follows:




     1. A large proportion of these are salaried. About 90 percent of
hourly employees report an hourly wage rate.
                      Category                Percent

              Total                        100.0

               Not Employed                 16.1


               Employed                    83.9        100.0

                 Wage Rate Known                       58.8

                 Wage Rate Unknown                     41 .2



We shall show below that estimates can be based only on employed youth

with reported wage rates, and indeed many of our simulations derive

from such estimates. It is clear, however, that the data contain consider-

able information on observed employment status that is not used if this

approach is followed. But to use all the data, our statistical speci-

fication must reflect not only the presumed structural effect of the

minimum wage, but must also reflect the unknown wage rates of some of

those who are employed. We proceed as follows:

      Consider again a group of individuals with measured attributes X.

Suppose that in the absence of a minimum wage, employment and wage rela-

tionships in a given year would be of the form


                           E = Xo. + El

(1)                        W X + E2
                           R E probability of a
                               reported hourly waqe.


Employment is denoted by the unobserved index variable E with the property

that an individual is employed if E > 0, W is the wage rate, c and     are

parameters to be estimated, and E1 and £2 are disturbance terms with

covariance matrix
                                           -20-




                                               PG

(2)
                                               G2]


Note that E and W are specified in reduced form. Given X, R is assumed

to be uncorrelated with E and W, although R could in principle depend on

 X and need not be the same for each person with observed attributes   X.
        In fact, we use several years of data so that E and W are specified

as



                               Et =    X   +        +



                               W
                                   =
                                       X d +        +
                                                        E2t

where      and dt are year-specific shifts in the underlying employment and

wage relationships, and W. is the real wage rate in year t.    The t and dt
are intended to capture shifts due to changes in the real minimum from one

year to the next. For example, as discussed above, an upward shift in

the minimum may result in an overall upward movement in the wage rates of

all youth, in addition to the effect on those with sub-minimum market wages.

In practice, we are not able to distinguish the effect of the minimum on the

year specific shifts from the effect of other aggregate changes in the

economy, like demographic trends. We shall argue below, however, that the

estimated values are not consistent with a general upward shift in wage

rates because of increases in the real minimum. To simplify exposition,

we shall repress for now the subscript t, as well as the year-specific



     1.  The substantive assumption is that given X, the random component
of R is not correlated with    or s2.
                                                -21-



 terms, proceeding with the implicit understanding that they are incorpor—

 ated in the vector X.


      For expository purposes we shall pause for a moment and consider a

diagram that relates the values of E, W, and R to the possible outcomes

in the presence of a minimum wage, as shown in Figure 7. The entries within

the diagram pertain to outcomes with a minimum wage. The notation on the

top and bottom outside margins of the diagram pertain to underlying values

of the employment and wage variables, On the right outside margin is

indicated whether, among persons who would be employed in the absence of

a minimum, a wage would be reported. The single-lined area indicates the

proportion of the group who would not be employed with a minimum wage.

Those with E < 0 would not be employed without the minimum and added to

this group are those with W <        M   who are not employed with a minimum--the
two areas indicated by 1 -           -
                                                Some of the latter group would have
                                P1       P2.


                         W< M                               W>M




                                                                     Wage
                                                                     Reported




                  Empl oyed
                  w<M (P1)

                  Employed                               Empi oyed   Wage Not
                                                         w>M         Reported




        E<0
                l 2V
                /NOt Employed


                                               E>0

                                         Figure 7
                                           -22-




a reported wage and others would not. We observe hourly wage rates for

persons schematically included in the crossed area.              (This is the group

used in the procedure to be described in Section C below. From this group

we can also estimate P1 and P2.) The remaining group we observe to be

employed but we don't observe their wage rates. Our goal then is to

describe the probabilities of the possible outcomes.

       To do this we assume that E and W (a transformation of the wage rate)

are distributed bivariate normal. To facilitate computation--and we

believe without appreciably altering the results--we suppose, as noted

above, that the unmeasured determinants of the underlying employment and

wage equations on the one hand and the unmeasured determinants of whether

a wage is reported on the other, are not correlated. This allows us to

proceed with a bivariate instead of a trivariate distribution.1                         For ease

of exposition we have only specified two relationships in equation (5).

We might more formally have added a third, say S = X3             -1-        where an

employed worker has an observed wage if S > 0.            If      is uncorrelated

with      and £2. however, expressions like Pr(E >         0,   W =     w,   S >   0)   can

be written as Pr(E >   0,   W =   w)Pr(S   >   0).   Our assumptions lead to

expressions like these and rather than carry the third equation through-

out the analysis, we have suppressed it, simply letting R indicate the

probability of a reported hourly wage. (Extensions of this reasoning

demonstrates also that if El and £2 are uncorrelated, then consistent

estimates of P1 and P2 and the parameters of the market wage function



     1.  We shall not explain this in detail but without this assumption,
the development would proceed much as we have laid it out except that we
would have to evaluate trivariate integrals in some instances.
                                                         -23-




are obtained by the procedure to be described in Section C. We shall

return to this.)

        If we consider all persons in the CPS survey, there are five possi-

ble observed outcomes, corresponding to the schematic diagram in Figure 7:



                      (i) Not employed,

                     (ii) Employed with a wage w less than P1,

 (3)             (iii) Employed with a wage w equal to M,

                     (iv) Employed with a wage w greater than M,

                     (v) Employed without a reported wage.


       We shall specify the minimum wage as the interval from M1 to M2, where
                           1
M2 -   M1
            is one cent.           Then if f     represents              the density of W, if         is a

standard normal density function, and if                             and       are standard normal

univariate and bivariate distribution functions respectively, the proba-

bilities of the possible outcomes are as follows:


               (i)    Pr[Not employed]
                       = Pr[E < 0]
                       + Pr[E > 0 and W < M](l                   -
                                                                         P1 - P2)
                       = 1 - [Xc]
                       +              M      X       -               -
                                                                             - P2)        =
                                                                                              Pr(l)
                                                         ].(l
(4)           (ii) Pr[Employed with a wage w less than N]
                       = Pr[E > 0, W = w].P1R
                       = Pr[E > 0W = w]f(W).P1R
                       = [X + (p/)(w- X)1
                               I

                               L
                                      (1 —
                                               2 )          -'
                                                                 1(w_-_X\. R = Pr(2)R
                                                                                     jl
     1. In preliminary estimates we experimented with wider intervals to test
the sensitivity of our model to this range. Within a moderate range around
M, our results are not appreciably affected by the size of the interval.
                                                                 -24-




               (iii) Pr[Employed with a wage w equal to M]
                          = Pr[E         >   0, M <      W       <
                                                                         M2].R
                          + Pr[E >           0,   W <
                                                        M].P2.R

                                    r        M2-X                -
                                                                         1
                                                                              -                        M1-X    -
                                                                                                                       ;    -
                                                                         Pj
                                             N2
                          +                              ;       -                         =
                                                                                                   Pr(3).R
                                                                         P].P2.R



(4)              (iv) Pr[Employed with a wage w greater than M]
                          =                  0,   W =
                                  Pr[E   >              w].R
                          = Pr[E >
                                             0W       w]f(W).R
                                                             -                                     -
                          =
                                                                                                        X) R                    = Pr(4).R
                                                                     X)]i(w
                     (v) Pr[Employed without a wage]
                                                                                                       - R)
                           =
                             Pr[E > 0, W <        +
                                                        M](P1                      P2).(l
                              + Pr[E         >0, W>M](l -                         R)

                                           -X
                              =
                                  2 [x, M                            -
                                                                         p] •(P1
                                                                                               +
                                                                                                       P7)(l       -
                                                                                                                           R)

                                            -X    M                                                                             =
                                                                                                                                    Pr(5).(l   - R)
                              +
                                  2      -                                        .(l - R)




      We see from (i) that the probability that an individual is not employed

      is given by the probability of not being employed without the minimum,

      Pr[E <   0];   plus the probability that without the minimum he would be

      employed at a wage below M, times the probability that he is not employed

      below the minimum or at the minimum (1 -                                         —                  The probability that
                                                                                  P1           P2).
      a person is employed with a wage W less than M is given by the probability

      of being employed without the minimum, with wage rate W = w, Pr[E >                                                                 0,
                                                              —25—




W =   w],   times the probability of being employed below M in the presence

of the minimum, P1, times the probability R of reporting a wage rate.

Similar explanations pertain to the remaining expressions.

       The log-likelihood function for N observations is then given by



                  N1                           N2                                         N5
              =         in Pr(l) +                   ln Pr(2). +                      +
(5)                                                                                             in Pr(5).
                  i=l                          i=l                                        i=i



              +         +            +         ln R +             ln (l-R)
                  (N2           N3       N4)                 N5



where i indexes individuals and N1 +                                   + .       . . + N5        N. Thus as long
                                                                  N2

as R does not depend on parameters that enter elsewhere in the likelihood

function, it may be disregarded in estimation. Equation (5) is maximized

with respect to a, ,                 c,   P1. P2. and p.

      Now suppose that, given X, E and W are uncorreiated so that p =                                               0.

Equation (4) may then be rewritten as follows:


                    (i) Pr[Not employed]
                            =    1   -


                            + [Xa].[(M               -   X)/G](l             -
                                                                                 P1
                                                                                      -
                                                                                          P2)

                   (ii) Pr[Employed with a wage w less than M]




(6)               (iii) Pr[Employed with a wage w equal to Ni]

                                                                                           M1 -   X
                            =
                                               M2                 -      -                             -

                                                                                  [Xa
                                 {[Xa                                                                       P]}.R
                            +                            -
                                 [Xa][(M1                    X)/a]P2R
                                                                            -26-




      (6)                   (iv) Pr[Employed with a wage w greater than M
                                   =



                             (v)   Pr[Employed without a wage]
                                       =
                                               [Xcx].[(M           -
                                                                        X)/o](P1
                                                                                        +
                                                                                                P2)(l
                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                               R)
                                                           -                - X)/G]}(l            - R)



  The probability of having an observed wage is equal to 1 -                                                         (i)    -
                                                                                                                                (v),
 which is given by


(7)                          Pr[Employed with an Observed Wage]
                               =   R[Xc]{l             -   [(M          -
                                                                            X)/cy](1        -
                                                                                                 P1
                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                           P2)}
                               =
                                   R[Xc].D

  where D             {l -    [(M          -
                                                   X)/G](l     -
                                                                       P1
                                                                            -
                                                                                P2)}.
            The distribution of the observed wage rates, conditional on observing

  a wage, can be derived by dividing equations (6, ii), (6, iii), and (6, iv),

  by (7).         If we denote observed wage rates by h(w), then their distribution

      is given by




                                           f(w)P1
                                                   D                                                      ofw<M1
                                                                   -

      (8)              h(w) =
                                       + P2.[M1-x)/]                                                      if        < w <




                                       f(w)                                                               f M2 <      W
                                               D




  From this expression, we can form a likelihood function and estimate

            ,   and   ci.     Thus, given our assumptions, consistent estimates can be
                                                  -27-



obtained from the single equation model if p =                    0.

       But in this model, a zero correlation does not mean that employment

and wage equations can be estimated separately with no loss of information.

Estimation of the two equations jointly provides information that cannot

be duplicated by estimating each separately. Indeed a market employment

equation cannot be estimated without considering a wage function as well.

There is no employment equation analogous to the conditional wage function

that does not depend on the wage function. And estimating the two equa-

tions jointly provides additional information on wage rates, even with

a zero correlation. As usual, the use of more information constrains

the parameter estimates to reflect more empirical fact and to this extent

provides better estimates, but in this case the information does not

'separate' as might be expected on the basis of experience with more

standard models.1


C. A Direct Specification of the Single—Equation Model

       We find empirically that indeed the correlation between the distur-

bance terms in the employment and wage equations is not significantly

different from zero. Thus because of computational ease we shall present



       1.Suppose, however, that the probability of w < N were known and that
   E   1
         P1
            -
            -
                     P.
                   Then the probabilities of employment and non-employment
aPe given respectively by

                Pr[Employed] =   Pr[E > 0]   -
                                                  Pr[E   >   0].Pr[w   <
                                                                           M]P3
                Pr[Not Employed] = Pr[E <        0] + Pr[E    >   0].Pr[w   <
                                                                                M]P3
the likelihood function formed from these terms could be used to estimate
a in E = Xa +    , together with the non-employment parameter P. From
this perspective, other single employment equation formulation of the
effect of the minimum can be thought of as incorporating the term
Pr[E > 0]•Pr[W < M].P in an ad hoc way by including M ÷ (an average wage)
as one of the X variables.
                                        -28-



a substantial number of results based on the single equation model. For

expository purposes, we shall also present in this section a direct deri-

vation of this specification.

     Again, consider a group of youth characterized by a vector of

measured attributes X.   Suppose that in the absence of a minimum wage,

the distribution in the population of wages paid to employed persons

with attributes X would be described by the density function f(W), the

"underlying' or market distribution of wages. Graphically, think of it

as the solid line in Fiqure 8.




                                I




                                    /          \_h(w)

                         //
                     —                                                  -
                                I
                                                                  w,W

                                    Figure 8


Recall the discussion in Section A above and suppose that the minimum is

set at level N. Persons with an underlying wage below N, and who would

have been employed without a minimum, in the presence of the minimum will

receive a wage below this level with probability P1. Also, for the reasons

set forth above, with probability P2. a person with an underlying wage

below the minimum will be employed and paid the minimum. Those with

market wage rates below ri who are not hired at or below the minimum are

without work because of it, with probability 1 -        -
                                                   P1       P2.
                                           -29-




       These ideas can be described more formally as follows. Suppose that

the expected underlying wage of individuals with measured personal and

regional attributes x is given by X13 and that the variance of wage rates

among persons with characteristics X is cr2. This gives rise to a wage

distribution f(W) like that shown in Figure 8.         That is,


(9)



where c is a disturbance term with variance c2.

       With a minimum wage M, wage rates may be distributed as represented

graphically by the dotted function in Figure 8. The form of this

function depends on the values of P1 and P2. For example, if P2 were

zero, there would be no oile-up of wages at M, only a jump in the density

function at M.        If both P1 and P2 were zero, the density function would

be truncated at M.

       Let the likelihood of observed wage rates be given by h(w).         It may
be rewritten as




                          f(w) P
                                                          ofw<M1

                                                           f
                                       -


                h(w) =                                             < W <
(10)


                          f(w)                            if £12     W
                           0



where D =       -                            and M is again a one cent interval
            1
                    [(M1-Xi3)/c](l-P1-P2),
                                          -30-


from M1 to M2. This formulation is identical to equation (8) in Section

B.1   It may be arrived at by assuming that a random sample is drawn from

the underlying distribution of market wage rates. Then, of the values

below M, some are set to M (with probability P2), while others are

                                          -           Then h(w) is the distribution
discarded (with probability (1 -     P1       P2)).
of observed wage rates in terms of the underlying distribution f. The

denominator D may be thought of as a normalizing factor assuring that the

density function integrates to 1.2 One can also think of h(w) as the

conditional distribution of wages, given that a wage is observed. The

other elements of the function may be explained in the following way.

A value of w <   M   will be observed with likelihood P1 times the likelihood

of an underlying wage W = w.      The likelihood of an observed wage at the

minimum (1 cent interval) is equal to the likelihood of an underlying wage

at the minimum, plus the probability that the underlying wage is below the

minimum, but is raised to the minimum. Observed wage rates above the




     1. Following standard practice, the log of wages is used as the depen-
dent variable in our wage model. Since our results are likely to be sensi-
tive to this distributional assumption, we have also experimented with other
transformations of wages, in particular the Box-Cox transformation:


                                      A
                                                 if A    0

                                                 if A = 0


As expected we find that the predicted unemployment from tñe minimum wage
is least when wages are assumed to be log normal (i.e., A = 0) and great-
est when nominal wages are assumed to be normally distributed (i.e., A = 1).

     2.  It is the probability that an individual who would have an observed
wage rate in the absence of the minimum will also have one after the intro-
duction of the minimum. Or it is the probability that a person who is
employed without the minimum will also be employed with the minimum.
                                                -31-



minimum follow the distribution of the underlying wage, except that a

larger proportion of observed than of underlying wages may be above the

minimum, as indicated by the denominator D.

       Suppose that among N persons with observed wage rates, N1 are below

M, N2 are "at M and, N3 are above M. For these N persons indexed by i,

the log-likelihood of the realized observations would be



                      N1                 N2                N3
                L =         in h(w.) +         in h(w) +         in h(w),
(11)
                      i=l
                                  '
                                         i=l               i=i



with the specification of h(w) for each group taken from equation (3).

This function is maximized with respect to F, G,                      and P2.
                                                                 P1

       Strictly speaking, the results of this model should be interpreted

as pertaining only to hourly wage employees. In practice, however, the

results based on this model do not differ substantially from those based

on the two equation model, that is based on data for all persons, includ-

ing both hourly and salaried youth.
III. Parameter Estimates

     We shall first describe the variables used in the analysis. Then

estimates based on the single equation model are presented, followed by

estimates based on the two-equation specification.


A. The Variables

      The variables used in the estimation are defined as follows:


           Age: Age in years.

           School :   Number of years of school completed.

           Race: Equal to 1 for blacks and zero otherwise.

           Never Married: Equal to 1 if the person has never married

                 and zero if married, widowed, or divorced.

           Area Wage: The average wage of adult manufacturing workers

                 in the SMSA or state in which the person lives, usually

                entered as the logarithm of area wage.

           Area Unemployment: The adult unemployment rate in the SMSA

                or state in which the person lives.

           Wage: The logarithm of the hourly wage rate.

           Employment: An indicator variable equal to 1 if the individ-

                ual is employed or zero otherwise.

           Youth Differential :   Dichotomous calendar year variables for

                 1976, 1977, and 1978.


    Only the youth differential variables require explanation. We assume

that youth wages increase over time with the adult wage index at, but may

deviate from this index in year t according to the multiplier dt. Then
                                             -33—




the wage rate of a youth who lives in area k in year t is given by



                          -
                              X              •e
                                                  £



(12)


                 in Wkt       Xktl +   ln   at +       in      dt + £2


The adult index at we know from published data and thus it may be subtracted

from the left-hand side of the equation; the dt must be estimated. Alterna-

tively, at can be thought of as a wage deflator with estimation of the real

wage equation


(13)                  in (Wkt/at) =
                                        Xktl          +   in    dt + E2


The results are virtually invariant to the use of an adult wage index or

the Consumer Price Index for a.1 To estimate the dt. we have entered

calendar year indicator variables for 1976 through 1978.

       These variables pick up shifts in the distribution of youth wage

       OVer 4--.-           4-- QUUI
            LilliC, ECILIVC LU  -.A.,13- ,., 1aLe. LLIIIIc1Le UI
                                      1. W9C                  --C
                                                                  LJtIII WI.-I1
                                                                              II
reflect   overall movement in youth wages resulting from changes in the

minimum wage, but they also reflect other determinants of youth wage rates

relative to adult rates, like the relative numbers of young and older

persons. We shall argue below, however, that the estimates themselves

together with trends in the real minimum wage are inconsistent with an

important upward shift in the distribution of youth wage rates with



     1. The results reported in the paper are based on an index calculated
from area wage data. Virtually the same results are obtained using the
Consumer Price Index.
                                      -34-




increases in the minimum.'


B.   Single Equation Estimates

      We shall first present pooled estimates by age group and then by race.

Most of our simulation results are based on these estimates. We shall then

present estimates based only on 1973 data and estimates based only on 1978

data and shall also discuss the "fit" of the model for 1978.

      1. Pooled Years Parameter Estimates by Age Group

      Parameter estimates based on the data from four years pooled together

are shown in Table 1, by age group.

      Consider first the estimates of P1 and P2 for out-of-school young men

16 to 24. The estimates indicate that during the period 1973 to 1978

approximately 37 percent of youth who otherwise would have been employed

at market wage rates below the minimum are still employed below the

legislated minimum. Another 36 percent of those with market sub-minimum

wages are employed at the minimum. Approximately 27 percent (l-.374-.357)

of this group are without work because of the minimum.

     The youngest sub-minimum group are the most likely to be employed

below the minimum; the oldest are the least likely to be employed below

this level. Whereas 49 percent of 16 to 17 year olds who otherwise would

be employed below the minimum are still employed below M, only 33 percent

of the subminimum workers in the 20 to 24 age group are employed below the



     1.  If there were such a shift, we could think of an upward shift in
the wage distribution with the minimum imposed on this shifted distribu-
tion. Then our calculated employment effects reflect the estimated employ-
ment effect on those whose market wage rates are still below the minimum.
Our estimates would not capture the negative employment effect of such an
overall increase in youth wages.
                                           -35-




              Table   1   :   Parameter Estimates for Out-of-School
                   Male Youth, Pooled Years, by Age Groupa


                                                    Age Group
        Variable
                                 16-24       20-24          16-19       16-17

Age                              0.062       0.041          0.107       0.053
                               (16.283)      (8.434)      (13.224)     (2.114)

School                           0.022       0.019         0.027        0.009
                                (6.582)     (6.128)        (6.447)     (1.148)

Black                           -0.062      -0.067         -0.103      -0.058
                                (2.754)     (3.187)        (4.564)     (1.553)

Never Married                   -0.156      -0.172         -0.134      -0.089
                               (10.249)    (12.188)        (6.720)     (1.559)

Log Area Wage                    0.566       0.586         0.302        0.119
                               (12.570)    (13.325)        (7.630)     (1.721)

Area Unemployment               -0.005      -0.006        -0.003       -0.010
                                (1.160)     (1.537)       (0.732)      (1.423)

Youth Differential:
1976                            -0.047      -0.046         -0.077      -0.028
                                (1.921)     (1.814)        (3.371)     (0.623)

1977                            -0.051      -0.027        -0.122       -0.082
                                (2.337)     (1.192)       (6.036)      (2.294)

1978                            -0.021      -0.031        -0.088       -0.107
                                (1.023)     (1.508)       (4.474)      (2.919)

Constant                        —0.399      -0.105        -1.255      —0.213
                                (4.800)     (0.948)       (9.051)     (0.497)



P1
                                 0.374       0.334          0.397      0.490
                                (9.136)     (7.064)       (12.421)     (8.881)

P2
                                 0.358       0.391         0.367       0.341
                                (8.502)     (7.338)      (11.039)      (7.335)
                                 0.345       0.347         0.321        0.297
                               (70.375)    (71.085)      (82.414)     (65.001)
N                                3000        3000          3000          921

a
     T—Statistics are in parenthesis.
                                        -36-



minimum. The estimated proportion raised to the minimum (the P2 values)

do not differ a great deal by age group although P2 is highest for those

20 to 24 (.39) and lowest for the 16 to 17 group (.34). The percentage

employment effects implied by these values depend not only on their

magnitudes but on the proportion of sub-minimum workers in each age group.

The simulations presented below reflect both of these factors. The absolute

employment effects depend in addition on the number of workers in the

age group.

     The remaining parameter estimates on the variables X all have the

expected signs, but some of the magnitudes are of interest. Youth wage

rates vary across regions with adult wages but less than in proportion

to the wages of older workers. For all youth, a one percent increase in

adult wages is associated with a .56 percent increase in youth wages.

For 16 to 17 year olds the elasticity is close to zero (.12).

     The estimated youth differentials indicate that the market wage rates

of young workers fell relative to the wage rates of older workers between

1973 and 1978. In particular, this is true for the youngest age groups,

as indicated by the following tabulation. In part at least, these declines

reflect the


                 Tabulation 1.     Youth Differentials by /\ge
                                   Group (see Table 1)

                            16-24         20-24      16-19        16-17

              1976          —4.7          -4.6       -7.7         -2.8

              1977          —5.1          -2.7      -12.2         -8.2

              1978          —2.1          -3.1       -7.7        —10.7


relatively larger proportion of youth in the labor market. In direction,
                                       -37-



they are not unlike the relationships between average observed wage rates

for young versus older employed workers. These estimates, however, are

corrected for the truncation effects of the minimum. That is, a substan-

tial number of low-wage workers are without work and thus have no observed

wage rate and are not included in the averages of surveyed workers.

Market wage rates fell faster than the uncorrected survey results would

suggest. This is especially true for black youth. (We shall return below

to separate estimates by race.)

     Although it is not possible to distinguish shifts in the wage distri-

bution due to the minimum from shifts due to other causes, such as the

increase in the relative number of youth, the year effects appear to be

inconsistent with the possibility that increases in the minimum result in

noticeable overall upward shifts in the market wage distribution of youth.

The real minimum, relative to the 1973 minimum, together with the esti-

mated youth differentials for each year are shown below in tabular and

in graphical form.


          Tabulation 2. Youth Differential Versus Real Minimum

                                  Real             Youth
               Year               Minimum          Differential

               1973               base                base

               1976               +13.8%              -4.7%

               1977               +   3.8             -5.1

               1978               +10.0               -2.1
                                    -38-




              Youth Wage Differential
              Relative to 1973 (%)




                      +5.0         +10.0       +15.0
          0

                                                       Relative to 1973 (%)




       -5.0                                    1 976

                   1977



                  Figure 10.   Youth Differential Versus
                               the Real Minimum


Whereas the real minimum was higher in each of the years 1976 to 1978 than

it was in 1973, youth wage rates were lower relative to adult wage rates

in each of these years. In addition, there is no systematic relation-

ship between the real minimum and the youth differential. To be a bit

more systematic we could think of the youth differential as being a

function of a time trend, possibly due to demographic effects, and the

minimum. Then we could graph the youth differential against calendar year

and "fit" a line to these points. Even this formulation does not yield

residuals from the time trend that are high when the minimum is high and

vice versa.1 Of course, we only have the information for four years and



     1. Although we have mentioned the possibility that youth wage rates
were falling over this period because of the increasing number of young
persons in the labor force, we believe that this explanation is not a
powerful one. The proportion of youth in the population rose only about
1 percentage point between 1971 and 1980, whereas during the previous
decade the percent of youth in the population increased from 12 to 16.
                                     -39-




 additional data could reveal a relationship. The weight of this evidence,

 however, does not point to a general increase in all youth wage rates with

 increases in the minimum. We do not observe a general bumping up effect.

 Thus in the simulations below we have assumed that changes in the minimum

do not lead to shifts in the whole wage distribution but we do allow for

the estimated shifts in youth market wage rates over time.


     2.   Pooled Years Parameter Estimates by Race

     Estimates for out-of-school youth 16 to 24 are shown in Table 2 by

race. The estimated P1 value for whites is virtually the same as for

blacks (.364 versus .358), with the estimated P2 value for whites some-

what lower than for blacks (.354 versus .400). ccording to these esti-

mates, 28 percent of whites who would otherwise be employed are without

work because of the minimum, while 24 percent of sub-minimum blacks are

without work for this reason. Thus effects of the minimum for a sub-

minimum black are not much different than for a sub-minimum white. But

a larger proportion of blacks than whites have submininium market wage

rates and thus the employment effect is proportionately greater for blacks

than for whites, as shown below.

     The estimates also indicate that youth market wage rates for both

blacks and whites were falling over the period, relative to adult wages.

The youth differentials by race are shown below.
                                 -40-



         Table 2 : Parameter Estimates for Out-of-School
                Male Youth, Pooled Years, by Racea

                                              Race
          Variable
                                  White                     Black

Age                               0.061                      0.058
                                (15.880)                   (10.469)

School                            0.022                      0.035
                                 (6.537)                    (5.854)

Never Married                    -0.157                     -0.152
                               (-10.413)                   (-6.361)

Log Area Wage                     0.567                      0.596
                                (12.424)                   (10.297)

Area Unemployment                -0.007                     _0.001
                                (-1.628)                   (-0.129)

Youth Differential:
1976                             -0.049                     0.016
                                (-1.998)                    (0.373)

1977                             -0.051                    —0.074
                                (-2.368)                   (—2.031)

1978                             -0.025                    -0.077
                                (—1.219)                   (—2.120)

Constant                         -0.350                    -0.607
                                (-4.221)                   (—4.745)


                                  0.364                      0.358
P1
                                 (9.002)                    (6.998)

                                  0.354                     0.400
P2
                                 (8.381)                    (6.688)

a                                 0.344                      0.355
                                (9.064)                    (45.456)

N                                 3000                       1300


a T-statistics are in parenthesis.
                                     —41—




               Tabulation 3. Youth Differentials by Race, Based
                              on Separate Estimates for Whites
                             and Blacks 16 to 24 (see Table 2)

                                    White           Black

                    1976             _4•9            +1.6
                   1977              -5.1            -7.4

                   1978              -2.5            -7.7


 These estimates are in contrast to average wage rates that show declining

 wages for white youth, but not for blacks.1 As mentioned above, our

 estimates correct for the minimum wage disemployment effects that affect

 blacks to a relatively greater extent than whites. Because the minimum

reduces the employment of low wage workers, it also tends to make observed

average wage rates higher than they would be without the minimum. In

presenting market estimates, our results correct for this effect.   In

addition, our estimates control for the individual attributes listed in

the tables, in particular age and schooling.

     The remaining parameter estimates except schooling do not differ sub-

stantially by race. The black estimated schooling coefficient, however,

is 60 percent higher than the estimate for whites (.035 versus .022).

These estimates are consistent with higher rates of return to college edu-

cation for blacks than for whites, as found by Freeman [1976]. But these

estimates are not limited to college versus high school education, they

reflect average returns over all observed levels.

     3.   1973 Versus 1978

     Parameter estimates for 1973 and for 1978 are shown in Table 3. The



    1.   See Freeman and Wise [1979] for wage rates of youth relative to
adults for 1967 and 1977.
                                     -42-



          Table 3   :   Parameter Estimates for Out-of-School
                 Male Youth 16 to 24, 1973 and l978



                                                   Year
         Variable
                                     1973                        1978

Age                                  0.054                       0.065
                                   (15.099)                     (15.943)

School                               0.028                       0.034
                                    (8.007)                     (8.636)

Black                              -0.117                       —0.107
                                    (5.929)                      (4.078)

Never Married                       -0.178                      -0.196
                                   (12.075)                     (11.482)

                                                                -0.032
                                                                 (2.005)

Area Wage                            0.128                        0.084
                                   (12.243)                     (10.773)

Area Unemployment                    0.013                       0.008
                                    (3.271)                      (1.517)

Constant                            -0.783                      -0.822
                                    (8.566)                      (7.476)


                                     0.312                       0.229
P1
                                    (7.033)                      (9.202)

                                    0.249                        0.451
P2
                                    (6.531)                      (9.719)

a                                    0.340                       0.373
                                   (79.285)                     (64.293)

N                                    3115                         3005




a T-statistics are in parenthesis.

b
     This variable was not available for 1973.
                                             -43-



estimated      coefficients for 1973 are very close to those for 1978. Al-

though the estimates for P1 and P2 do differ between the years, their

sums are quite similar---.56 in 1973 and .68 in 1978. Thus the likelihood

that youth with market wage rates below the minimum are out of work because

of the minimum (1 -         -         is by these estimates .44 in 1973 and .32 in
                       P1       P2)
1978.

        Recall that we have not allowed P1 and P2 to depend on the difference

between the market wage rates and the minimum. We believe, however, that

persons with market wage rates below but close to the minimum are more

likely than those with lower market wage rates to receive the minimum.

If the minimum is nearer the tail of the distribution, a relatively small

proportion of those below it will have market wage rates close to the

minimum. This could explain a lower proportion of those with sub-minimum

market wage rates receiving the minimum in 1973 than in 1978.          It could

also explain the higher value of P1 in 1973 than in 1978, indicating that

a larger proportion of those with market wage rates below the minimum

continued to be hired below M in 1973 than in 1978.1 Nonetheless, we shall

base most of our simulations on a model with P1 and P2 the same for all

years. Although this may not be accurate for any individual year, we

believe that our estimates provide good average values and thus realistic

average employment effects.

        The pooled data of course allow us to observe different portions of

the underlying market wage distribution, depending on the level of the



     1.  In addition, the coverage of the minimum wage legislation was
increased somewhat between 1973 and 1978 (in 1974) and this would have
reduced somewhat the likelihood of employment below the minimum.
                                     -44-




minimum in a given year. Combining these observations we believe provides

more accurate estimates for the time period than those provided by data

for any single year. As mentioned above, however, it may be that employ-

ment effects for a single year are most accurately obtained from data

based on that year only. For purposes of comparison, we shall present

below simulations based on the various model estimates.   In general, the

results are quite similar.

     4. The Model Fit

     Unlike most more traditional methods of analysis, the distributional

assumptions play a key role in our work. It has become standard practice

to assume that wage functions are log-normal, and the results reported

above are based on a log-normal distribution as well. However, to check

the sensitivity of our results to this assumption and to determine a

"best' fit, we also experimented with other distributions, using a Box-

Cox transformation of wage rates.1

     A comparison of the 1978 empirical distribution of wage rates by

interval for out-of-school male youth 16 to 24 versus the predicted

distribution based on the log-normal wage distribution is shown in Figure

9.   It appears from the graph that the fit is quite close, especially at

the tails where alternative distributions are likely to give different

results. Thus if we can fit the tails in particular, we have added con-

fidence in our results. The actual percentages below the minimum, at the

minimum (interval), and above $5.90 are 4.9, 15.6, and 21.1 respectively;

the predicted percentages are 5.0, 16.1, and 18.8. No continuous distribu-



     1.   See footnote 1, page 30.
     WAGE DISIBIBUTION FOB 16 TO 24 YEAR OLOS
            SUBGROUP: MALE NON-STUDENTS
                      SOURCE MAT 1976 CPS




                                     Empirical   distribution
                                            distribution



                                                                01




                   Figure   9

I.
                                     -46-




tiori, of course, can capture precisely the pile-up of wage rates at

"magnet" values like $3.00, $4.00, or $5.00.

     A somewhat more formal way to measure the fit is to calculate a

chi-square statistic based on the differences between the empirical and

predicted frequencies within the intervals. The statistic:



                                U (n. -

                               j=l     n




(where n. is the number of observations in the th interval, and U is the
                                                                     + K)
number of intervals) has a chi-square distribution with N-(J -
                                                                 1


degrees of freedom, where K is the number of parameters estimated in our

model. Among a wide range of distributions that we tried, the log-normal

gives the smallest chi-square value. It is very much smaller than the

chi-square value based on the assumption of normality for example (286.1

versus 548.7).* Although we have not made formal tests for each year, we

have used the log-normal throughout.


C. Two-Equation Estimates

     Estimates based on the two-equation model described in Section lI-B

are shown in Table 4. The estimated P1 and P2 values are very close to

the single-equation estimates shown in Table 2 for the 16 to 24 age group.

The wage equation    parameters are also very close to the single equation

estimates. The estimated value of p, the correlation between the distur-



      1.   This section has been reproduced from Meyer and Wise [1981].

      2. We could have allowed the distribution to vary from sample to
 sample, but we concluded that the complexities inherent in such a pro-
 cedure would not be offset by appreciably improved estimates.
                                     -47-

       Table   4 :     Two-Equation Estimates for Out-of-School
                     Male Youth 16 to 24, Pooled Yearsa




                                        Wage                   Employment
       Variable                        Equation                 Equation

Age                                      0.061                    -0.011
                                       (13.940)                   (0.648)
School                                  0.019                      0.116
                                        (3.369)                   (9.439)

Black                                  -0.048                     -0.636
                                        (1.207)                   (8.734)

Never Married                          -0.140                     -0.464
                                        (5.765)                   (6.943)

Log Area Wage                           0.609                     -0.779
                                      (10.244)                    (3.293)

Area Unemployment                      -0.003                     -0.062
                                       (0.518)                    (3.712)

Youth    Differential:
1976                                   -0.034                      0.092
                                       (1.211)                    (0.830)
1977                                   -0.039                      0.161
                                       (1.543)                    (1.642)
1978                                   —0.025                      0.175
                                       (1.036)                    (1.862)
Constant                               -0.348                      0.725
                                       (3.357)                    (1.875)



P1
                                                    0.364
                                                   (9.116)

P2
                                                    0.392
                                                   (6.225)

P                                                  -0.251
                                                   (0.716)

                                                    0.352
                                                  (30.228)

N                                                   5000

a
    T-statistics are in parenthesis.
                                    -48-




bance terms in the market wage and employment equations, is not signif-

icantly different from zero.'

     The market employment equation estimates reveal two unexpected

results.   First, once we correct for schooling, race, and marital status

(as well as the regional and calendar year variables) there is no rela-

tionship between age and the probability of employment. This is in

contrast to much tabular employment data that shows a substantial rela-

tionship between age and employment. According to our results, however,

this is a spurious result reflecting schooling and, in particular, marital

status. Evaluated at the mean of other variables, our results indicate

that married youth are about .11 more likely to be employed than single

young men, and that a year of schooling increases the likelihood of

employment by about .03. Controlling for other variables black youth are

about .16 less likely to be employed than white youth. Although it is

plausible that wage rates and employment status affect marriage decisions,

we believe that the estimates reflect at least a strong relationship

between marital status and cost of non-employment, or conversely, between

marital status and the value of income. There is likely to be a causal

relationship between marital status and the desire for employment and

higher paying jobs.

     Second, the market probability of employment increased somewhat




     1.  The estimated value is negative. Because it is estimated very
imprecisely, it may not be appropriate to rationalize it. However, our
estimates control for marital status which is not common among other
estimates of employment and wage equations. Since marital status has a
positive effect on both the wage and employment equations, its exclusion
would tend to induce a positive correlation between the disturbance terms.
                                    -49-




between 1973 and 1978 according to the calendar year differentials,

while youth market wage rates were falling relative to adult wages. This

would suggest, for example, that if demographic trends tended to reduce

the youth employment ratio, they were more than offset by falling youth

wage rates. Without the minimum, youth would have been 2.3 percent more

likely to be employed in 1976 than in 1973, 3.9 percent more likely in

1977, and 4.3 percent more likely in 1978.1 These estimates of course

control for adult area unemployment rates.




     1.  The estimates represent the derivative of the probability of
employment with respect to the calendar year indicator variables, evaluated
at the mean of the other variables.
                                          -50-



IV. Simulated       Employment and Wage Effects of the Minimum

     We shall first present results based on the single—equation model

and then some results based on the two-equation model that cannot be

inferred from the single-equation parameter estimates only. The simula-

tion results were obtained by calculating appropriate employment and

wage rate values for each person in our sample and then summing over

all youth.'


A. Simulations Based on the Single-Equation Model

     Simulated employment and wage effects of the minimum based on the

pooled years estimates (see Table 2) are shown below.




                Tabulation 3.     Simulated Employment and Wage
                                  Effects by Age Group Based on
                                  Pooled Years Model (See Table 1

                                        16-24    20—24   16—19      16-17

          Percent Increase in            3.9      2.2     7.1        8.7
          Employment if no
          Minimum

          Expected Market Wagea          2.68     2.95    2.11         74

          Expecte Wage With              2.67     2.94    2.11       1.77
          Minimum

          Expected Wage with             2.78     3.01    2.23       1.86
          Minimuma Conditional
          on Employment


               a.    In 1973 dollars.




     1.    Details are provided in the appendix to Meyer and Wise [1981].
                                    —51—




According to these estimates, without the minimum, employment of out-

of-school male youth would have been 3.9 percent higher over these years

than it was. It would have been 8.7 percent higher for 16 to 17 year olds,

but only 2.2 percent higher for those 20 to 24.

     Expected earnings of youth were not affected much by the minimum.

Without the minimum, the expected market wage would have been $2.68.     In


the presence of the minimum, the expected wage of this group, that would

have been employed without the minimum, was $2.67. While the expected

wage conditional on employment was higher than the market expected wage

($2.78 versus $2.68), this increase was just offset by the zero earnings

of those without work because of the minimum.

     On the one hand, it can be argued that the minimum has not hurt youth

because their expected earnings are not affected much by it. On the other

hand, youth who are not employed lose current income and more importantly

will have lower incomes in the future because of non-employment in early

years. Wage increases come in large part with work experience.1      Indeed,

if the minimum prevents some youth from gaining work experience, it may

prolong non-employment by prolonging the length of time that their market

wage is below the minimum. We are implicitly assuming in making these

arguments that at the margin leisure is not valued much by a youth with

no employment.

     We observe that the averaqe market wage rate of youth 16 to 17 ws l.7.

The real minimums over these four years were $1.60, $1.82, $1.66, and

$1 .76 in 1973, 1976, 1977, and 1978 respectively. Thus the minimum was



    1. See for example Ellwood [     ] and   Meyer and Wise [   ].
                                    —52-




set on average very close to the central tendency of the market wage dis-

tribution for these youth. It is thus not surprising to observe a

relatively large dis-employment effect for this group.

     For comparison we have also obtained analogous employment and wage

estimates based on separate estimates for 1973 and for 1978 (see Table 3).

They are as follows:



          Tabulation 4.   Simulated Employment and Wage Effects
                          Based on Separate Estimates for
                          1973 and 1973 (See Table 3)

                                            1973         1978

        Percent Increase in                 4.0          6.8
        Employment if No
        Minimum

        Expected Market Wage                2.77         3.87

        Expected Wage With                  2.75         3.78
        Minimum

        Expected Wage With                  2.87         4.14
        Minimum Conditional
        on Employment


The results are in order of magnitude commensurate for those based on

the pooled data.   In both years, however, these estimates indicate a

slight decline in expected wage rates with the minimum, versus market

wage rates without the minimum.   (The estimates are in current year

dollars.) We also find a larger employment effect in 1978 than in 1973.

The real minimum was 10 percent higher in 1978.

     One check on the distributional assumptions of our model is to predict

the potential employment gain in 1973, based on estimates derived from

1978 data. This provides some confirmation of the specification because
                                    -53-




the 1978 data exhibits a relative absence of observations just below the

1978 minimum, and thus there is no way to observe the assumed market

distribution in this range. The 1973 data, however, included observations

in this range because the minimum was lower. Thus for 1973, one can argue

it is possible to observe a part of the market distribution that was not

observable in 1978. Thus if both sets of data lead to the same con-

clusions, we have greater confidence in our distributional assumptions.

Based on 1978 data and parameter estimates, we estimate that the dis-

employment effect of the 1973 minimum was about 4.3 percent, very close to

the 4 percent figure based on 1973 data and parameter estimates. The

match is improved if we take account of the shift in the market wage

distribution between 1973 and 1978, as exhibited in the pooled years

estimates.

     To show the moderating effect of inflation on the employment effects

of a fixed minimum, we calculated the percent increase in employment that

would have resulted had the minimum been held at its 1973 value through-

out the period. These results are shown in the second row of the tabula-

tion below. For comparison, we have also included the effect of no mini-


        Tabulation 5. Simulated Employment Effects by Age Group,
                       Based on Pooled Years Model (See Table 2)

                                   16-24    20-24    16-19    16-17

        Percent Increase in         3.9      2.2      7.1      8.7
        Employment if No
        Minimum

        Percent Increase in         2.8      1.7      5.0      5.9
        Employment if 1973
        Minimum ($1.60)
        Had been Maintained

        Percent Increase in         3.0      1.8      5.2      6.2
        Employment if Minimum
        Had Been $1.25
                                          -54-


mum, reproduced from the first tabulation above, and the percent increase

in employment had there been a $1.25 minimum throughout the period.        If


the minimum had been maintained at its 1973 level, inflation would have

led to youth employment increases equal to about two-thirds of the poten-

tial increase in employment that could have been achieved by elimination

of the minimum. A $1.25 minimum would gain about 80 percent of the

potential increase in employment if there were no minimum, according to

our estimates.

        Simulated employment effects by race and age based on the pooled

years model are as follows:


              Tabulation 6. Simulated Employment Effects by Race
                             and Age Based on Pooled Years Model
                              (See Table 1)

             Age GrouR            Total          White      Black

               16-24                3.9           3.7         5.6

               20-24                2.2           2.1         3.5

                16-19               7.1           6.9        10.1


                16-17               8.7           8.6        10.1




 The precent increase in employment if there were no minimum is higher for

 blacks than for whites in each age group. For youth 16 to 24, the effect

 for blacks is 50 percent higher than the effect for whites. Since the

 estimated values of P1 and P2 are about the same for blacks as for whites,

 this result is due to the greater proportion of blacks with attributes

 associated with low wage rates. The effect for the youngest age group is

 only   17 percent higher for blacks than for whites. Thus these results imply
 that the differences in the attributes of black and white high school
                                      —55—




 dropouts are relatively small compared to the difference in the attributes

 of older blacks and whites. Among youth 20 to 24, the black effect is 67

 percent higher than the effect on whites, Apparently this is not the

 result of a difference by age group in the race effect, since according

 to the estimates in Table 2, the race effect is only slightly higher for

the 20 to 24 age group than for the 16 to 17 group.

      Again, for comparison we also calculated employment effects by race

for 16 to 24 year olds, based on separate estimates by race. They are:


             Tabulation 7. Simulated Employment Effects by Race,
                            Based on Pooled Years Model Estimated
                            Separately for Whites and Blacks 16
                            to 24 (see Table 2)

                        te                         Black

                         3.9                          5.3

These estimates are very close to those based on the pooled years model

(Tabulation 6) that does not estimate separate parameters for blacks

and whites, other than an additive race effect. Again, because the

black market wage distribution is lower than the white distribution,

the part of the market distribution not observed because of the minimum

is different for blacks and whites. Thus these results also help to

support our distributional assumptions.



B.   Simulations Based on the Two-Equation Model

      Selected simulated employment effects based on the two-equation model,

by race, are shown below.
                                        -56-




        Tabulation 8. Simulated Employment Effects for Out-of-School
                       Male Youth 16-24, Based on Two-Equation Model,
                       Pooled Years, by Race (see Table 4)

                                               Total   White     Black

       Percent Increase in Employment           3.3     3.2       5.0
       if No Minimum

       Percent Increase in Employment          2.4      2.3       3 3
       if 1973 Minimum ($1.60) Had
       Been Maintained

       Percent Increase in Employment          2.6     2.5        3 6
       if Minimum Had Been $1.25


These estimates indicate that if there had been no minimum, employment

would have been 3.3 percent higher than it was. The comparable estimate

based on the single equation model is 3.9 percent, as shown in Tabulation

5.   Recall that the two-equation estimates are based on both wage and

salary workers, whereas the single-equation estimates are based on hourly

wage employees only. Salaried workers on average have attributes asso-

ciated with higher wage rates than hourly workers and thus should be

expected to be affected less by the minimum. The other values in Tabula-

tion 8 are close to the comparable values in Tabulations 5 and 6, based

on single—equation estimates (although Tabulations 5 and 6 do not contain

counterparts to every value in Tabulation 8).

     These estimates of course are based in large part on observed employ-

ment outcomes, that were not incorporated in the data used to derive the

single-equation estimates. There is substantial information in the employ-

ment data and they could certainly lead to estimates at variance with the

single-equation results. That they do not again suggests that our results

are not simply determined by the market wage distribution assumptions.

     Tabulations 9 through 11 present simulations of employment status by
                                      -57-




market wage rate, with and without the minimum wage legislation. These

results cannot be obtained from the single-equation estimates only, because

the simple model does not allow estimates of employment status by market

wage rate.




               Tabulation 9.   Simulated Employment Status by
                               Market Wage Rate, With and Without
                               the Minimum, Men 16-24

                                   Employed    Not Employed         Total

                                    Without a Minimum Wage

       Market Wage Rate
                                     89.2          10.7              12.3
       Below Minimum

       Market Wage Rate
                                     86.3          13.7              87.3
       Above Minimum

       Total                         86.7          13.3             100.0 (4999)

                                     With the Minimum Wage

       Market Wage Rate              37.5          32.5              12.3
       Below Minimum                32.5<M
                                   35.0 at M

       Market Wage Rate              86.3          13.7              87.3
       Above Minimum

       Total                         83.9          16.1             100.0 (4999)
                                    -58-



        Tabulation 10.   Simulated Employment Status by
                         Market Wage Rate, With and Without
                         the Minimum, White Men 16-24

                            Employed         Not Employed      Total

                             Without a Minimum Wage

Market Wage Rate                                   8.0
                               92.0                             12.1
Below Minimum

Market Wage Rate                                 11.7           87.9
                               88.3
Above Minimum

Total                          88.7               11.3         iOO.0 (4454)

                               With the Minimum Wage

Market Wage Rate              69.5               30.5           12.1
Below Minimum               33.5<M
                           36.1 at M
Market Wage Rate                                  11.7          87.9
                               88.3
Above Minimum

Total                          86.0               14.0         100.0 (4454)




        Tabulation 11.   Simulated Employment Status by
                         Market Wage Rate, With and Without
                         the Minimum, Black Men 16—24

                            rmrl ri,,cr1
                               VI      '-I
                                             Nint Pmnl
                                                     •
                                                         nvd   Trit1

                             Without a Minimum Wage

Market Wage Rate                                 25.3           18.2
                               74.7
Below Minimum

Market Wage Rate                                 31.2
                               68.8                             81 .8
Above Minimum

Total                          69.9              30.1          100.0 (545)

                             With the Minimum Wage

Market Wage Rate               56.6              43.4           18.2
Below Minimum               27. 3<M
                           27.3 at M

Market Wage Rate               68.8              31.2           81.8
Above Minimum

Total                          66.6               33.4         100.0 (545)
                                      -59-



 We shall explain the results in Tabulation 9, for both blacks and whites

 together. The separate estimates by race are analogous.

      Without the minimum, 10.7 percent of youth with subminimum wage rates

would be without work and 89.2 percent would be employed. With the mini-

mum, 32.5 percent are without work and only 67.5 percent are employed.

(Of this latter group, 32.5 percent are employed with wage rages below

the minimum and 35 percent are employed with wage rates equal to the

minimum.) Total non-employment is increased from 13.3 percent without a

minimum to 16.1 percent with the minimum. Thus not only does the minimum

wage increase non—employment among youth, but it also concentrates non—

employment among youth with the lowest market wage rates.1

     The results for white youth are quite close to the results for both

races together because a large majority of youth are white. The estimates

for black youth are similar in direction, but the proportion not employed is

higher both with and without the minimum. Among black youth with market

wage rates below the minimum, non-employment is increased from 25.3 percent

without the minimum to 434 percent with the minimum, according to these
estimates.
     A possibly anomalous result is that the non-employment rate without

the minimum is shown as lower for persons with sub-minimum than for those

with above-minimum market wage rates. This results from assuming the esti-

mated correlation coefficient which is negative, although very imprecisely

measured and not significantly different from zero by any reasonable crite-

rion. Thus this aspect of the simulations should not be given much cre—



     1.  Our model specification of course prescribes that any employment
effect be on this group but it does allow no employment effect at all.
                                      -60-




 dence.


 V.   Conclusions

      We have estimated the employment and earnings effects of the minimum

 wage by parameterizing a hypothesized relationship between underlying

 market employment and wage relationships versus observed wage and employment

 distributions in the presence of a legislated minimum.

       If there had been no minimum during the 1973-78 period, we estimate

 that employment among out-of-school men 16 to 24 would have been approxi-

mately 4 percent higher than it in fact was. Among young men 16 to 19

 employment would have been about 7 percent higher and among those 20 to 24

 2 percent higher. Employment among black youth 16 to 24 would have been

 almost 6 percent higher than it was, as compared with somewhat less than

 4 percent for white youth. Thus the proportional employment effects of

 the minimum are greater for the younger than for older youth and are

 greater for black than for white youth.

      The aggregate effect on employment, however, depends not only on

 the proportion of each group without work because of the minimum, but

 also on the number of youth in each group who were employed. For example,

there are about 10 times as many out-of-school youth 20 to 24 as 16 to 17.

Thus if the potential employment increase is 2.2 percent for 20 to 24 year

olds and 8.7 percent for those 16 to 17, elimination of the minimum would

add to the employment roles about two and one-half tines as many youth 20 to 24


      1.  An alternative would be to base the simulations on an assumed
 correlation of zero, which would have produced a non-employment rate for
 sub-minimum workers higher than for the above minimum group, if there
 were no minimum. See, for example, the two-equation estimates for 1978
 presented in Meyer and Wise [1981].
                                       -61-



 as 16 to 17. Our estimates apply to out-of-school youth, however, and

 most young persons 16 to 17 are in school. Nonetheless, it is clear that

 the desirability of a youth minimum, for example, depends on the goals

 sought through it.   If aggregate employment increase were the goal, more

 could be gained by reducing the minimum for older than for younger youth.

 Indeed, if the minimum were reduced for all, the majority of the gain

could come from the older group.

     Although it is sometimes argued that the adverse employment effects

of the minimum are offset by increased earnings, we find virtually no

earnings effect. Even though some youth with market wage rates below

the minimum are paid the legislated minimum, the increased earnings of

these youth is offset by the non-employment and thus zero earnings of

others. Expected earnings of youth are about the same with the minimum

legislation as they would be without it.

     Had the minimum not been raised over the 1973-78 period, inflation

would have greatly moderated the adverse employment effects of the minimum,

According to our estimates, if the minimum had remained at its 1973 level,

approximately two-thirds of the potential employment gains from elimina-

tion of the minimum would have been attained.

     Our statistical procedure emphasizes the effect of the minimum on

youth who otherwise would be employed at subminimum market wage rates.

But we have also allowed for estimation of possible upward shifts in all

youth wage rates with increases in the minimum. The weight of the evidence

provided by our estimates, however, is inconsistent with a general increase

in youth wage rates with increases in the real minimum. Thus our findings

support the hypothesis that the effects of the minimum are indeed concen-
                                    -62-




trated on youth with sub-minimum market wage rates. We find no evidence

that the wage rates of youth with market rates above the minimum are bid

up. Although we cannot identify an effect of the minimum on youth 16 to

24 with above-minimum market wage rates, our evidence does not strictly

speaking rule out an increase in the employment of older workers with

increases in the minimum.

     A concomitant of our procedure is estimation of market wage and

employment functions. In particular, we are able to estimate the trend

in youth wage rates corrected for the disemployment effects of the minimum.

The average of wage rates among employed youth show white youth wages

falling relative to adult wages between 1967 and 1977 but show no decline

for black youth. We find, however, that market wage rates of blacks as

well as whites were falling over the period of our analysis. Apparently

the greater diseniployment effect of the minimum on black youth made it

appear as though their wage rates were not falling, whereas in fact low

wage black youth were disproportionately without work. Thus their market

wage rates were not incorporated in the averages of observed wage rates.
                                     -63-




Ashenfelter, Orley and Robert S. Smith, "Compliance with the Minimum Wage

     Law," Journal of rolitical Economy, Vol. 87, April 1979.

Cunningham, James, "The Impact of Minimum Wages on Youth Employment, Hours

     of Work, and School Attendance: Cross-sectional Evidence From the

     1960 and 1970 Censuses," mimeograph, January 1980.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Alan J. Marcus, "Minimum Wage Legislation and the

     Educational Outcomes of Youth," mimeograph, July 1979.

Eliwood, David, "Teenage Unemployment: Permanent Scars or Temporary

     Blemishes?" in Freeman and Wise (eds.), The_Youth Employment_Problem:

     Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences, University of Chicago Press,

     1982.

Freeman, Richard B., The_Overeducated American, New York: Academic Press,

     1976.

Freeman, Richard B. and David A. Wise, "Youth Unemployment," NBER Summary

     Report, 1979.

Gramlich, Edward M., "The Impact of Minimum Wages on Other Wages, Employ-

     ment, and Family Incomes," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

     1976.

Hall, Robert E., "The Minimum Wage and Job Turnover in Markets for Young

     Workers," in Freeman and Wise (eds.), The Youth Employment Problem:

     Its Nature, Causes,and Consequences, University of Chicago Press,

     1982.

Hamermesh, Daniel S., "The Minimum Wage and the Demand for Labor," mimeo-

     graph, October 1980.

Hausman, Jerry A. and David A. Wise, "Social Experimentation, Truncated

     Distribution and Efficient Estimation," Econometrica, May 1977.
                                                      -64-




Hausman, Jerry A. and David A. Wise, "Stratification on Endogenous Variables

     and Estimation: The Gary Income Maintenance Experiment," in Structural

     Analysis of Discrete Data: With Econometric Applications, Charles

     Mansk-j and Daniel McFadden (eds.), M.I.T. Press, 1981.

Meyer, Robert H. and David A. Wise, "Discontinuous Distributions and Missing

     Persons: The Minimum Wage and Unemployed Youth," NBER Working Paper

     No. 711, July 1981.

Meyer, Robert H. and David A. Wise, "High School Preparation and Early Labor

     Force Experience," in Richard B. Freeman and David A. Wise (eds.), The

     Youth Employment Problem: Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences,

     University of Chicago Press, 1982.

Mincer, Jacob, "Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages," Journal of Political

     Economy, August 1976.

Mincer, Jacob and Linda Leighton, "Effect of Minimum Wages on Human Capital

     Formation," NBER Working Paper No. 411, February 1980.

Welch, Finis and James Cunningham, "The Effects of Minimum Wages on the

           nd ,rlc rr,mnr,cfir,n
                   '-,           ,,fI Vr,,,f-h mn1r,,mnf "
                                 II
                     .,,I tj_ _l ._?   I I_I I I   Id II I.. I I   LIII V I ¼JJ II II.. I I 1.,   I I_. V I      rif
                                                                                                              TV '1 I          -,nnmir'c
                                                                                                                        I_ ¼. Id I I Id III
                                                                                                                                     ¼. .1



     and Statistics, February 1978.

Wessels, Walter J., "The Effect of Minimum Wages in the Presence of Fringe

     Benefits: An Expanded Model," Economic Inquiry, Vol. 18, April 1980.
