                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ENERGY AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION: A DYNAMIC
                  MODEL OF THE "DUTCH DISEASE"



                          Michael Eruno

                          Jeffrey Sachs


                     Working Paper No. 2




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        uarnoriage IIA   U1)d
                          February   1 982




This paper was presented at the Conference on Unemployment, Newnham
College, Cambridge, July 1q81, under the original title "Input
Price Shocks and the Slowdown in Economic Growth, Part II." The
paper is part of a joint study of the authors on the macroeconomic
effects of supply shocks. We thank Mr. Louis Dicks—Mireaux
for very able research assistance. Support from the National
Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The research
reported here is part of the NEER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #852
                                                     February 1982




    Energy and Resource Allocation; A Dynamic Model of the "Dutch   Disease'


                                  ABSTRACT

   It is well known that a domestic resource discovery gives rise to wealth

effects that cause a squeeze of the tradeable good sector of an open economy.

The decline of the manufacturing sector following an energy discovery has been

termed the "Dutch disease," and has been investigated in many recent studies.

Our model extends the principally static analyses to date by allowing for:

(1) short—run capital specificity and long—run capital mobility; (2) inter-

national capital flows; and (3) far—sighted intertemporal optimizing behavior by

households and firms. The model is solved by numerical simulation.




                   Michael Bruno                      Jeffrey Sachs
                   Department of Economics            Department of Economics
                   Hebrew University                  Harvard University
                   Jeruselam, Israel                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                      (61 7)868—3927
   The rise in energy prices in the 1970's upset the sectoral allocation of

resources as well as the overall macroeconomic balance of supply and demand.

Most obviously, energy—intensive industries such as steel or aluminum were hard

hit, while sectors producing energy substitutes and primary energy (coal, gas,

etc.) flourished. Less obvious, though probably more pervasive were the sec—

toral demand shifts caused by the reallocation of wealth following the OPEC

shocks. Energy—poor countries (e.g. Japan) scaled back domestic absorption

sharply in the face of higher oil import bills, while spending in the oil—

exporting countries boomed. Shifts in overall absorption have differential

effects on the production of traded and non—traded goods, with a wealth increase

raising non—traded good production and squeezing the traded—good sector. The

squeeze of the tradeables sector in such a context has become known as the

"Dutch disease," and is the subject of this analysis.

   Many recent studies [i ,3,4,6,7,9] have investigated the consequences of an

oil discovery or oil price increase for resource allocation, but the analyses to

date have been incomplete. The effects on the traded and non—traded goods sec-

tors are inherently dynamic, though most models have been static, either

focussing on the short run or long run. A rise in wealth shifts demand towards

the non—traded good sector, and sets in train a process of capital accumulation

in that sector and decumulation in the other. Moreover, there are likely to be

current account imbalances over time, first as the economy borrows from abroad

to finance capital expenditures in the oil sector, and later as the economy

lends abroad out of oil earnings.
                                       —2—


   Thus, a complete theoretical model should allow for:      (i) short—run capital

specificity, and long—run capital mobility between sectors; (2) capital accuniu-

lation in the aggregate; (3)   international   capital mobility; and (4) far—sighted

behavior by firms and households (in their investment, consumption and savings

decisions) .   Bruno [i] provides for these factors in a two—period analytical

model, and this paper complements that analysis by extending it to the infinite—

horizon case. This extension allows for a realistic assessment of empirical

magnitudes along the adjustment path of the economy. This substantial benefit

comes at some cost: the model is no longer analytically tractable and must be

solved by numerical alogorithnis, as we describe below.

   The model employed here is a direct extension of the framework described by

us elsewhere in this volume [2]. In addition to exogenous energy production,

firms in the traded and non—traded goods sectors produce output according to

two—level CES production functions, combining value-added with intermediate

inputs. Capital is assumed to be costly to adjust, so that determinate invest-

ment demand equations may be derived. We choose the case in which the invest-

ment rate in each sector may be written as a function of the sector's "Tobin's

q" (the real price of equity in the sector) .     Households behave according to a

life—cycle consumption model. Finally, domestic and foreign capital markets are

fully integrated, so that home assets must earn the world rate of return. The

entire model is solved as a perfect foresight, intertemporal equilibrium, in

which various policies may be analyzed without being subject to the "Lucas

critique."
                                      —3—


    While some aspects of our model are loosely calibrated to the U.K. economy,

the model is not equipped at this point to assess the role of the Dutch disease

in recent U.K. performance. Thus, we do not seek to add empirical estimates to

the British policy debate on this issue. For stimulating contributions to that

debate; see [6] for a view which attributes a large role to the Dutch disease,

and []   for   an opposing view.

   In the next section, the barebones of the "Dutch disease" are set forth, and

some of the dynamic issues are described. In section two, the full model is

detailed, and may of its properties are mentioned. Specific simulation exer-

cises are set forth in the third section, and possible extensions of this analy-

sis are raised in the fourth and concluding section.
                                               —4—


I. Introduction to the Dutch Disease.

      A rise in wealth in a tradeable asset (e.g. oil) leads to a rise in demand

for all normal goods, including both traded and non-traded commodities.               By

assumption, the demand for non—traded goods can only be satisfied domestically,

while the demand for tradeables can be satisfied by increased net imports. As

demand rises for both types of goods, the relative price of non—traded goods

must increase to preserve home—market equilibrium. Factors will be drawn into

the non—traded goods sector and away from tradeables. Some of the increased

demand for non—tradeables will be satisfied by increased production, and the

rest will be eliminated by the rise in the relative price of non—tradeables.

The increased demand for tradeables will be met by increased imports, which more

than make up for the decline in their domestic production.

      Fig. 1 illustrates these effects in a simple short—run static framework, in

which capital is fixed within the sectors and is immobile across national

boundaries, and in which capital accumulation is ignored. We suppose there are

three sectors: energy (denoted by E), non—traded goods, N, and tradeables other

than energy, T. For illustrative purposes, relaxed later, we can assume that

all of the domestic energy is exported. Budget balance requires (in the absence

of savings, investment, and internation capital flows):

(1)        TQT + NQN   +
                           EQE =   PTCT
                                          +
                                              PNCN

where C denotes consumption and Q denotes domestic production. Market clearing

in the non—traded goods market requires N =                  We will denote the relative
                                                       CN.
price on N in terms of T as         (=    N/r),      and the relative price of E as        (
                                             —5—




   In   an economy without oil (QE =   0),    equilibrium would be at point A. A

discovery of oil in this simple model would shift the consumption possibility

frontier vertically in the amount EQE. Non—traded good production rises, from

QNA to QNB, and the relative price of non—traded goods, v, rises (the slope at the

point of tangency becomes steeper). Production of tradeables falls absolutely

(from QTA to QTB), while net imports of non—oil tradeables rise from zero to

CTB — QTB.

   In general, such a static analysis is inadequate, since the shift from A to B

will cause profitability on capital in the two sectors to diverge and to differ

from the rate of return given on world capital markets. In the long run, these

rates of return must equalize, so that a "long—run" analysis might proceed as in

Fig. 2.   Now, we assume that physical capital flows freely between sectors and

from abroad so that the marginal product of capital is always equal to r*, which

is fixed on the world market. By the famous results of the Heckschen—Ohlin—

Samuelson model, fixing rw also fixes the relative price of non—traded goods to

traded goods, , and forces the economy to produce on a Rybczynski line
(depicted RR), along which capital in both sectors earns the marginal product

r*. In Fig.2, the HR line is drawn according to the assumption that the non—

tradeable sector is capital intensive. The line c(       ii) in   Fig.2 is a

consumption—expansion path showing the consumption levels of C and CT for

various income levels, at the fixed relative price T•
                                               —6—




Traded Good
   Sector




      CB




                            A




                          AA B B
                          CN,QN   CN,QN
                                                             Non—Traded Goods Sector



              Figure 1.   The Short—Run Effects of an Oil Discovery
                                        -7—


   An economy without oil starts at equilibrium at point A. National income in

tradeable   units is given by the distance OB. An oil discovery, owned by

domestic residents, raises GDP by the amount EQE, which is given by BD in the

figure. Consumption shifts to point F, at the intersection of c( i) and the new

national budget iine.I/ By the assumption of perfect world capital mobility, the

relative price    remains unchanged, unlike in the short—run model above. Since
                                                F
the new domestic consumption of non—tradeables CN must be satisfied by domestic

production of non—tradeables, production must lie on the RR line directly below

the point F, at G in Fig. 2. At this point, capital and labor inputs have

increased absolutely in the N—sector and have decreased absolutely in the

T—sector. The basic result of the "Dutch disease" analysis is again confirmed:

the (non—oil) tradeable sector is compressed by the discovery of oil. But here,

international capital mobility proceeds to the point where the relative price

increase of non—traded goods is completely eliminated. Also, once again, net

imports of the tradeable good rise sharply.

   Figures 1 and 2 provide two faces of the adjustment process, but unfor—

tunatley we cannot simply concatenate these two figures to get a truly dynamic

analysis. In general, the impact effect of the oil discovery will be a shift in

investment demands in the two sectors, which will disturb the equilibrium at

point B in Fig. 1.   More importantly, the economy will run current account imba-

lances as the adjustment proceeds, so that by the time that the long—run of Fig.

2 is achieved, national income will have to be adjusted to take into account the

economy's net foreign investment position. For example, national income may

exceed the level OD (say OD' )   if the economy runs surpluses along the adjustment
path, so that domestic production may occur at H instead of G.
                                                                 —8--




Traded Good
    Sector


              D'


              D
                     \
                         \
                             \
              B
                                 \
                                     \
                                         \
                                             \
                                                 \                            C(rr)
                                                     \
                                                         \


                                                             H




                                                                        Non—Traded Goods Sector


                  Figure 2. Long—Run Model of Oil Discovery
                                          -9-


      One strong motive for current account surpluses will arise if agents in the

economy recognize that the oil is a depleting resource, so that current national

income exceeds levels that can be expected in the future. Households may then

save, and accumulate foreign assets, in order to maintain consumption levels

after the oil is depleted. This is a topic to which we return.

     The short-run and long—run effects on       of an oil discovery can also be

seen by using sectoral factor—price frontiers (see [i I    for   details). In Figure
3, we draw each sector's FPF in T—good units.      wT (= W/PT) and r-p (=r/PT) repre-

sents the marginal products of labor and capital in terms of good T. Then, the
FPF in T can be represented as 4(wT,rT) = 0      and in N as (wT/,rT/) = 0.            The

The curve      in Fire 3 represents the particular FPF for the initial price .

It   is drawn here under the assumption that N is more capital intensive than T

goods (remember that the slope of the FPF at any point measures the sector's

capital—labor ratio). An increase in the relative price Ti (a real apprecia-

tion) will shift this curve homothetically outwards while a decrease in Tr (a

real depreciation) will shift it inwards.

     Consider the wealth increase due to an oil discovery, as discussed

above. Once again, assume that international capital mobility fixes the rate of

return to capital at rT =    r*   in the long—run. For both sectors to have the same

wage and for rT =   r*,   the FPF for each sector must pass through A. Since the

position of the FPF for N moves only according to shifts in T, the long—
              0                   0
run value of i must be fixed at 11N' and must be invariant to the wealth
                                    0
change. In the short—run, though, iT will jump (assuming that there are

rising costs to rapidly reallocating capital among sectors), shifting the FPF
                                      —10—



 WT


                      0'




 T



                                      r
                                                             rT


      Figure 3. Factor—Price—Frontier Analysis of Oil Discovery




WT




                                                 0

                                                 0




                                                     1




                                 r*
                                                                  rT
      Figure 4. Factor—Price—Frontier Analysis of Rise
                                              —11—


                            0         1
for the N sector from                                                    0
                                to . At      the initial product wage         the   profit rate in
                                                                        WT,
non—tradeables rises from A to B'. Alternately, we may say that at the rate of

interest r*, a higher wage can momentarily be maintained in the N sector. Assuming

that labor but not capital is shifted in the short run, labor starts moving into the N

sector and out of tradeable goods, while the profit rate differential makes for a rise

in investment in the N sector and decumulation in T.          The relative price           starts
falling back gradually with the FPF             shifting back. The process comes to a
halt eventually as         returns to        with capital labor ratios back to their ini-

tial levels. Both labor and capital inputs in N have expanded and the corres-

ponding inputs in T have contracted proportionately, as described earlier.

    The same apparatus can be applied to study the role of E as an intermediate

input, especially useful for the case in which 71E rises (as studied below)

Since the T sector tends empirically to be more E—interxsive than the N sector,

we proceed under the useful stylization that B is used only in T. The FPF in

T becomes                       =   0, while the FPF in N remains as before. Consider in
                    r, TIE)

Figure 4 the long-run effects of a rise in TTE that leaves r* unchanged. The FPF

in the T sector must shift inward, with the new long-run wT given-- along the ver-

tical line rn2 =   r*   (at D). The FPF for N must also intersect at point D, which

can only come about through a real depreciation of .            The      schedule shifts

to , as     shown. We can also deduce that the long—run capital—labor ratio in N

must fall (since the tangent at D has lower slope than the tangent at A).

    Now we turn to the fully dynamic model which allows us to find multi—period

equilibria in an economy with far-sighted agents.
                                     —12—



2. The Simulation Model

  The complete simulation model is set forth in Table 1. It is very similar in

structure to the model in [8], and detailed justifications of the behavioral

relations may be found in that earlier paper. We will briefly outline the

structure here, proceeding through the functional blocks of the model. The

equation numbers that follow refer to Table 1. A list of variables is provided

at the end of the table. iUl variables are written in intensive form, per unit

of the full—employment labor force, which grows at rate n.


(a) Production technology

    The economy is divided into three sectors, including two final goods (N and

T) and energy (E). The final—good sectors produce according to two—level CES

production functions, which combine value added with intermediate inputs. The

intermediate inputs themselves involve a bundle of commodities, including

energy, other imported raw materials R, and the output of the other final—good

sector. Thus, there is a complete input—output structure for the economy. The

production functions for the two final goods may be represented as:


(1.1)    QT =   pT[vT(KT,LT),(NT,ET,p)]
(1.2)    QN = FN[VN(KN,LN),MN(TN,EN,RN)]


The V and M functions are each CES, with substitution elasticities i and

°i respectively (i     N,T).

    The energy sector is assumed to use foreign inputs only, so that it does not

generate any derived demands for labor or final outputs of the other two
                                                                     —13-


                                             Table 1. The Simulation Model


Production Technology

 (1.1)          QT1T =                   iT =       UMTMT 1 T
                                 UVTVT

 (1.2)                       =
                                   UVNVNN            +
                                                             IJMNMNP1N

 (1.3)                   =


 (1.4)          VTT =              ULTLT2T           +
                                                             UKTKTT
 (1.5)          VNN                ULNLNN +                  UKNKN
                                                                     2N
(1.6)           PTT = JTPVTT                             +
                                                              TPMTT
(1.7)           PNP3N =            1NPVNN +                   NPMNIN
(i.s)                                    =
                PVT(aVT/aLT)
(1 .9)          VN (     VN/ 3LN) =             w

(1.10) (T/vT)/(T/T                                       =
                                                              VT/MT
(i .11)                                                  =
                (N/vN)/(N/aMN                                 VN/MN
(1.12)          PMT4T =           TPN4T         +    TPR4T +              ETPE4T
                     p                       p
(1.13)          MN     4N     =
                                    NT        4N        +
                                                              tNPR4N +           NE 4N
(1.14) MTT =                       UNTNT7T          +
                                                             URTRT'         +
                                                                                UETET
(1.15)          MNN               UTNTNN            +
                                                             URTRT          +   UETET
(i .   1   6)   MT( T/ T) =
(1   . 1
           7) MT (       T/      aRT)
                                         =


(1.18)          P(3MN/rN) =
(1 . 1 9)       M1 (     N/ aRN)         =

(1.20)          KT =         T -         (d+n)KT
(1.21)          KN =         N     —
                                         (d+n)KN
                                                               -14-


Table 1 continued


(1.22) T = K.[qT                -
                                        JT    +       PTfl+d)/21/(fl+d)
(1.23) N =                      - JN          +       PNfl+d)/2]/(fl+d)
(1.24)    'T =        JTPJT[1           +

(1.25)    'N =        JNPJN[1           +
                                             /2(JN/KN-d_n)]
(1.26) JT =           alTPT         +
                                            a2TPN        +
                                                               a3TPF        +     a4TPE
(1 .27) JN            alNpT         +       a2NpN        +
                                                               83NPF
                                                                            +
                                                                                  a4NPE


Household Sector

(1.28)    w =     H    +    p

(1.29)    F =               +                     + WE         +       Z

(1 .30)   A       r( &.n)W +                (1 —r) (wL+Tr)

(1.31)    (ac/cT)/(c/cN) =
(1.32)    (ac/acF)/(dc/cN)

(1.33)    (ac/acE)/(ac/acN) =
           p
          C 5 =                 UCNCN + UCECE + UCFCF
(1.34)
   -.-\               UCTCTp+ +      Pu
i .))
I

                           CTT
                                             Pp
                                              °
                                                      P°
                                                      NN               + CEE          + CFF
(i .36)   A = PTCT + N0N                          +
                                                        PECE
                                                                   +       PFCF


(1.37)    WE          JPEQE(1_Te)e
                                              -   r*t dt
                      0
                                                                      —15—




Market       Equilbrium          Conditions

(i .38)                           r* —             Div/qK
(1 .39)       QN/qN =             r*       -
                                                   D±V/qK
(i   .40)     H/H                      -       (w+Tr)/H           -   n

(1.41)        urn
              t +
                         ertq              =       0


(i .42)       Jim ertq =                           0
              t +

(1 .43)       urn e_r*tH =                     0
              t +

(1 44)        T =           CT
                                   +       [a1TJT + a1NJN +                  (IT/PJT-JT)]         +             + TN
(1 .45)       N =           CN
                                   +       [a2TJT + a2NJN +                  (IN/PJN—JN)]         +
                                                                                                           NT

(1 .46)                          PVTVT         - WLT          +              - (d+n)KT]       -
              DiVT
(1 .47)       DiVN               PVNVN         - WLN +                       - (d+n)KN]       -
                                                                                                      'N
(i .48a)      LT +          LN
                        =
(i   .48b)    W/w            ;C/c           +          p   log [(LT+LN)/

Balance of' Payments

(i .49)       z=            (PVTVT + PVNVN + EQE +                        r*z)   -   (A   +       + N)          —   nZ

(1 .50)       XT
                    =
                             (T/F) —ps.q*
Fiscal Policy

(1 .51a) Tr          = TE•PEQE

(1.51b) Tr           =
                            1.WE.Te/(1_Te)
                                      —16—


Table 1 continued


Variable and Parameter Definitions

A        Total household absorption

C        Instantaneous household utility

CE       Household consumption of energy

CF       Household consumption of foreign final goods

CN       Household consumption of N

CT       Household consumption of T

EN       Energy input into N

ET       Energy input into T

F        Financial wealth of households

H        Human wealth of households

         Total investment expenditure in T

'N       Total investment expenditure in N

         Gross fixed capital formation in T

         Gross fixed capital formation in N

KT       Capital stock in T

         Capital stock in N

LT       Labor input in T

LN       Labor input in N

MT       Intermediate input bundle in T

MN       Intermediate input bundle in N

NT       Non—traded input into T

         Consumer   price index
         Price of energy input
                                        -17-



          Price of foreign final good

          Price of investment good in N

          Price of investment good in T

          Price of non—traded good

          Price of imported, non—energy raw material input

          Price of trade&ble good

    VN    Value—added deflator in N

    VT    Value—added deflator in T

          Production of enerr

          Production of traded good

          Tobin's q in non—tradeable sector

          Tobin's q in tradeable sector
    r*   World interest rate

    RT   Raw material (non—enerr) input into T
RN       Raw material (non-enerr) input into N
TN       Traded-good input in N
Tr
         Transfer payments from government (net)

         Tax rate on enery revenue

VN       Value-added in N

VT       Value—added in T

w        Nominal wage rate

W        Household sector wealth (for life—cycle households)
WE       Wealth from enerr production
W        World wealth

XT       Exports of domestic traded—good
Z
         Domestic holdings of foreign bonds
                                        -18-


Table 1 continued


Other parameters

d        Rate of depreciation

n        Rate of population growth

o        Rate of time preference for life—cycle savers

          Cost—of—adjustment parameter in investment functions

          Proportion of life—cycle households in total


Notes to Table 1

1. At any moment, KT, KN, and Z are predetermined. S, r*,         E' F' R' E' and
    the parameter values of the model are exogenous. Thus, the          equations

    determine: QT, VT,        N'   VN, MN, E' LT, -N' T' VT' VN' N' VN' MN'
                                                                            W, H, F,
    NT, RT, ET, TN, RN, EN,        N' 'T' 'N' T' N'          N' JT'
    WE, A, CT, CN, CE, Cp, C, Pc qT,           H, DiVT, DivN, , XT, Tr, and w or
    (depending on (1.48a) or (1.48b)). In the case of (1.48b), w (w/P) is

    predetermined. Note that current the values of H, q, N are determined

    implicitly by the transversality conditions (1 .41), (1 .42), and (1 .43).


2. Equation pairs (1 .4), (1 .6); (1 .5), (1.7); (1 .12), (i .14); (1 .13), (i .15);

    (i .34), (1 .35) are linked by duality relationships, as spelled out in our

    study [2]. The parameters in these equations are therefore subject to

    cross—equation restrictions.
                                        -19—



sectors. Indeed, in this model, the issue of time pattern of oil production and

"optimal depletion policy" is ignored, as the cash flow from energy production

is treated as exogenous.

    The production functions (1.1) and (1.2) imply dual relationships linking

the prices of the final outputs with the prices of the various inputs. As we

described in [2], these relationships are also of the CES type, since the

CES function is "self—dual". Thus, we have:


(1.6)       T = QT[PVT,pMT(pN,pE,pR)]
(1.7)       N = QN[pvN,PMN(pT,pE,pR)]

Note that these equations implicitly define the true value—added deflators

VT and VN in terms of the other prices.

    At any moment, the capital stocks in the final—good sectors are pre-

determined. Output supply functions conditional on KT and KN may then be

derived, as was shown in detail in our essay [2] in this volume.   Specifically,
we impose the first—order conditions that            =             =
                                                         W/Pv,         Py/P,
        =
            PM/Pj,   (iT,N), etc., as in equations

(1.8) to (i.ii) in Table 1.

    The optimal investment policy for the firm makes the rate of gross physical

capital formation an increasing furnetion of the sectoral Tobin's q (see [2] for

an extended discussion). For each sector, a unit of' physical capital is a com-

posite good, involving a fixed proportion of four commodities, so that P1 is a

weighted average of N, T, E, and R• The investment equations are shown in
Table 1 as (1.22) and (1.23).
                                          -20-



(b)   Household Sector

      Households supply labor, hold asset portfolios, and make consumption choices

among traded, non—traded, energy, and imported final goods. We assume that a

portion 2 of all households are perfect life—cycle savers, optimizing consuinp—

tion expenditure over an infinite horizon. The remaining proportion (i—u) of

households are myopic or credit—constrained, and these households merely consume

their labor income, without accumulating or holding financial assets. This

division in households is made in recognition of the empirical evidence on con-

sumption expenditure that shows current consumption to be more closely tied to

current income than is predicted by a pure life—cycle model.

       For a given class of intertemporal utility functions, life—cycle households

choose total consumption expenditure PCC as a fixed fraction 3 of contem-

poraneous wealth: pC =        .i.   A rigorous justification for this equation may be

found in [a]. Non—life cycle households simple spend (w+Tr)L, where Tr are net

per capita transfers from the government. Total private absorption is the sum

of spending of these two groups:




(1.30)           A =     i   + (1 -c1) (w+Tr)L


Once total spending is chosen, households divide expenditures among the variety

of available goods, including N, T, E, and F (the foreign final good). Thus,

A = PECE + PTCT + PNCN + PFCF, with the consumption levels selected to maximize

an instaneous CES utility function. The consumption equations are given in the

model as (1.31) thru (1.33).
                                                      —21—



     Next, consider wealth (w) held by the life—cycle households.                            This is
comprised of human wealth and financial wealth. Human wealth is the discounted

value of future labor income (inclusive of net transfers from the government) as

implied by (1.40). Financial wealth is the sum of equity and bond holdings and oil

wealth, where the latter is the post—tax discounted value of the future stream

of oil revenues. (See (1 .29) and (i .3'7) in Table 1.)


(c) Market equilibrium conditions

     There are three types of market equilibrium conditions: for assets, com-

modities and factor inputs. For assets, we assume that the foreign bond, and

domestic equity claims to capital in the N and T sectors are all perfect

substitutes, so that the ex ante expected yields must be identical. The foreign

bond has a fixed instantaneous yield r*. The yield on domestic equity is the

sum of the dividend yield (Divj/qK) and capital gains (qi/qj), so that


(1 .38)    r*   =
                    (Divj/q1K)          +
                                            (qi/qi)                  i =    T, N

The expression for dividends is given in (1 .46), and is based on the assumption

of all—equity firms with no retained earnings (see [81                       for      a more complete

discussion).

    There are market equilibrium conditions for the final goods sectors, that

require:


(1.44)     QT = CT +         T    +
                                      [a1TJT   +
                                                   a1NJN +   (IT/PJT_JT)]    +
                                                                                 Xrp + TN
(1.45)          =        +        + [a2TJT +
                    CN       GN              a2NJN +         (IN/PJN-JN)]    +
                                                                                 NT
                                      —22—



The bracketed expressions represent the inputs of each sector into investment

demand. Note that one element of final demand for the tradeable commodity is

export demand Xrp (which is of course not present in the non-traded sector).

XT is written as a function of exogenous foreign wealth W, and the relative

price of the foreign final good:


(1.50)     XT =   c(pT/PFYw*

We do not need market clearing equations for energy, raw materials, or the

foreign final good, since we assume that these commodities are in perfectly

elastic supply on the world market.

    The model is solved under two alternative assumptions for the labor market,

either (a) full employment, with flexible real wages; or (b) less-than-full—

employment, with sluggish real wage adjustment as a function of the rate of

unemployment. Under assumption (a)


(1 .48a)    L = LT + LN


and under (b)


(1.48b)     W/W - Pc/Pc =   L-(LT+LN)1/L

    Finally, there are the balance of payment accounting relationships,

according to which the accumulation of foreign bonds by domestic residents

equals the current account surplus: (Z)t = CAt. The current account is given as

the difference of national income and national absorption, in (1.49).
                                        —23-



Simulation Results

    The model parameters used in the simulations (Table 2) are "guesstimates"

rather than econometric estimates. Mr. Louis Dicks—Mireaux of Harvard

University is now engaged in a careful econometric specification of the model.

Thus, the estimates here are meant to provide a plausible order of magnitude for

various effects, rather than precise measures.

    To choose parameters for the production block of the model, our econometric

estimates in [2] for the manufacturing sector of the U.K. were used as a

benchmark, alongside the 1973 input—output table of the United Kingdom. Thus,

the elasticity of substitution between Vj and M1, and between K1 and Li, IS con-
servatively set at 0.2. The elasticity of substitution among the components of

M1 is set at 0.5. The remaining parameters of the production function are then

selected to yield the 1973 factor shares as shown in the input—output table.

The procedure yielded the following production relations:


            =               +
                [.43VT•2S       •41MT2S]4
         QN =   [.68VN_.25 + .19MN2S]4
         VT =   [.72I-.25   +   .16KT•2S]4(.62)
         VN =   [.52LN•2S   +
                                .26KN2S]4(.55)
         MT =   [2.5NTi + •9T1 + 1.65RT]
         MN =   [.41TNl   + .07EN1 +


    Three simulation exercises were undertaken to illuminate the links of North

Sea oil to the rest of the U.K. economy. First, we consider alternative budge—

tary methods of redistributing the proceeds of oil revenue taxes to the public.
                                          —24—


                       Table 2. Key Parameter Values for Simulation


 1T, 1N       -0.3
 T' N         —0.25

 T'       N    0.2
 4T 4N         0.5

 T'       N   -0.25
 d                 0

n              0.02

               10

 5             0.02

r*             0.04

               0.05

              -0.5

               1.25

 TE            0.9
IT,...,        C  A'
               '-"1
UMT            0.41

UVN           0.68

UMN           0.16

ULT           0.11

UKT           0.02

              0.05

UNT           2.5

URT            1.6
                                     —25-.


Table   2 continued


UET              0.09
UTN             0.41

URN             0.07

UEN             0.79

alT             0.3

a2T             0.6

a3T             0.1

a4T             0.014

aiN             0.3

a2r             0.6

a3N             0.1


84N             0.014
                0.333
                0.486
CE              0.059

CF              0.132


Note that the production function parameters are also shown on p. 23.
                                     —26—




Second, we analyze the effects of a rise in energy prices, under the contrasting

assumptions of flexible and fixed real wages. Third, we study the dynamic

responses to a domestic oil discovery. It is important to stress again that the

simulation results provide qualitative rather than quantitative measures of the

effects of the various disturbances, since the model is only loosely calibrated

to the U.K. economy.

   All results are stated as percentage deviations from a base case, in which

the economy is on an equilibrium growth trajectory. In the base case, the eco-

nomy is characterized by a declining stream of domestic energy production, very

similar to that assumed by Forsyth and Kay [5]. For the first 15 years,

domestic energy production exceeds energy consumption by about ten percent;

energy production then falls by 50 percent for the following 15 years, and falls

again by half (to 25 percent of original production) for the remaining horizon

of the economy. With an assumed world real interest rate of four percent, these

assumptions make the country a net energy importer in present value terms (but

presumably much less of one than the U.K.'s competitors).


Simulation 1:   Budget Policy and Oil Revenues

    Under current projections, over 80 percent of North Sea oil earnings will be

collected in taxes in the next decade. An important issue of public policy is

how to manage the government budget in light of the oil revenues, both in terms

of expenditure and debt policy. In this first exercise, we focus on debt

management for a given trajectory of expenditure on goods and services.
                                     -27—



    Increased revenue from oil taxes can be used to reduce public debt (or

equivalently, accumulate official reserves) or to make increased transfer

payments to the private sector. As is well known, this choice is irrelevant

under assumptions of perfect foresight, competitive capital markets, and

infinitely—lived households (i.e., households with an operative bequest motive

between generations). However, for finite—lived or capital-constrained

households, the budget decision has an important bearing on the intertemporal

distribution of consumption expenditure, and thus on prices, output, and capital

accumulation as well. As described earlier, (i—a) percent of the households in

this model are "capital constrained", so that the budget choices will affect the

growth path of the economy. In the simulations we set    equal to 0.5.

    As a simple illustration, consider two alternative policies. In the base

case, the government simply returns current tax revenue in transfers (we label

this the "current—transfer" policy); in the second case, the government pays out

in each period the constant, perpetuity—equivalent of its oil revenues (we label

this the "constant—transfer" policy). Since oil revenues decline over time with

the diminution of production, the current transfer is initially greater, and

then later less, than the perpetuity—equivalent transfer. In the cons tant—

transfer case, the government initially runs a budget surplus to build up

reserves, the income of which is then used to sustain transfers after oil pro-

duction subsides.

    In sum, a switch from a current to a constant transfer policy shifts con—

sumption to a later date, and smooths the intertemporal path of consumption

expenditure and presumably the intertemporal distribution of utility across

generations. In terms of the equilibrium in Figure 2, production is farther out
                                     - 28-



along the HR line in equilibrium (e.g., at point H rather than G), so that

there is greater non—tradeable production and less tradeable sector production

than under a current—transfer regime. The analogy to Figure 2 is close but not

perfect, though, since in the simulation model, N/T (i) may change slightly

in equilibrium, and the relative price of domestic tradeable to foreign tra—

deable final goods, T/F, may also vary. (The movement of ii apparently

results from the fact that the real price of investment goods JN/T and

JT/PT vary in the long run.)

    The specific quantitative results of the policy shift are shown in Table 3.

Under the constant—transfer policy, consumption and the terms of trade T/F are

reduced in the early years, as is the relative price of non-traded goods to

traded goods N/PT• Because of the terms—of-trade effect, real wages fall by

0.2 percent. Since N/T falls, production in the traded goods sector is

stimulated, and Kr1, is higher in the short run, relative to the current—transfer

case. Over time, the consumption expenditure in the constant—transfer policy

rises relative to consumption in the base case, so that short—run effects are

essentially reversed in the long-run. By sustaining consumption in the

long-run, the constant-transfer policy results in higher steady—state T/F and

N/r• The higher long-run consumption level means a larger non-traded goods

sector, and a reduced traded—goods sector. Thus, KN is 0.6 percent higher in

equilibrium and KT is 0.3 percent lower than under the current transfer policy.
                                    —29—


          Table 3: Effects of a Shift to a Constant—Transfer
                                                               Policy




                  1980           1985           1990            Steady—State
KT                 0.0            0.2            0.4                 -0.3

KN                 0.0            0.0            0.2                    0.6

T/PF              -0.6           -0.5            0.2                    0.3
                  -0.6           —0.2           -0.2                    0.2

QT/LT             —0.2           —0.2           -0.1                    0.1

QN/LN              0.0           0.0             0.0                    0.1

W/CPI             —0.2          —0.2            —0.2                    0.2


        All variables are measured by their percentage change over
        base—case values, where in the base case all oil tax revenues
        are redistributed in the period of their collection.
                                      -30-


Simulation 2:   A Five-Percent Increase in World Energy   Prices
    Next, we study a small increase in the world price of energy, first under

the assumption of continuous full-employment, and then with sluggishness in real

wages. We assume a constant—transfer policy for government revenues. The spe-

cific shock is aa permanent, unanticipated, one—shot rise in the world energy

price of five percent in 1980. The effects are shown in Table 4. Details for a

single sector's adjustment to higher E may be found in our study [2].

    The novel effect here is the differential behavior of the final goods

sectors, which results from the higher energy—intensity of production in traded

goods (again, see Bruno [i] for details). When energy prices rise, full

employment requires a 0.4 percent drop in real wages, as shown in Table 5.

Substitution away from energy inputs reduces labor productivity in the tradeable

sector .
           QN/LN is also reduced as labor shifts from the traded to the non—

traded goods sector. Because of the shift of labor into non—tradeables, the

marginal product of capital in N actually rises when energy prices increase and

that sector's capital accumulation increases very slightly. Profitability in T,

on the other hand, is hard hit, and investment in T is sharply negative. In the

steady state, KN rises by 0.1 percent while KT falls by 0.3 percent.

   With temporary real wage rigidity, as shown in Table 5, the unemployment

rate jumps one percentage point upon impact of the oil shock, falling over time

at a rate of about 0.2 percentage points per year. The unemployment depresses

investment, but only slightly, since rational entrepreneurs know that the

unemployment (and resulting low profits) are temporary. In 1985, KT and        are
                                       —31—



a mere one—tenth of one percent lower than in the full employment case.

Finally, note that the real wage rigidity worsens the economy's international

competitiveness after the oil shock, with PT/PF about 0.4 percent higher during

1980 than in the full-employment case.


Simulation   3:   Evaluating the Effects of the North Sea Oil Sector:
                  The Dutch Disease
    Forsyth and Kay, among others, have studied the resource allocational   con—

sequences of the North Sea oil production. The present model is well—suited to

such a task, though it is not yet calibrated on the demand side. To get a feel

for the major qualitative effects of the North Sea oil boom, we compare simula-

tions of the economy with and without domestic energy production. The effects

of a one—shot move from no production to self—sufficiency are illustrated in

Table 6. We assume that energy production immediately, costlessly, and unexpec-

tedly comes on line in 1980, and then follows the declining production profile

outlined earlier.


    The results support most qualitative points in Forsyth and Kay's astute

analysis, though there are also important differences. The domestic oil wealth

improves the country's terms of trade (T/F) by 0.2 percent initially, and

raises the relative price of home to traded goods by 1.1 percent. There is

substantial shift of labor to the non—traded goods sector, and production

QN rises by 2.7 percent, while T falls by 1.9 percent. Average labor produc-

tivity in non—traded goods accordingly falls by —0.1 percent initially. The

terms-of—trade improvement also raises real wages by 0.8 percentage points.
                                     —32—


    Forsyth and Kay correctly indicate that the benefits of North Sea oil are in

large part enjoyed through a relative expansion of the non—traded goods sector.

Thus, the oil discovery prompts a boom in investment in N, and a squeeze in

investment and profits in T. By 1985, KN rises by 1.2 percent and KT falls by

0.7 percent. Importantly, the continued expansion of the non—traded goods sector

and decline of the traded goods sector substantially reverses the relative price

increase N/T• In the long run, N/T falls back to 0.3 percent above its ini-
tial value.

    An important point not stressed by Forsyth and Kay is that optimizing

rational households (and govermnent) will not consume all current oil revenues,

but will rather save in anticipation of the future decline in energy production.

Thus, much of the current energy revenues will show up in current account

surpluses. To the extent that the revenues are saved in the short run, the sec—

toral reallocation of production is postponed for the future. And to the extent

that the current revenues overstate the "perpetuity equivalent" of oil earnings

(i.e., to the extent that current production exceeds "permanent production"), a

focus on current production levels overstates the resource allocational con—

sequences of the oil sector.
                                       —33—




         Table 4. Energy   Price   Increase (5 Percent): Flexible Wages



                  1980              1985            1990         Steady-State
KT                 0.0             -0.2             -0.3              -0.5

                   0.0              0.0             0.1               0.1

                   0.3              0.3             0.3               0.3
                   0.0              0.0            -0.1               -0.1

QT/LT             -0.2             -0.2            -0.2               -0.2
QN/LN            -0.2              -0.2            -0.2              -0.2

W/cpi             -0.4             -0.4            —0.4               0.5


        All variables are measured by their percentage change over
         base—case values. For this set of simulations, the
         government pursues a constant-transfer policy.
                                     —34—


        Table 5. Energy Price Increase (5 percent): Sluggish Real Wages



                   1980           1985            1990          Steady-State

KT                  0.0           -0.3            -0.4               -0.5

                    0.0           -0.1            -0.0                0.1

                    0.7            0.4             0.3                0.3

                    0.0            0.0             0.0               -0.1

QT/LT               0.1           —0.1            —0.2               —0.2

QN/LN               0.1            0.2            -0.2               —0.2

W/CPI               1.0            0.2            0.0                 0.0

Unemployment        1.0           0.2             0.0                0.0
  Rate (percent)

         All variables except rate of unemployment are measured by
         their percentage change over base—case values. For this
         set of simulations, the government pursues a constant—
         transfer policy.
                                    —35—


             Table 6. Energy Sector Windfall: Estimated Effects



                  ____           1985           1990          Steady—State
KT                 0.0           -0.7            -1.1             -1.3

KN                 0.0            1.2            2.0              -3.2

                   2.0            2.0            2.1                   1.8

                   1.1            0.8            0.6               0.3

QT/LT              0.8            0.8            0.8               0.7

QN/LN             -0.1           0.2             0.4               0.5
W/CPI              0.8           0.9             1.0               1.1

                  —1.9          —1.9            —1.8              —1.6

                   2.7           2.9             3.0               2.9


        All variables are measured by their percentage change over
        base—case values, where in the base case, there is no domes-
        tic energy production. These estimates treat the emergence
        of the energy sector as a one—shot, unanticipated phenomenum
        in 1980.
                                      —36—


Conclusions and Extensions

    Our model of a dynamic perfect foresight equilibrium in a multi—sector open

economy elaborates earlier findings concerning the Dutch disease. For instance,

in the third simulation we see clearly that the net effect of the energy sector

is to reduce long—run production of other tradeables, and to improve the

economy's terms of trade on final goods. The first simulation demonstrates that

the size of this effect depends on government budget policies concerning the

redistribution of oil—tax revenues to the private sector.

    There are three extensions to this work that seem very fruitful at this

point. Most importantly, the model must be more accurately parameterized to

depict the behavioral relationships in the U.K. economy. As indicated earlier,

this work is now being undertaken at Harvard by Mr. Louis Dicks-Mireaux.

Second, a monetary sector and nominal and real price rigidities can be built

into the present framework, along the lines of [31.   Important       aspects of the

U.K. adjustment process in recent years have involved the interaction of mone-

tary and real phenomena. For example, the strong appreciation of the pound

sterling in the late 1970s has often been attributed to its role as a

"petro—currency", and this appreciation has had a profound effect on the real

economy.

    Finally, a one-country model can be usefully embedded in a multi-country

context allowing us to endogenize the world rate of interest      ,    foreign   prices,

and foreign wealth. As pointed out in [8], the overall effects of higher oil

prices are importantly determined by shifts in these "world" parameters, which

have been held fixed in this study.
                                  —37—


                               Footnotes

There is a subtle point in determining the
                                             country's new budget line after
the oil discovery. The discovery induces a capital inflow, and the economy

moves down the Rybczynski line from A to G. The initial capital stock is K,

and after the shock the stock is K+LK.   Initially, GDP =   iK   +   wL; now GDP =
r*(K+i)   + wL +
                   EE   Whether the foreign capital comes in the form of ren-
tals from abroad, or foreign direct investment, or domestic investment

financed from abroad, there will be a service income outflow (each period)

in the amount rK. Thus, GNP rises exactly by the value of oil production.

The budget line, through AB, shifts to DF.
                                     -38-


                                  References

1. Bruno, M., "Adjustment and Structural Change under Supply Shocks," forth-
        coming Scandanavian Journal of Economics, 1982.

2. Bruno, M., and J. Sachs, "Input Price Shocks and the Slowdown in Economic
        Growth: Estimates for U.K. Manufacturing," presented at the Conference
        on Unemployment, Newnham College, Cambridge, July 1981.

3. Buiter, W.H., and D.D. Purvis, "Oil, Disinflation, and Export
        Competitiveness: A Model of the 'Dutch Disease' ," in J. Bhandari and B.
        Putnam (eds.): The International Transmission of Economic Disturbances
        under Flexible Ex—change Rates, forthcoming, MIT Press, 1981.

4. Corden, W.M., and J.P. Neary, "Booming Sector and De—industrialization in a
        Small Open Economy," inimeo, 1980.

5. Fleming, J.S., "U.K. Macro—Policy Response to Oil Price Shocks of 1974—75
         and 1979—80," presented at the International Seminar on Macroeconomics,
         Paris, June 1981, and forthcoming in the European Economic Review,
         1 982.


6. Forsyth, P.J., and J.A. Kay, "The Economic Implications of North Sea Oil
        Revenues," Journal of Fiscal Studies, 1, July, 1980, 1—28.

7. Neary, J.P., and D.D. Purvis, "Real Adjustment and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
        presented at the NBER Conference on Exchange Rates and International
        Macro—economics, Cambridge, Mass., 1981.

8. Sachs, J., "Energy Growth under Flexible Exchange Rates," NBER Working Paper
        No. 582, November 1980; also forthcoming in J. Bhandari and B. Putnam
        (eds.): The International Transmission of Economic Disturbances under
        Flexible Exchange Rates, forthcoming, MIT Press, 1981.

9. van Wijnbergen, S., "Optimal Investment and Exchange Rate Management in Oil
        Exporting Countries: A Normative Analysis of the Dutch Disease," mimeo,
        Developnent Research Center, World Bank, 1981.
