FIBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECULATIVE HYPERINFLATIONS IN MAXIMIZING

MODaS: CM WE RULE THEM OUT?

Maurice

Obstteld

Kenneth Rogoff

Working Paper No. 855

NATIOUL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge Mk 02138

February 1982

The research reported here is rt of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #855

February 1982

Speculative

Hyperinflations in Maximizing Models:
Can We Rule Then Out?
Abstract

Knife—edge stability is a common property of dynamic monetary

models assuming perfect foresight or rational expectations. These models
can be closed with the assumption that the economy's equilibrium lies on

the unique convergent path (the saddlepath). While this empirically
plausible assumption yields sensible results, aggregative models are not
specified in sufficient detail to allow one to prove that the saddlepath is

the unique equilibrium path. Brock (1974, 1975) and Stock and Scheinkman (1980)
have advanced models in which individual preferences are more fully
specified and in which, under certain conditions. the uniqueness and stability

of equilibrium can be rigorously demonstrated. This paper shows that
these uniqueness conditions are economically unreasonable.

Therefore, the

question these maximizing models address remains unresolved.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
M.I.T.

Cambridge, MA 02139
(January 1 — June 1, 1982)

Kenneth Rogoff
Division of International Finai
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System

Washington, DC 20551
(202) 452—3725

Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing Models:
Can We Rule Them Out?

by
Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogoff*

Introduction

In

-

his seminal papers on monetary perfect—foresight equilibrium,

Brock (1974, 1975) asked whether explosive price—level paths can be

equilibrium paths when the money supply grows at a constant rate. By
deriving the demands for money and goods from the optimizing decisions
of infinitely—lived agents, Brock was able to argue that, at least in the
conLext of one simple model, such "hyperinflationary equilibria" can be

ruled out under a few economically reasonable assumptions. Brock's conclusion
have provided an important theoretical justification for the convergence
assumption typically used to close saddlepath—stable macroeconomic models
1/
with rational, expectations.—

In subsequent work, Brock has modified his earlier conclusions,

however. Brock (1978) demonstrates than an additional, less intuitive,
condition is needed to preclude explosive (but not implosive) price paths
in a continuous—time version of his discrete—tine model. Brock and Scheinkman

(1980) prove that a similar condition is necessary to rule out hyperinflationa

equilibria in certain overlapping—generations models of money demand. And
Scheinkman (1980) does the same in a variant of the dower (1967) cash—in—
advance model. These papers are among the few attempts to justify rigorously
the stability assumption first proposed by Sargent and Wallace (1973) and

now a ubiquitous feature of dynamic monetary models.-'

!/This paper represents the views of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.

—2—

Here, we re—examine and evaluate the assumptions needed to preclude
hyperinflationary equilibria in the models of Brock and of Brock and Scheinkman.

We establish that the additional condition suggested by Brock (1978) is
uscessary and sufficient to rule out hyperinflationary equilibria in the
discrete—time version of his model, as well as in its continuous—time

version. Further, we interpret the condition and show it implies that
agents must have infinitely negative utility when their real balances are

zero. Unless money is essential in this extreme sense, speculative
hyperinflationary paths along which the economy is eventually demonetized
are equilibrium paths.

Our results show also that speculative hyperinflation can be ruled
out in Brock and Scheinkman's (1980) overlapping—generations economy
only if agents, in the absence of money, have infinitely negative utility
when old.

3

4

I.

The Brock Model in Discrete Time

In this section we study a discrete—time version of Brock's (1974,

1975) infinite—horizon dynamic monetary model. The treatment of the model
allows the market period length to be an arbitrary, exogenous constant, h.

The continuous—time model analyzed later may be obtained as the limit of
discrete—time models as h +

0.

A demand for money arises in the model

through the assumption that an agent's instantaneous utility depends on
his stock of real balances as well as his consumption level. Like Brocic,
we focus on utility functions that are separable..2!
The model is one in which identical agents with perfect foresight

choose
the

time paths for consumption and nominal money balances that

present

maximize

discounted value of their instantaneous utility streams. A

market period has length h, and the individual must consume at a constant

rate c during each period t. The cumulative intra—period utility derived
from this consumption is hu(c). Similarly, the cumulative intra—period
utility derived from holding nominal money balances

hv(M/P), where

over the period is

is the period—t money price of the single consumption

good. The individual's objective is thus to maximize

Ii

I h[u(c) + v(M/P)](l - oh)tTh

(1)

t= 0

where time, t, is measured in steps of length h. In (1), (1 — dh)

is the

representative agent's fixed subjective inter—period discount rate, which

naturally depends on the period length h. The functions u() and v() are
increasing in their respective arguments, strictly concave, and obey the

4

Inada conditions

liii

u'(c)

,

(2a)

0,

(2b)

c-to

Urn

u'(c)

=

lAm v'(m) =

m0
1.im v'(m)

,

(2c)
(2d)

0,

where m denotes real balances N/P.

At the beginning of each period, a typical individual receives hy
units of the consumption good and, from the government, a nominal cash
transfer of

dollars. Unconsumed units of the consumption good perish

at the period's end. The individual's flow budget constraint is therefore
given by

Mt — Mt_h — Pthy —

Phct

+

(3)

Agents have perfect foresight concerning the future paths of the price level
and we therefore do not distinguish, in (3) or below,

and transfers

between actual and anticipated variables.

Let At denote the Lagrange multiplier associated with constraint (3).
The first—order necessary conditions for an optimal individual plan are

-

6h)tTh -

AP

_hv'(M/P)(l - ah)tTh -

(4)

t+h

for finite P. Use of (4) to eliminate

(5)

and

from (5) yields the

5

necessary condition

u'(c)/P —

hvt(M/P)/P

+ (1 —

which summarizes the models demand side.
Markets

are assumed

to

cause the level of government

issues

clear at the beginning of each period. Beconsumption is not directly relevant to the

discussed here, it is set equal to zero. In equilibrium, the denand

for consumption during period t, hc, must equal available output hy, and so

CL = Y

for all t. Further, the demand for nominal balances must equal the supply, so
Mt -

Mt_h

+

for all t.
By

combining the market—clearing conditions (7) and (8) with (6), we

obtain a first—order difference equation in m.
—

In (9), 8

1 — dh and

mIu'(y)

—

hv'(m)].

Mt+h/Mt. It is assumed that

°

> 8

for

all t.

Equation (9) embodies both the first—order conditions of individual
optlmality (the Euler conditions) and the requirement of market equilibrium.
The equation must be satisfied by any equilibrium path of real balances.
While there are many Euler paths for real balances——paths which satisfy (9)——

6

not all are equilibrium paths. We now discuss a condition under which all
but one of these "candidate" equilibria can be ruled out.

II. The Infeasibility Condition and the Uniqueness of Equilibrium

By definition, hyperinflationary equilibrium paths are paths along
which the price level is unbounded even though the monetary growth rate re-

mains constant. To study the existence of such paths, we assume that
constant

at level

introduced

is

This enables us to employ the diagrammatic technique

by Brock (1974, 1975). For notational simplicity, the temporary

assumption that the period length h equals unity is also made.

Define Mm) mu'(y) — v'(m)]

and B(m)

mu'(y)(8Ia). As shown in

Figures 1(a) and 1(b), the B(m) schedule is a straight line of slope u'(y)(BIG)

(assumption (2cfl, the A(m)

emanating from the origin. If lin v'(m) —

rO

schedule may assume either of the shapes shown in 1(a) and 1(b). At the level
of real balances a such that v'Ou) —

concave, Mm), A'(m) > 0
<

1,

for in >

u'(y),

A() = 0. Because v(S) is strictly

and A(m) < 0 for 0 cm <

;, as

A(m) and 5(m) intersect at some i >

in. Provided

that

shown. Whether they

intersect at m 0 as well depends on the shape of vN. If lim ACm) —

rO

—Un my' (in) equals some strictly negative number, we have the configuration of

m0

Figure 1(a).-1' If instead lim mv'(ra) — 0,

we have that

of Figure 1(b).

tit+0

The Euler equation (9) may be written as

—

A(uI)

B(a+1).

(10)

The diagram shows how to construct the Euler paths for m. which may be
thought of as "candidate" equilibrium paths. Given an initial a0, a1 must

A(n', &(m)

Acm)

Figure 1(a)

ACm')

A(rnl, B(m)

13(ni)

m

Figure 1(b)

7

satisfy B(m1) —

Mm0),

and thus is uniquely determined, as Figure 1(a) shows.

Using (10), m2, m3,... may be found in the sane manner. Although every path
generated this way satisfies the necessary conditions of individual optimality
and the market—clearing requirement, not every choice m0 initiates an equi—

librium path for the economy. Faced with the given path of cash transfers and the
tnplied path of the price level, individuals may find it advantageaus to plan
consumption and money—demand paths inconsistent with aggregate intertemporal
equilibrium.

The Euler path initiated by

— m is the steady—state path. This

path is an equilibrium, for it satisfies the transversality condition

urn Stt()m — 0,

(11)

which is sufficient for individual optinality.2—' Eacistence of a perfect—
foresight equilibrium is therefore established.

Uniqueness can be established only by ruling out Euler paths that
originate to the right or left of i.

by m0 >

mare

Brock has shown that paths initiated

not equilibrium if mild conditions are imposed on v('). tror

an alternative discussion, see Gray (1981).] Real balances grow without bound
along these paths, and an individual can always gain by choosing at some point to
reduce his real balances forever below the level indicated by the Euler equation.

Consider now paths initiated by m0 <

;. Along

these hyperinflationary

paths, real balances decline monotonically over time even though the money
growth rate is constant at a.

We

now argue that all such paths may be ruled

out as equilibria if, and only if, the following infeasibility condition holds:

lim mv'(m) >0.
m+ C

(12)

8

The argument is as follows. First, return to Figure 1(a), which
is drawn on the assumption that (12) does hold. By inspection, any
solution to (10) initiated by m0 < in

requires

eventually become

that

negative. These paths are infeasible. and may

therefore

be excluded from

the class of possible equilibrium paths.' it follows that when (12) is
valid, the steady—state path is the unique equilibrium path.
When mv'(m)

• 0 as m 0, as in Figure 1(b). most Euler paths start-

ing to the left of ;
through ;,

are again infeasible. However, Euler paths which pass

such as the one depicted in Figure 2, are not infeasible: While

the price level becomes and remains infinite after a finite number of periods,
real balances need not become negative to generate a path satisfying (10).
There exists a countably infinite number of these paths, all of which obey

the transversality condition (11) un addition to (10)1 and and are, in fact,
9/

perfect—foresight equilibrium paths. —

The nature of these hyperinflationary paths requires comment. First,
why do agents hold positive real balances at any tiie if they expect the
price level to become and remain infinite after a finite number of periods?
The reason is that in, the equilibrium real money holding in the period before
the price level becomes infinite, satisfies v'(in)

content to hold ;
The

>0

u'(y). Thus, agents are

without attempting to increase consumption above y.

utility gained by consuming a dollar just equals that lost through the

concomitant

reduction in real balances. The individual is not concerned that

his dollars will be worthless next period.

A second question relates to the fact that v'(O) —
marginal utility of money grows without bound as m +

the

will it not pay for

at some point to "consume a little less and harvest a large
10/
utility from money services"?— To answer this, suppose that an

the individual
marginal

0,

. Since

A(rn\ 5(m)

6(m)

n'o

Figure 2

rn

9

Individual does add a dollar to his money holdings at some tine t before

the price level jumps to infinity. Two possible strategies are to consume
the dollar before the price level jumps or to hold the dollar forever.

Now the first—order condition (6), which must hold along an Euler path,
guarantees

that for all n with
n—l

<

i

E S
i—a

v'(m+j)/P+j

(13)

+ $"u'(y)/P..

Thus, the individual cannot gain from strategy one because he is indifferent
between consuming a dollar in period t and consuming it in period t+n.

Consider strategy two next. If the price level becomes infinite at
tine t+T, then v'(mt+T_l)

v'()

u'(y); and by setting n — T—l in the multi-

period arbitrage condition above, we obtain

•

T_li

$ v'(m+i)/P+i.

(14)

i— 0

The gain from holding an extra dollar forever when it is known that money
will lose its purchasing power at tine t+T is given by

T-l

t+

$i()f

i0

When urn mvS(m) —

t

+ lim {

S

p-. iT

Sit(M/P)/P}

(15)

and
0, expression (15) equals the right—hand side of (14),

rn. a

so the gain from holding an additional dollar forever just equals the gain
from consuming the dollar at time t.

Therefore,

strategy two, like strategy

one, cannot augment individual welfare.
A final question is the following: Even when liz my' (in) > 0, as in
UI-to

Figure 1(a), v'(m) =

u'(y),

and tt+T — m+T+l — ... — 0?

so how can we rule out equilibria with t+T1

—

Expression (15) shows why the infeasibility con—

1-0

dition

(12) precludes this type of path. First, note that condition (14)

is still valid along the path described. But the right—hand side of (14)

now strictly smaller than (15). which is the gain to the individual from
and holding the doladding an extra dollar to his money holdings at time t
is

lar

forever. Since this gain exceeds the sacrifice u'(y)/P necessary to

obtain the dollar, the hypothetical path we have been considering cannot

be equilibrium. The argument makes clear that in a sense, condition (12)
implies that money has intrinsic value even when the price level is in-

finite. We discuss in Section IV whether it is reasonable to rule out
hyperinflationary equilibria on this basis.

It is worth digressing briefly to note that the problem of hyper—

inflation does not disappear when agents' lives are finite.

If urn my' (in)

m.D
leads
them
to hold
— 0 and agents choose an initial real—balance level that

real balances m at some point before their lives end, the price level will
still become infinite in the next period.

We conclude that when the infeasibility condition (12) does not
hold, there exist a countable infinity of hyperinflationary Euler paths

that cannot be ruled out as equilibria. The next section shows that when
trading

tionary

takes place continuously, there exists a continuum of hyperinfla—
equilibria if (12) is false.

11

III. The Brock Model in Continuous Time

The previous section's results carry over, with only slight modif 1—

cation, to the continuous—time limit of the discrete—time mode1AJ As long as
Un my' Cm)

0,

there

exist feasible hyperinflationary equilibrium paths

satisfying the Euler equation (10) and the transversality condition (11).

0, the set of real—balance levels

We now show that as the market period h •

initiating a feasible hyperinflatioflary equilibrium path grows more
dense.

unique

0.

In the Unit of continuous—time trading, any m3 lower than the
steady—state value ; initiates

an

equilibrium path when lin

my' (m)

When lisa mv'(m) > 0, the steady—state path remains the sole equilibrium

m0

pith.
=

To demonstrate these results, we continue to assume that

for

all t. With trading period h, (9) may be written as

u'(yX]. —

where i E (M+h —

6h)(l

—

M)/hM

uh)m+h

—

(a

—

mF.u'(Y)

—

hv'(m)1.

—1)/h and, by assumption. ô, ii <

the non—zero, steady—state level of real balances ;

v'()

u'(y)(ó + p —

(16)

solves

the equation

C

(.17)

in, the

successive real—balance levels

generated by (16) become more closely spaced as h +

0.

Thus, when (12) fails,

the set of points oi which lie on some hyperinflationary

dense as the period length shrinks. For the proof,
—

By (16),

dph).

We now show that when

m÷h/m E O(h.m)

1.

L

path becomes more

use (16) to write

(hv'(m)/u'(y)1)I((1

—

dh)(1

—

phfl. (18)

12

Since m falls over time along an explosive price—level path. it must be

proved that DO/ah C 0 for m < in. Differentiation of (18) yields

[v'() — v'(m)l/u'(Y)

—

+ 6uh{[hv'(m)/u'(Y)] —

1).

(19)

By (18) and the concavity of v('), the foregoing expression is unambiguously
C in.

negative when

Thus, as h + 0, the distance between m+h and

along a feasible Euler path shrinks.

In the limit of continuous time, (16) becomes the differential equation

=

m{p

+ 6 —

[v'On)/u'(y)]}.

(20)

Figures 3(a) and 3(b) plot rn as a function of m, with 3(a) shot..-ng the case in

which condition (12) holds and 3(b) the case in which it does not)-' it is
evident that in is rising when above the steady—state level ; and falling when
below rn. From (20). in is given by the equation v'(m)Iu'(y) =
In 3(a). any initial in0 <

that in —

lim (—mv'(m)Iu'(y)]

11

+ cS.

initiates a path having the property

C 0 when m = 0.

Because in reaches 0 in finite

wO

tine along these paths, infeasibility allows us to rule them out as

before. However, when lim mv'(m) —

0,

as in 3(b), rn -. 0 aS in •

0.

In con—

m+O

tinuous

time, therefore, any m0 C m in Figure 3(b) initiates a hyperinflationary

equilibrium path along .thich real balances approach zero asymptoticallyP'

As in the discrete—tine case, the infeasibility condition (12) is necessary
and sufficient to ensure that the steady—state path is the only equilibrium
path.

S

m

Figure 3(a)

fl-i

flgure 3(b)

13

Iv. An Interpretation of the Infeasibility Condition

While the infeasibility condition (12) Is central to the discussion
of "speculative" hyperinflationary equilibria, its interpretaL].1 remains

elusive. It states that an agent holding nominal balances N who adds a dollar
to his money holdings reaps a gain (1/P)v'(M/P) which is bounded away from

zero no matter how high the price level P. In this sense, condition (12)
implies that money is essential to the welfare of agents.

The nature of this essentiality is made more precise by the following

theorem. If tim mv'(m) > 0, then tin v(m)
rn—'-0

Proof. Let urn mv'(m) = a > 0, and suppose, contrary to the assertion of the
rn* 0

Theorem, that v(O) is finite. Since v() is strictly concavc

v(m) —

v(0)

> my' (m)

(21)

and

for any m > 0. Choose m* to be small enough that v(m*) — v(O) <

v(O)

Im*vt(m*) — aJ < e, where e< a/2. Then, by (21). c > v(m*) —

> a —

a.

> m*v'(m*)

But the foregoing string of inequalities implies that C > aIZ and so

contradicts the assumption that c < a/2. It follows that v(0) cannot be finite,
that is, there is no positive m* small enough that v(m*) —

v(0)

C C.

According to the Theorem, a utility—of—money function satisfying
the infeasibility condition (12) has the property that v(O) =

—. The

converse is not true, however. Any concave function v() such that v(m) =

[log(m)]

for in < exp(—2/3) has the property that v(O) — but also

satisfies urn mv'(m)

0. thus, the assumption v(0) =

— is

0

not sufficient, to preclude hyperinflationary equilibria.

necessary, but

14

The Theorem shows how important money must be if hyperinflationary

equilibria are to be excluded. It must be true that if an agent is de—
prived of his real balances, no finite increase in his endowment nf the
consumption good can restore him

to

his previous utility level. This re-

quirement seems inconsistent with the view that the utility—of—money
function v(•) captures money's role in reducing the frictions that would
14,

characterize a complex barter economy. —
As was shown

in

Section III, the infeasibility condition (12) ex-

cludes hyperinflationary equilibria by ensuring, in effect, that money has

some intrinsic value even when the price level is infinite. Starr (1980)

points out that

"the economy is effectively demonetized when the

price of money is zero so that monetary transactions——available at any posi-

tive

price——are discontinuously unavailable at a null price." If

discontinuity
m

•

in agents' opportunity sets at P —

there is a

, the Unit of mv'(n) as

0 becomes economically irrelevant. On this view, it is of doubtful

validity to rule out hyperinflationary equilibria in the Brock model even by
appealing to condition (12).

15

V. Eyperinflationary Equilibria in an Overlapping_GeneratiOns Economy

is formally
to a condition Brock and Scheinlcman (1980) have used to rule out
infeasibility condition (12) that ilin mv'(m) > 0

The
identical

rn.0

hyperinflatlonary

equilibria in certain overlapping_generations models of

money demand. The condition they use refers, however, to the function
giving the utility of old—age consumption.
To derive the Brock—Scheinkluan condition, consider an economy with

a stationary population in which agents live for two periods.
tions, the "young" and the "old,
ceives y units of

coexist at each date t. Each

agent re-

perishable output while young but none while old. Only

by accumulating money in

youth can an individual consume in old age.

The lifetime utility of an Agent young at date t

12

Two genera-

1

is given by

2

u(c) +

where c is his consumption while young and c+l his consumption while old.
The constraints facing this agent are:

y —

c
—

(22)

—

NIPt + Et+l/Pt+l

In (23), 11t+l denotes cash transfers from the government,

(23)

bestowed

exclusive—

ly on agents old at date t+l.

Under perfect foresight, individual utility maximization implies
that

16

u'(c)/u'(c+i)

—

(24)

SP/P41

at an interior maxinum. Equilibrium at each date in the goods and money

markets

iziplies that
1

2

(25)

and that

Mt —

for

all t

(26)

Mi + Ut

> 0. By (22) and (26). c — y

—

ni, where

—

Mt/Pt. Also, c1 =

by (23) and (25). Thus, in equilibrium,

u'(y

—

(>

Denoting M+i/M by a

—

m)

—

(27)

—

1n)/u'(m+i)
8),

we

may write (27) as a difference—equation in m,

(28)

(8/a)u'(n+i)m+i.

If money is held, the foregoing difference equation must govern the

l5

economy's evolution in perfect—foresight equilibrium.— The stationary
statei defined by u'(y —

) = (/a)u'(ni)

clearly provides one equilibrium.

Can there exist, in addition, hyperinflationary equilibria along which m
0? To answer this question, note that as tnt •

approaches zero as well. As Brock and

0, the left—hand side of (28)

Scheinkraan (1980) observe, however, if

17

un mu'(m) > 0,
iuO

(29)

the right—hand side of (28) is bounded away from zero as

0. Condition

(29) Is therefore sufficient to rule out hyperinflationary equilibria in
this overlapping—generations economy.

The inequality (29) is formally identical to (12), which pre-

cludes hyperinflationary equilibria in the Brock model. In particular, the result of section IV shows that in order to rule out hyper—
inflationary paths for the overlapping—generations economy, it must be assumed that

u(O) =

—. This

assumption seems more plausible than the assump-

tion v(O) = — needed to rule out explosive price—level paths in the Brock
model.

It should be noted, however, that (29) does not rule out hyperinfla—
tions if, say, because of government lump—sum redistribution of endowments,

an old agent's income is £

> 0 instead of zero. In this case, the difference

equation (28) becomes

rnu' (y — a —

nit)

(N)u' (c + m+t)m÷i*

(30)

and the right—hand side of (30) goes to zero as m • 0 even If (29) holds.
Thus, whIle (29) may be a reasonable assumption, it will exclude hyper—
inflationary equilibria only in extreme cases.

18

VI. Concluding Remarks

Dynamic monetary models assuming rational expectations or perfect

foresight

occupy a central position in modern macroeconomics. Because

expectations are self—fulfilling in these models, there are many "candidate't

equilibrium price levels, each corresponding to a different expected in-

flation rate. When a model is well—behaved, exactly one expected inflation rate can be justified exclusively in terms of market fundamentals,
that is, the expected future values of (and possibly past innovations in)

the exogenous variables driving the economy. The corresponding price
is said to lie on the convergent manifold of the system. All others initiate price paths that are fueled in part by speculative anticipations
unrelated to actual market conditions.

In

-

an influential paper. Sargent and Wallace (1973) demonstrated the

intuitive appeal of closing perfect—foresight monetary models with the as-

sumption that equilibrium prices lie on the convergent manifold. Host
subsequent authors have adapted the convergence assumption and have found

that it delivers economically sensible results. Nonetheless, there remains the theoretical question of whether any forces guarantee that an economy of maximiziElg agents will never find itself on a divergent specula-

tive equilibrium path. Wallace (1980), among others, has argued that inconvertible fiat money is valued only for its expected future purchasing
power and that monetary equilibrium is therefore bound to be "tenuous":

The

price of money may be

inflationary

zero in equilibrium, and there will exist hyper—

equilibrium paths along which money eventually passes out of

use.
Brook (1974, 1975), however, provided an infinite—horizon maximizing

19

model

in

which money, while remaining a store of purchasing power, also

has an intrinsic value to agents. He modelled this intrinsic value by
assuming, with Samuelson (1947). that real balances are an argument in

consumers' separable utility functions. The money_in—the—utility—function
device was intended to capture money's role in facilitating trarsactionS.
Brook (1978) subsequently provided a condition on the utility function
necessary and sufficient to exclude hyperinflationary equilibria in a

continuous—time version of his discrete—tine model. A similar condition
was found by Brook and Scheinkman (1980) to rule out explosive inflation
in a class of overlapping—generations models.

This paper has shown that unless money is essential in the very
strong sense that agents have infinitely negative utility without it, one
cannot rule out hyperinflationary equilibria in Brook's model. This is true

in discrete time as well as in continuous time. On the view that money has
intrinsic value because it reduces transactions costs, it is implausible to

assign it this much importance. In the context of Brook and Scheinkman's
(1980) overlapping—generations economy. hyperinflation can be excluded if
agents have infinitely negative lifetime utility when old—age consumption

is zero. But this is so only if agents have no means of avoiding a zero
consumption level in old age without holding money.
transfers

If government lump—sum

or "reverse bequests" from children to parents are introduced,

speculative equilibria reappear.
The convergence assumption used to close a wide class of forward—

looking monetary models yields sensible results and has considerable intuitive

appeai! However, the assumption cannot be ratIonalized at present by
pointing

to

a simple but

more

fully specified model

of individual behavior

20

Sn which price—level uniqueness can be deduced from the requirements of

market equilibrium. Money may

be

sufficiently essential to preclude

hyperinflationary equilibria, but a robust theory demonstrating this has
yet to appear.

21

Footnotes

1. See1 for example, Lucas (1975), Kouri (1976), and Rodriguez (1980).

2. Calvo (1979) studies local uniqueness of equilibrium in models
with capital. Cray (1981) obtains results similar to Brock's in a model
in which money is held because it reduces transactions costs.

3. A number of problems may arise when the utility function u(c,m)
<

is non—separable. In particular, when

0, there may be multiple

convergent equilibria even if both goods are everywhere normal. [See

Obstfeld (l98].)j This paper ignores the possibility that there exists
more than one convergent equilibrium path. It is concerned only tjith the
possibility that an economy possessing a single convergent equilibrium

path may also possess divergent equilibrium paths. Calvo (1978, 1979)
and Taylor (1977), the latter in the context of an ad hoc model, describe
economies with multiple convergent rational—expectations equilibria.

4. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1981) discuss the implications of a time—varying
monetary growth rate.

>

5. Clearly, B(m)

0. Because B/a C 1 and v't(m) < 0, (2d) en-

A(n)

sures that A(ra) and B•(m) intersect at least once at some in > m.

To show

A(m) — B(m).

It suf-

the uniqueness of the steady state;, write 'Y(m)
fices to show that for m >
[1 —

in

>;.

Cm) >

—

v'(m)

— mv"(m).

But for m >

in, [1

—

(S/G)]u'(y)

> 0.

, '3"

0.

To see this, calculate " (m)

Because A(;) —

($/O)]u'(y)

—

v'(m)

>

BC;).

'V'(m) =

0, and so W'(m) >

0 for

22

6. If —urn my' (in) —
rn—p 0

axis only at rn —

— the

—. This

A(m) schedule in Figure 1(a) cuts the vertical

is the case, for example, when v(m) — ml_R/1_R and

R >

1.

7.

See Brock (1974, 1975) for a proof. To better appreciate the economics

of the transversality condition, see the inultiperlod version of (6)

(equation (13)3 developed later in this section and the accompanying discussion
(which draws on Gray (1981)3.

of money can
B. Mi assumption of free disposability ensures that the price
never be negative.

9. It is worth noting that when tin v'(m) <
m.D
in the text), the A(rn) schedule does not

u'(y)

(contrary to the assumption

intersect the horizontal axis, but

is always above it. In this case, any path originating

to the left of

is

an equilibrium path. Along such a path, the price level approaches infinity
asymptotically.

10.

In his discrete—tine model, Brock (1975), p. l3B, uses this argument

to rule out hyperinflatioflary equilibrium paths.

11. The continuous—tine limit of the representative household's objective
function (1) is

[u(c t)

11mW =
h-PO

12.

.

tt

+ v(N /P )]e_tdt.

0

This diagram was suggested to us by William Brock.

Again, if tin mv'(m)
rn-'0

the

schedule cuts the vertical axis only at in

—

23

13. these hyperinflationary paths are equilibrium because they satisfy the
continuous—time transversality condition lint eätuT(y)m = 0.

See Arrow and

Xurz (1970) or Brock (1978).

14. Fischer (1974) provides a detailed discussion of the possible roles for
real balances in production and utility functions. Brock (1974) also contains
a brief discussion of the money—in—the—utility function approach. He shows
it is equivalent to assuming that each agent derives utility from consumption
and leisure, where leisure is an increasing function of real balances because
money saves transactions tine. flowever, this story does not provide a plausible

rationalization for the infeasibility condition (12). While it may be reasonable to assume that utility is infinitely negative when leisure is zero, it
is not reasonable to assume that an agent who does not hold money will have no

leisure time. Gray (1981) specifies a somewhat different role for money,
in which real balances reduce the output cost of transactions. rather than

their cost in terms of leisure. The condition necessary for uniqueness of equilibrium in Cray's model is formally identical to (12), except that a transactions

function replaces the utility—of—money function. The Theorem of Section IV can
be used to prove that Gray's uniqueness condition holds only when transactions
costs eat up more than one hundred percent of output in the absence of money.

Thus, it is impossible to rule out speculative hyperinflations when the demand
for money arises from Gray's transactions technology.

15. Of course, nothing precludes the Pareto inefficient nonmonetary equilibrium
in which the price of money is zero at all times.

If everyone believes money

will be worthless next period, it will be in the present model.

24

16. In addition, speculative hyperinflations are conspicuously absent
from the historical record: Explosive monetary growth seems to be an
adequate explanation of all observed byperinflations. Flood and Garber
(1980) subject this proposition to an econometric test, finding no evidence that the post—world War I German hyperinflation was unjustified in
terms of underlying monetary conditions.

25

References

Arrow, Kenneth J., and Kurz, t4ordecai. Public Investment, the Rate of Return,

and Optimal Fiscal Policy. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1970.
Brock, William A. "Money and Growth: The Case of Long—Run Perfect Foresight."

International Economic Review 15, üo. 3 (October 1974): 750—777.
Brock, William A. "A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Model." Journal of

Monetary Economics 1 (April 1975): 133—150.
Brock, William A. "A Note on Hyper—inflationary Equilibria in Long Run

Perfect Foresight Monetary Models: A Correction." Mimeo, University
of Chicago. 1978.

Brock, William A., and Scheinkinan, Jose A. "Some Remarks on Monetary Policy
in an Overlapping Generations Model." In Models of Monetary Economies,

edited by John Kareken and Neil Wallace. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, 1980.

Calvo, Guillermo. "On the Indeterminacy of Interest Rates and Wages with
Perfect Foresight." Journal of Economic Theory 19 (December 1978):
321—337.

Calvo, Guillermo. "On Models of Money and Perfect Foresight." International

Economic Review 20 (February 1979): 83—103.
dower, Robert W. "A Reconsideration of the Microfoundations of Monetary
Theory." Western Economic Journal 6 (December 1967): 1—8.
Fischer, Stanley. "Money and the Production Function." Economic Inquiry
12, no. 4 (Decraber 1974): 517—533.

Flood, Robert P.,

and Garber, Peter M. "Market Fundamertals Versus

Price—Level Bubbles: The First Tests." Journal of Political Economy

88. no. 1 (February 1980): 24—58.

26

Cray. Jo Anna. "Dynamic

instability in Rational Expectations

Attempt to Clarify." Xerox,

Models: An

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve

System. 1981.
the
Kouri. Pentti .J.K. "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in

Short Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach." Scandinavian
Journal

of

Economics 78, ito. 2 (Nay 1976): 280-304.

Journal
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle."

of Political Economy 83, no. 6 (December l975h1113—1144.
Obstfeld. Maurice. "Inflation. Real Interest, and the Determinacy of

Equilibrium in an Optimizing Framework." National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper no. 723, 1981.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Rogoff. Kenneth. "Process Consistency in Rational
Expectations Models." Xerox, Board of Governors of the Federal ReserV

System. 1981.

Carlos A. "The Role of Trade Flows in Exchange Rate Determinatio:

Rodriguez •

A Rational Expectations Approach." Journal of Political Economy 88,

no. 6

(December 1980): 1148—1158.

Samuelson, Paul A. Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge: Harvard
University

Press, 1947.

Sargent. Thomas 3. and Wallace, Neil. "The Stability of Models of Money

and Growth with Perfect Foresight.' Econometrica 41. o. 6 (November

1973): 1043—1048.
Scheinkman, Jose A. "Discussion." In Models of Monetary Economies, edited

by John Kareken and Neil Wallace. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis. 1980.

27

Starr, Ross 11. "General Equilibrium Approaches to the Study of Monetary

Economies: Comments on Recent Developments." In Models of Monetary
Economies, edited by John Kareken and Neil Wallace. Minneapolis:
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1980.

Taylor. John B. "Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic Macroeconomic
Models with Rational Expectations." Econometrica 45, no. 6 (september
1977): 1377—1385.

Wallace, Neil. "The Overlapping Generations Model of Fiat Money." In Models
of Monetary Economies, edited by John Kareken and Neil Wallace.

Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. 1980.

