                   NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ASPECTS OF THE CURRENT ACCOUNT
                   BEHAVIOR OF OECD ECONOMIES




                         Jeffrey Sachs



                     Working Paper No. 859




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         February 1982




This paper was presented at the Fifth International Conference of
the University of Paris—Dauphine on Money and International
Monetary Problems, June 15—17, 1981. I wish to thank Barry
Eichengreen for helpful discussions, and Joy Mundy for assistance
in preparation of the paper. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in International Studies. Pny opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #859
                                                     February 1982




                     Aspects of the Current Account Behavior
                                of OECD Economies



                                    ABS TRACT




     This essay examines some aspects of capital flows within the OECD,

and outlines a framework for analyzing current account movements. In both

the theoretical and empirical sections, I argue for the importance of in—

cluding investment and growth in analyses of the current account. I present

empirical evidence confirming that shifts in investment rates explain a

large part of recent OECD current account behavior. In addition, the links

in theory and practice between exchange rates and the current account are

scrutinized. A link between current account deficits and depreciation

is evident for the large OECD economies, but not for many smaller European

economies. It appears that the exchange rate behavior in the smaller economies

can be explained by specific exchange rate policies in these economies.




                                        Jeffrey Sachs
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Harvard University
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138

                                         (617) 495—4112
    Introduction


        Many aspects of international capital
                                                mobility among developed economies
   are not well Understood. There are
                                         puzzles about the size and distribution
   of current account imbalances and their
                                             counterpart, international capital
   flows, within the OECD. There are
                                        competing theories about the links
   of exchange rate movements to the current account that have not
                                                                   yet been
   sorted out empirically. Most
                                   fundamentally, there is doubt about the basic
   degree of capital mobility, with some (like Feldstein and llarioka [1981]),

  arguing that national capital markets are highly segmented, and others

   (lilçe Harberger [1980]) arguing that high international capital mobility

  effectively equalizes rates of return in disparate financial centers.

  Harberger [1980] recently bemoaned this professional "schizophrenia"

  (p.331) in thinking about capital
                                      flows, indicating that it points to
  "a genuine ignorance on our collective part of how the world capital market
          —
  works. U'!
       This   essay examines some aspects of capital flows within the OECD,
  and outlines a framework for analyzing current account movements. In

 both the theoretical and empirical sections, I argue for the importance of

 including investment and growth in analyses of:the current account, in

 contrast to much recent work which emphasizes
                                                 savings (but not investment)
 decisions in current account determination. I present empirical evidence

• confirming that shifts in investment rate explain a large part of recent

 OECD current account behavior.

      In addition, the links in theory and practice between exchange rates

 and the current account are scrutinized. There has been amazingly little

 evidence brought to bear on the basic assertion that exchange rate depreciation

 is correlated with current account deficits, and appreciation with surpluses.
                                       2



 The assertion •is made, but not tested, in Kouri and Macedo [1980], for

 example. The hypothesized link holds up well for the larger OECD economies

 and not for a number of smaller European economies characterized by large

 deficits   and exchange rate appreciation in the 1970s. But on closer
 scrutiny, the exchange rate behavior in the smaller countries can be
• explainedby their specific exchange rate policies. For these countries,
 a link is found between deficits and rising nominal interest rates rather
 than depreciating currencies.
                                          3




     An Overview of Current Account Behavior: 1960—1979


         The broad outlines of current account behavior for fourteen OECD countries

 may be gleaned from Table 1. From the final line of the Table, we see the well

 known fact that the OECD as a whole went into deficit upon the 1973 oil price

 hike, after a decade-and-one-half of aggregate surpluses. Even at the point

 of deepest deficits, though, the ratio of the current account to gross national

 product, CA/GNP, for the fourteen countries in the aggregate never fell below
 -   .005 during 1974 to 1979. Note that the smaller countries have
                                                                      consistently
 run deficits since 1960, and that CA/GNP worsened after 1973 considerably more

 for this group than for the larger countries, a fact which we will take up

 soon.

         The position of a country as a capital importer (i.e., with a current

 account deficit) or exporter is remarkably steady over time, and is also

 tied closely with economic size, The largest economies (by total GNP),

Germany, Japan, and the United States, have been fairly consistent capital

exporters, at least until the large U.S. deficits of 1977 and 1978. With

the exception of Sweden, the small countries have all been capital importers

for twenty years, with remarkable consistency. For the six small countries

excluding Sweden, during 1961—79, there are only 10 observations of surplus

of a total of 114 annual observations. The
                                               proportion of surplus years

between 1960 and 1979 is shown in the last column of Table 1.     Of the large

countries, only Canada is consistently in deficit; of the small, none is

typically in surplus.

       An indicator of the persistence of surpluses and deficits across years

is given by the correlation of CA/CNP for the list of countries across

subperiods. Between 1960—65 and 1966—73, the correlation for thirteen

countries (excluding France) is .81. For the periods l966-73 and 1974—79,
                                          4



    the correlation is r =   0.72,

        Also, the absolute magnitude and variability of CA/GNP is negatively

related to economic size. For the group of large countries as a whole,

the 1960—79 range of CA/CNP is 0.004 to —0.004, while for the small countries,

the range is 0.003 to —0.044. The standard deviation of CA/GNP for the

large eight economies is 0.003, much less than 0.011 for the smaller

countries. This same point was made by Harberger [1980], using the ratio

of CA to gross investment i rather than to CNP. The result probably

reflects the fact that small countries are truly "small" in international

capital markets, and can borrow and lend internationally at a fairly fixed

interest rate, while larger economies face an upward sloping schedule of

international funds. We return to this point later in the paper.

        Note that the deficits are a substantial fraction of gross domestic

investment in many of the countries. For the smaller countries as a group,

international capital inflows accounted for more than eleven per cent of

the    funds for gross domestic investment during 1974—79. This ratio is an
astonishing    22.6 per   cent for Norway; Norway's deficits, we shall note
later,    reflect international borrowing to finance Norway's North Sea oil

development.

       My regression analysis to date has focused more on the sources of
shifts    in the current account, than on the reasons for persistent Imbalances,
though the theoretical discussion below clearly     points to factors which can

explain    long periods of. international borrowing. Current account flows over
decades    can be expected between countries with similar tastes but unequal
marginal productivities of capital, either because of different technologies,
a   different industrial mix, or different initial endowments of capital.

Alternatively, CA imbalances can occur between countries with similar

technologies, but differing intertemporal consumption preferences (i.e.
                                           5



 savings behavior). If differing technologies or capital endowments are

 the main source of capital flows, we would expect to see persistent

 deficits in economies with high investment rates. This is indeed the case

 for the large versus small OECD economies. The I/GNP ratio for the smaller

 six countries is consistently three to four percentage points above the

 same ratio among the large eight economies. For our three subperiods,

 these rates are given by:


                                 1960—65       1966—73   1974—79
              (I/CNP), large 8      21a          .22       .22

              (I/CNP), small 6     .26           .26       .25


          a196165 Source: International Financial Statistics

     On a country—by—country.. basis, Japan is the significant exception to

the negative link of CA/GNP and I/GNP. The Japanese CA/GNP ratio is usually

positive although the investment share I/CNP is the highest among the

fifteen countries studied. My guess is that Japanese capital controls

until the late l970s explain the low CA/GNP ratio. In the absence of

controls, Japan's extraordinary savings rates would likely have led to

large CA surpluses, and smaller investment rates. Since the capital

controls effectively bottled up the savings domestically, in spite of

Japanese home interest rates much below international levels, CA/GNP was

reduced and I/GNP was raised..

     As a further check on the investment relation, I ran a cross—section

of CA/GNP and I/GNP for a number of subperiods, with and without Japan

included. These are shown as regressions 1 to 3 in Table 2.        The

correlation between investment rates and CA/GNP is particularly strong

after 1970.
                                               6


           If   differing endowments of capital, rather than differences in techno—

logies or product mix are behind the persistent differences in investment

rates, the international flow of capita' would be from high per capita

income countries to lower per capita income countries. Surprisingly,

the       simple relationship between CA/GNP and real per capita income is
negative, not positive, and extremely weak, as shown in regression 4.
Other writers have found a weak or negative relationship between per

capita income and the current account balance in examining flows between

developed and developing countr1es.' Apparently low per capita incomes

are, as much evidence of low total factor productivity as of low endowments

of capital per head.

          ]t is often thought that the recent pattern of current account

deficits and surpluses reflects in part the distribution of oil import

dependence among nations. I have argued at length in Sachs [1981] that

the links between oil dependence and deficits were rather weak in the

1970s, for good theoretical reasons. As an illustration of this

proposition, regression 5 and 6 show CA/GNP as a function of I/GNP and

M
    oil
          /GNP, where M
                        oil .is   the value of net petroleum imports into the

country. All variables are averaged over 1970—79. There is no overall

negative        relationship between oil dependence and CA/GNP   and   the oil
variable is weak and statistically insignificant. The           basic explanation

here is that while countries with higher oil dependence, cet.

suffered greater real income losses after the oil price increases in the

197 Os, real income losses             se do not lead to international borrowing.

In principle, it is crucial whether the income losses are perceived as

permanent or temporary; only in the latter case will deficits be greatest

in countries with the largest income losses. A second part of the explanation
                                      7




 is that oil—rich countries, such as Canada, Norway and the U.K., experienced

 a sharp rise in investment expenditures on energy resource development,

and these expenditures contributed to current account deficits.

      The links betweer investment and the current account are even

 stronger when we consider shifts In international borrowing. With great

consistency, the countries that had the largest increase in CA deficits

in the 1970s were those with the sharpest rise in gross investment.

As seen in regression 7, [I/GNp)7179 — C I/GNP)6170] accounts for 66

per cent of the variance in [(CA/GNP)7179 —                     Since the
                                               (CA/GNP)6170}.
coefficient on investment is —0.65, a one per cent rise in the investment

rate was financed on average 0.65 per cent by foreign capital inflows, and

only0.35 per cent by gross national savings.

     In principle, exogenous. increases in domestic savings rates, in

addition to shifts in investment, might explain the recent current account

behavior. Indeed the theoretical section stresses that a great variety

of shocks can potentially account for CA movements. Our empirical task is

to sort out which of the possible shocks is the likely candidate for having

moved the current account in any particular period, and here the evidence

strongly points to investment shifts as opposed to savings shifts as the

mijor influence. As seen in regression 8 in Table 2, shifts in national

savings rates are virtually uncorrelated with CA shifts between the decades

of the 1960s and 1970s. TheR2 is only 0.01, and A(S/CNP) is statistically

insignificant.

     On a country—by-country time series basis, we again find a large

role for shifts in investment rates in CA swings and an apparently smaller role

for shifts in savings rates. The simple correlation (not shown) during 1961—1979

between (detrended) CA/GNP and (detrended) I/GNP Is negative in thirteen of the
                                           8



fourteen coun€ries, with r < —.50 in six cases. The (detrended) savings

rates, as expected, are positively correlated to (detrended) CA/GNP, for

twelve of the fourteen countries, though. the correlation is generally

weaker; r >   .50 in three countries.
                                      9


 An Overview of Exchange Rate—Current Account Linkages: 1973—80


      With the great extent of theorizing about current account effects

 on the exchange rate, there has been remarkably little attempt to verify

 competing hypotheses. Before we explore what theory says the links

 should be, let's examine what the links have been. While there are

 many potential hypotheses to test, I will focus on the view that deficit

 countries will have depreciating nominal and real exchange rates, and

 surplus countries the opposite. With respect to the current account

 influences on the nominal exchange rate, Kouri has dubbed this view the

"accelerationist" hypothesis.

     Proponents of this view, of course, recognize that domestic financial

policies can upset any simple link between deficits and depreciation, but

argue that the hypothesis is supported empirically, in spite of potential

complications. As Kouri and Macedo [1981] write:


     Allowing for the effects of intervention, changes in interest rates
     and so on there is still a clear tendency of currencies o surplus
     countries to appreciate continuously and those of deficit countries
     to depreciate continuously.

        [referring to evidence on the large 7 countries] cumulative
     autonomous capital flows have been insufficient to finance the
     substantial imbalances that have existed since 1973. Year after
     year, furthermore, they have often accentuated the pressure on the
     exchange rate of deficit countries....


     Table 3 offers the basic data to test this proposition. The exchange

rate for each country is a geometric weighted average of the country's

bilateral exchange rates with the other countries, where the weights are

country shares in total international trade during 1968—73. The real

exchange rate EP*/P Is similarly calculated, using the wholsale price
                                       10



index as the price variable, Among the large countries, there is a clear

pattern of nominal and real exchange rate appreciatior among surplus

countries (Germany, Japan, the Netherlands) and depreciation among the

rest (Canada, France, Italy, U.K., and U.S.). The correlations of both

nominal and real exchange rate changes with (CA/GNP) are negative for all

of the large countries except Canada. Regression equations of %(E)

on lagged %A(E) and (CA/GNP), shown in Table 4, tell a similar story.

       Interestingly, the pattern seems to break down for many of the smaller

countries, where we observe large deficits together with nominal and

,rea1 exchange rate appreciations. Norway, for example, had deficits of

over 10 per cent of GNP in 1976, accompanied by real and nominal exchange

rateappreciation of over 6 per cent throughout the year. Austria,

similarly,   experienced real appreciat.on in the midst of seven consecutive
years of deficit. Nor is there a negative correlation between exchange
rate movements and the current account on an annual or quarterly basis.
In   almost all cases the correlations are positive or weakly negative, and

the regression coefficients are statistically insignificant.

      Table 5 packages the data in a slightly different format, by simply

counting for each country the number of observations in which surpluses

and deficits are associated ¶.ith nominal and real appreciations and

depreciations. An       statistic is used to test for independence of the

current account position ana the direction of exchange rate movement.

Again, there is a clear pattern of nominal and real depreciation cum

deficits in the large countries, versus nominal and real appreciation cum

deficits in many of the smaller countries. There are as many observations

of   deficits with appreciation as with depreciation for the smaller
countries.
      What explains this difference in behavior? Clearly, a major step
                                         11



towards explanation is a difference in exchange regimes in the small and

large countries. Of the large countries, the U.S., U.K., Canada and

Japan have been floating throughout theentire period 1973—80, and France

and   Italy floated for most of the period.±i Germany has been at the
center of a series of cooperative exchange arrangements, first the "Snake"
and since March 30, 1979, the European Monetary System      (EMS). The Dutch

guilder has remained fairly closely linked to the Deutsehemark, first in

the   Snake and now in the EMS.
        The smaller countries, with the exception of Australia, have all
maintained      some linkage to a group of currencies, either formally as

members of the Snake     and EMS (Belgium, Denmark, Norway for a period), or
infoma1ly       by pegging to a basket of currencies (Austria, Finland, Norway,

Sweden)      Since the theory of nominal., exchange rate movements and the

current account is predicated on a floating regime, it is perhaps not
surprising that.the smaller countries fail to support the "accelerationist"

viçw.     With respect to real exchange rates, the difference in exchange

regime    provides little answer to the differences in behavior of large

and small countries. Most of the links between CA/GNP and P/EP* that         have

been    described in the literature apply to both fixed   and flexible rate


regimes,    as we shall see.
                                                                            If we
        There   is still a quandry, though, with the smaller countries.

maintain the assumption of the imperfect substitutability of home and

foreign    assets which underlies the accelerationist view, we know that a
deficit    country can peg its exchange rate only at the expense of continued
off icial reserve outflows, or increasingly contractioflary monetary policies
with rising domestic interest rates.      There is no evidence of significant
use    of official reserves to finance the post—73 deficits, and indeed for
                                     12



these countries official reserves increased in almost all of the years

between 1973 .nd 1979. With respect to interest rates, e can check the

imperfect capital mobility assumption by examining whether interest rate

differentials with Deutschemark assets tended to increase during deficit

years for the currencies pegged to the DM (Austria, Denmark, the Netherlands,

and Norway until December 12, 1978). As seen in Table 6, there is a clear

pattern of rising differentials during the deficit years for all of the

countries. Correlations of annual changes in interest rate differentials

with CA/Y show a negative link for each of the countries except Denmark

(see Table 6 ).

    With   this brief overview,' we turn to the theoretical section. The

goal is to embed international capital flows in a model that can explain:

(1) the persistence of current accouni deficits and surpluses,    (2) the

large role of investment shifts in current account movements,    (3) the

co—occurrence of deficits and exchange depreciation in floating exchange

rate economies, and (4) the ambiguous links between the real exchange

rate and the current account.
                                         13



A Theoretical Model of the Current Account


       In a series of recent papers, I have developed an infinite—horizon,

two-country model of the current account under assumptions of economic

growth with far-sighted households, value—maximizing competitive firms,

and efficient asset markets. Since an analytical solution to the model

is   apparently beyond reach, I   have examined the model with computer

simulations.    In this section I sketch a two—period, one country analog
to   the model, that preserves the basic structure and results of the more

complete analysis. The strength of the approach is that it illustrates

how specific exogenous shocks induce particular correlations between key

variables, such as CA with P/EP and I.

      Most recent models analyzing the links of the current account to

the exchange rate and to other variables, have failed to properly model

current account behavior. Typically, the current account balance is

written as a simple function of the exchange rate and current financial

wealth (as in Kouri [1981], Dornbusch and Fischer [19801, and Rodriguez

(1981]). There is almost never any treatment of physical capital accumu-

lation, and its relationship to wealth holdings. Moreover, the current

account equation gives inadequate results for many types of questions,

since the savings behavior that is implied by the equations is not

credible. Thus, in Dornbusch and Fischer [1980] for example, consumption

is not a function of human wealth, or the discounted value of domestic

output. We will see that many disturbances affect the current account

precisely by altering the discounted value of domestic output, and such

channels are necessarily ignored in the Dornbusch—Fischer model. In

Rodriguez [1980], all anticipated disturbances to the economy have an
                                       14


impact   on the current account onlj through real balance effects, probably

the least important of all the relevant channels.

       Failure to treat investment and capital accumulation is not an

innocent simplification, if we are to draw real—world conclusions from

our models of exchange rate behavior. By excluding all wealth accumulation

except in the form of foreign assets, these models set up a one—to—one

link between the change in wealth, and the current account balance. With

domestic investment, however, real wealth may be increasing or decreasing

along with CA surpluses and deficits. Again, in Dornbusch'-FisCher, the

exchange—rate links to the current account are mediated entirely by changes

in wealth. A deficit signals declining wealth and thus declining money
                                                          treated, a CA deficit
demand cmii depreciation. With investment explicitly

may easily be matched with ris wealth and appreciation, particularly

if the deficit reflects an investment boom.

       It is not enough to add investment as a component of expenditure to

                                               account. In addition, we must
arrive at a general theory of the current

include    the returns to investment as part of the wealth of firms'
shareholders and allow that wealth to affect current consumption decisions.
This     general equilibrium structure is readily built into the simple model

now presented.

       We consider an economy which produces a single final output, with price

P. The economy is small in the world capital market, so that domestic
                                            denominated bonds at a fixed interest
 agents can borrow and lend in foreign

 rate r*.      The domestic output is an imperfect substitute in consumption

                                      world price P and domestic price EP*,
 for a foreign final good that has
                                                      is assumed to be small in
 where E is the exchange rate. The home country
 its import market, so that P* is exogenous, and may be considered fixed.
                                          15


     All international capital flows take place in one—period foreign
denominated bonds; I     denote   the end—of—period domestic net holdings of these
bonds as Z. Domestic equity is internationally tradeable, and is a perfect
substitute for Z, so that the required return on equity, in foreign

currency units, Is r*. The only outside asset denominated in domestic

currency is non—interest bearing money, M. Inside domestic bonds have

interest   rate i,   which may differ from the return on foreign assets

because of the portfolio preferences of domestic agents. Neither domestic

money nor the domestic bond is held by foreigners.

        In assuming perfect substitutability of home equity and foreign

bonds    (or foreign equity), but imperfect substitutability of domestic
and foreign bonds, I am deviating from a typical assumption that home
assets are better substitutes with each other than each is with foreign
assets. Of course, there is no theoretical assumption that is "right"
in this regard: relative asset substitutability depends on the nature of
underlying    stochastic shocks in the economy, and on the structure of

trade. Kouri [19811 has pursued the hard work of linking an array of

exogenous disturbances to optimal asset demand functions in a general

equilibrium model. We are still far off from concrete results in this

area for open—economy macroeconomic models, and I do not pursue the

ambitious task of solving endogenously for the structure of portfolio

choices.

     Households make their consumption decisions to maximize a two-period,

additively separable utility function, subject to the constraint that the

discounted value of consumption must equal initial wealth
                                                          16


      -


                max      U(CD,CF) +              U(C,C)                                           (1)


      cl,C1,c2,c2

     S.t.              + c) + 1-r* (ir2C + C) =                       W1



In this equation, ir           is the   period t          relative         price of home goods to foreign

goods (ii
            =              and W1 is the initial wealth, in units of the foreign

final, good. C is consumption of the home good, and C is consumption

of the foreign good. By additive separability, the household first determines

total spending each period                     + C, and then determines the composition

of spending between C and C.
                                                                                                  (1-ct)
     To stay as simple as possible, I choose U(•,) to be log (C C )

Then the optimal expenditures are given by:


            —                      cF' —
                                           (1—ct)(l+S)
                           '
                                    1          (2-i-IS)          1
       1
                (2+)nj
       D = ct(l+r*)                 F      (1—ct) (l+r*)                                          (2)
                               ,
                                   C2            (2+)            Wi
                 (2+)2
The discounted value of expenditure on each of the goods                              C, C, C, C
is a constant share of wealth by the assumption on utility.

      Managers are assumed to maximize the market value of firms. By the

assumption that the cost of capital r* is set in the world equity market,

firm valuation is simply the present discounted value of total earnings,

net of investment expenditur.e (Ii):

                                                          —
      V =             — 7t1w1L —    Ii)    +              l+r*                                        (3)



                                                                                        =             and
 Output is produced according to the production function                                    F(K,Lt)
 K2 = K1 +       Il   (I assume that all capital goods are imported, so that

 investment expenditure in terms of the foreign good I also equals the

 quantity of new capital.) We will assume ContinuouS full employment
                                                   17



     L. Obviously, first-order conditions for value maximization are
L1

given by:


     _....
                       :7T2
                                         = (1 +   r*)                  (4)



In the spirit of simplicity, I will assume that the production function

Is Cobb—Douglas, with                =


     Domestic wealth is given by the sum of human wealth (H), domestic

ownership of equities, and net foreign investment.      I will assume that

households own the entire domestic capital stock, and that all international

capital flows are chages in Z. There are no initial holdings of Z. In

this model, the issue of portfolio composition between equity and Z is

unimportant since equities and Z earn the same rate of return. All that

matters Is that at the beginning of the first period, domestic households

own the claims to domestic firms. Human wealth is the present value of

total labor earnings iT1w1L1 + (i12w2L2)/(l+r*). Adding up the Components

of wealth, we have:


                    712Q2
     W
             ¶1Q1
                            -
                                Ii                                     (5)



     Domestic money demand is set, without formal justification, according

to a transaction demand specification


         =
             Q (l-1-i)0                                                (6)



Here, real balances are an increasing function of domestic output and a

declining function of the domestic interest rate i. Because this is a

two—period model, second period money demand is inherently problematic

as there are presumably no alternative assets to money in the last period
                                               18



(and   thus no second—period interest rate 1) and no explicit reason to hold

               I will arbitrarily fix         to the exogenous world interest rate
money.                                   i2
1* (any constant would do); a better sdlution only emerges in an infinite

horizon model, or in a finite—horizon model with a very explicit

transactions technology.

       The domestic interest rate is determined according to portfolio

preferences for home versus foreign assets. As I've noted, in more

sophisticated models the pbrtfolio            problem is solved with explicit
attention      to the types of shocks in the economic environment. Here I

fall back to a reduced form        specification,     as in a model of Kouri [1981),

in which the nominal interest rate differential between the home and foreign

asset, net of expected exchange rate changes, is a declining function of

the stock of foreign assetsheld domestically:

                       t÷l   (lii*)] =              f'(Z)< 0, f(0) - 1, f           (7)
       [1 + Y'                            f(Z)
                                                                             >o
                                                                         =
In our two period case, Z1          CA1. In a multiperiod     model, Z        E    CAL.
                                                                             1=1
       The model is completed by adding an export demand equation

and market clearing conditions:


       X =--                                                                        (8)
           t
                lit



and

                                                                                    (9)



*     is   a world export demand shift varable, presumably reflecting foreign

income or wealth.
                                                                                    and to
           Our goal is to solve for CA1, the first period current account,

relate CA1 to the parameters of the model, and to E2/E1 and 112/111, the
                                                             The first—period current account
rates of nominal and real exchange rate change.
                                                  19



 at world prices, is simply given by,



      CA1        n1(Q1 -    Cf)-   C -                                             (10)

and CA2 =              by the household budget constraint. From (2), we have
                —CA1

consumption as a function of W, and in (5), we have the definition of W.

Thus, substituting in (10), we can write CA1 as


                711Q (r*_5)        (rr Q   — TI   Q   )(l+S)       I
            —                                                  —
        1        (2+ô)(l+r*)          (2+5)(l+r*)

Of course this expression is not yet in final form, since 711, 1T2 Q2 and

I are endogenous, and indeed Q2            is   a function of I. Still, (11) points

up the three fundamental determinants of current account balance. The

first term on the right hand side shows that CA1 is an increasing function

of the difference between the world interest rate and the rate of time

preference (r*_cS). This difference determines the desire to save income

for later consumption. In the Continuous time version of the present

model, t1 =     (r*_i5)W, so that r*_tS in fact determines the path of overall
wealth accumulation.

     The second term might be described as capturing the role of transitory

fluctuations in current account determination. When export demand falls te.rnporarily

in a given year, pulling down real income, households dissave not because

they are poor but because their transito income is less than permanent

income. In the attempt to smooth the income stream, households borrow in

early periods if the real income stream is rising, and lend Initially if

the real income stream is falling. Thus, CA1 decreases with (rr2Q2 —
                                                                                  1T1Q1).
     The third term highlights the special role of investment in current

account determination. Since CA1 =                     — (C +711C + Ii), the effects on
CA1 of an exogenous shock that causes I to rise depend on the effects of

the shock on C +iT1C. To the extent that the shock has no effect on
                                                         20



household wealth, consumption will not change; (ir1C + C +                            and thus

the deficit (
                          l1+ir1C + C -Q1)
                                                      will   rise one—for—one with the investment

boom. This is precisely the case for a rise in investment projects

that just earn the market rate of return, r*. If domestically owned

firms retain earnings to invest in projects with return r*, households

dissave by the same amount, keeping C1 constant. Though the first—period

dividend flow to households is reduced by the rise in I, households

'!pierce the corporate veil," and dissave. They effectively substitute

the firms' investment for their household savings, so that total absorption

is increased one—for—one with I.

       Sometimes a rise in I also signals "good news" that raises household

wealth. For instance an anticipated rise in future world demand for

domestic output raises both I and W. In this case, both                              + C and

I rise, and the deficit worsens more than one—for—one with the increase

in I.
       To solve for the reduced form for CA1, and                        and 1T2 we must first

determine wealth W in terms of the underlying parameters: Y, Y, r*, K1,

ô. A couple of facts are helpful here, First, by the assumption of

Cobb—Douglas technology, (l+r*)K2 =                                  so that investment
                                                        (l—)ir2Q2,
   (
        1(
               —          is   given by


                   (l—) Tr2Q2     —
             =                                                                             (12)
                     l+r*             1(1


Second, 111Q1 and 7T2Q2 are linear in W, Y, and Y. When the consumption

and investment equations are plugged into (5) and (9), we find WOJ C,


       W   =     i   1                _____
                         (2+)(Y + l+r* + K1)
                                                                                           (13)


           = (2+S) — cL(l+5) —              c   > 0
                                                    21


                     {[l—a}y          [(2+S) —   c(1+ó) —                  ÷                  (14)
       CA1                                                   B]/[1+r*]Y        [1—cdK1}

We will interpret this expression shortly. To find the terms of trade
                                                                                                iTt,

note that            = Ec(l+ô)/(2+5)W + Y] from (2), (8) and (9). Thus


            =                    +
                •_
(Remember that Q1 is fixed, since K1 is predetermined, L1 =                        t,   and

Q1 =   F(K1,L1).)        7r2 is found similarly, though now Q2 is endogenous. To

find Q2, we use the investment equation (12), K2 =                       + I, and Q2 = LB
                                                                    K1
The solution for 7F is


                                                                                              (15)
        2
            =   [l+r*J     []B t9:*) +

Finally, the ratio 7r2/1r1            is given, after a bit of algebra, by:


            —   c(1+r*)Y*   + [(2+5) —        ct(l+S)]Y*   + c(1+r*)K          I
        1       [(2-I-5)—BcL]Y + [a(l+cS) /(l+r*)JY + c,(l+5)K1                ICi


       These bulky equations are in fact easy to interpret. To start with

CA1, a rise in            cet.             necessarily   improves the current account.. and

an anticpated rise in Y necessarily worsens the current account. In

both cases, the rise in world demand causes an increase in wealth, and in

11, 71, and Il• But when Y rises, households save some of the first

period income gain (i.e. run a surplus) to spread the consumption windfall

across time; when           rises, households borrow against the anticipated

future windfall to enjoy higher consumption in the initial period.

Since an increase in Y* in either period leads to a demand increase in

both periods, ir and 112 both rise. Also, I rises, since rr2Q2 is increased,

and I is linear in second—period real income (see (12)).

       An equal rise in              and     has an ambiguous effect on CA1. But in

the benchmark case r* =          5,    a "permanent" rise in Y (i.e. dY =
                                                                                        dY)
                                                                                              leads

to a deficit on CA1! This is sharply counter to the conventional view
                                             22



that the current account :Linproves when demand shifts permanently towards

a country. But the reason is clear enough. Higher Y* increases investment

demand, throwing 1r1(Q1 — C1) — C1F

investment (e.g.     =   1,
                                    —
                                             I    negative. In a model without

                                  = 0 in the present case), and with       =


r   = 5, a rise in 'f* has no effect on the current account. Rather, iT1

and 112 rise in equal proportion, and the value of exports and imports

rise by the same amount.

       Finally, note that CA1 is an increasing function of the initial

endowment   of capital. Higher K1, cet. p., reduces 11/K1, which in turn
induces an   improvement in the current account. All other things equal,

capital flows should lead from highly         capital—endowed economies to

poorly capital—endowed economies.

       What can we say about the links of CA1 and real        depreciation?    It

is possible to find every combinations of CA1             0 together with ff2/ill

What is crucial is the source of the current account imbalance.            Consider

two countries that are identical except for .            We can easily verify
                                                            CA1   < 0. Thus, when
from                          <   0, and from (14) that —
       (16) that
                   —k
current account differences reflect taste differences, high deficit

countries will experience real depreciation. On the other hand, for two

countries that are identical except for future demand 'f*2, the opposite

conclusion is reached. Higher Y unambiguously leads to higher 112/ill,

and to a fall in CA1. Similarly, a temporary decline In world demand

(dY < 0; dY = 0) causes 112/ill to rise and CA1 to fall. First—period
deficits are again associated with real exchange rate appreciation.              If


the countries differ only in K1 the effects on the relative ¶2'il are

                                             and       r*, faster growing countries
ambiguous. In general, with              I
will see a larger decline in 112/ill.          Since growth in Q2/Q1 is inversely
                                                           23

 related     to K1, we should expect, cet. par., that countries with initially

poor endowments of capital to experience relative large real exchange

rate depreciation over time. As noted above, such countries will also,

cet. par., have larger CA deficits.

       At this point, we can bring in the monetary side to find the links

between CA1 and nominal exchange rates. The monetary subsystem was given

in (6) and (7). Noting that P1 =                                   and '2 =                    and sub—
                                                       (E1P*)ir1                   (E2P*)1r2
stituting into the money demand equations, we can write:



       E2
                 —
                          J                 (l+i*) 0                                                      (17)
       E1            N1   Q2                (l+i*)Oi
From the portfolio equation (7), (l+r*)/(l+i) = (E1/E2)f(CA1). Remember
that 6 measures the substitutability of home and foreign denominated
nominal bonds, with £ =                 1   for the case of perfect substitutability. Thus,

plugging into (17), we have


       E              N                            /(1+0)                     —11(1+0)
        2     =      [(2) (1)11 / (14 )                      [f (CA1)     1                               (18)
        i.                17t2                 Q

For the individual periods we have:
                                                                    —
             —
             —
                  l/(l40)3/(l+0)            -(l+0) —0W(l-F'3)            01(148) —1/(148)                11(148)
       E1        N1       2                                        712            111          [f(cA)]             (19a)

       E2 =      N2Q2
                          '(1+i*) Ott                                                                              (19b)

Not   surprisingly, both real and purely monetary                             factors affect the exchange

rates. Changes in N1             and N2 can move E1 and E2 with no effects on CA1, it1,
      etc.   under the assumptions of the model. For given N1, N2, real

exchange rate appreciations and depreciations tend to cause nominal exchange

rate appreciations and depreciations. Thus, as Stockman [1980] has indicated,

much of the observed correlation between changes in E and EP*/P may be due
                                            24



to common responses to underlying shocks. This is in contrast to the more

typical assumption that       changes   in E cause EP*/P to move because of

nominal price rigidity.

    We also see a direct effect of CA imbalance on the nominal exchange

rate,   working through the Kouri—Branson portfolio demand channel. Thus,

even if a deficit economy is on a path of real appreciation, rising output,

and stable money supply, it may experience nominal depreciation as its

net indebtedness grows over time. Of course only in the case of perfect

capital mobility, f= 0, does this effect go away.

        Thus, to sum   up,   a deficit country will surely experience nominal and

real depreciation if the deficit is caused by high5. If, on the contrary,

the deficits arise from a path of increasing Y', then T2/1T1 will be

large, and the nominal exchange rate will tend to appreciate unless -fis also

large.
                                    25


Extensions and Conclusions

     There are at least three important directions for extending the

theoretical framework described above. hese are: a multiperiod or

infinite—horizon analysis with more general functional forms; the intro-

duction of capital control restrictions as a policy instrument; and an

explicit treatment of portfolio considerations in a setting with un-

certainty and risk averse agents.

     The first is, in a sense, easy and already accomplished (cf. Sachs

[1982, forthcoming], Lipton and Sachs [1980]). An infinite horizon, two—

country version of the model here has been developed and analyzed through

simulation. There is no reason to stick with particular functional forms as

in the model in this paper once recourse is made to computer simulation.

Thus, in work now underway with Michael Bruno, a three—sector infinite—

horizon model of the U.K. is being developed, that incorporates a complete

input—output structure in the production technology.

     The second extension, to explicitly treat restrictions on capital

mobility, would allow a more accurate depiction of the degree of capital

mobility among the OECD economies. Most of the major economies have or

continue to resort to restrictions on international capital flows to help

achieve current account and other objectives. Foreign access to the U.S.

bond market was effectively closed until 1974, and until much more

recently in Japan. Our understanding of theoretical aspects of capital

controls is still rather limited, and controls are rarely brought in ex-

plicitly .into theoretical work.

     The third direction is by far the hardest. To this point we have

very little feel for the relevant sources of risk that lead to the imperfect

substitutability of assets across national borders. Our models will have

radically different conclusions if imperfect substitutability is •based on
                                    26


inflation risk, default risk, political risk, or hedging behavior against

still other types of real disturbances. It seems that the most fruitful w2y

to proceed here is to build small theortical models, with attention to a

limited number of key stochastic elements, so that portfolio behavior may

be derived endogenously.
                                   FOOTNOTES


1/       Harberger, A.C., "Vignettes on the World Capital Market," American
          Economic Review, May, 1980.

2/       For background on the extensive role of Japanese Capital Controls
          until the mid—'l970's, see Seki, Kaname, "Foreign Exchange Law,"
          the Japan Business Law Journal, Vol. 1 (July 1980).

3/       Halevi, N., "An Empirical Test of the Balance of Payments States'
          Hypothesis," Journal of International Economics, Vol 1 (February 1971).

4/       Until, of course, joining the European Monetary System in 1979.

5/       Finland began peggingto a basket of currencies on Nov. 1, 1977.
          Norway was in the Snake until December 12, 1978, at which point
          it began pegging to a basket of currencies. Austria was in the
          Snake off and on throughout the 70's, alternating between the
          joint European float and a closer connection with the Deutchmark.
     •
          Denmark was a member of the Snake, and now the EMS. Sweden has
          pegged to a basket of currencies since the mid—l970's.
                           List of References


Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer, "Exchange Rates
                                                           and the Current
     Account," American Economic Review, December, 1980.

Feldsteifl, Martin and Charles Harioka, "Domestic Savings and International
     Capital Flows," Economic Journal, 1981.

                               of the 'Balance of Payments Stages'
Halevi, N., "An Empirical.Test
     Hypothesis," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 1 (February
     1971).

Harberger, Arnold C., "Vignettes on the World Capital Market," Papers
     and Proceedings of the American Economic Association, American
     Economic Review, pp. 331-337.

Kouri, Pentti J. K., "Balance of Payments and the Foreign Exchange Market:
     A Dynamic Partial Equilibrium Model," NBER Working Paper No. 644,
     March, 1981.
                     "The EffectofRiSk on Interest Rates: A Synthesis
     of the Macroeconomic and Financial Views," NBER Working Paper No.
     643, March, 1981.

                     and Jorge Braga de Macedo "Perspectives on the
                                         Wilson School of Public and
     Stagflatiofl of the 1970s," Woodrow
     International Affairs, Princeton, Discussion Paper No. 91,
     December, 1980.
                                 "Accumulation and Growth in a Two—Country
Lipton, David and Jeffrey Sachs,
     Model," NBER Working Paper No. 570.
                                    Substitutability and Monetary Policy
Obstfeld, Maurice, "Imperfect Asset
     under Fixed Exchange Rates," Journàlof, Internatifla2 Econ,
     May, 1980.

 Rodriguez C., "The Role of Trade Flows in Exchange Rate DeteIminatiOflVol. 88,
      A Rational Expectations Approach," JO aoPo]4tiCa1 Ec,
      No, 6, December, 1980.
                                                                      the
 Sachs, Jeffrey, "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in
                                                                    1981.
      1970s," forthcoming in Brookings Papers
                                              on Economic Activt,

                 "Energy and Growth under Flexible Rates," forthcoming in
      The Internat                                      MIT Pr ess 1982

 Stockman, Alan, "A Theory of Exchange Rate     Determinatiofl,' 2LP2!1.I2.!
      Econojy, Vol. 88, No. 4, August, 1980.
                                         TABLE 1

                   CURRENT ACCOUNTS AS A PROPORTION OFGNP, 1960-79


                                                                      Proportion
                                 (CA/CNP)                (—CA/I)      of Surplus
                       1960—65   1966—73      1974—79    1974—79        Years
Large Countries

Canada                 —.019     —.003       —.020       .011            .12
France                   NA        NA        —.006       .024            .39
Germany                  .002     .010         .010     —.007            .85
Italy                   .010      .018       —.002       .002            .72
Japat                    005a     .011         .003     —.011            .50
Netherlands              .010     .005         .01      —.050            .65
                                                                                       I.
U.K.                   —.002      .003       —.012       .058            .52
U.S.                    .007      .001        .000      —.004            .69

Average, Large 8         004a     .004         .004     —.003            .55


Small Countries

Australia              —.029     —.021       —.023      .094             .09
Austria                —.001     —.008       —.029      .105             .23
Denmark                —.015     —.021       —.033      .138             .16
Finland                  016a    —.014       —.027      .080             .15
Norway                 —.025     —.015       —.080      .226             .17
Sweden                  .000      .001       —.016      .076             .33

Average, Small 6         012a    —.012       —.030      .118             .19

Average, All            003a      .004       —.002      .009             .38


a 1961—1965


Source: Current account balance is from the OECD MainEconomic Indicators, Historical
         Statistics. GNP and I are from the International Financial Statistics,
         International Monetary Fund.
                                                       TABLE 2

                                        REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF CA/GNPa




        Country
                                                                                                                     .23
                                        CA
i.      Excluding Japan                ()              = .037
                                                        (1.57)
                                                                           -       .172
                                                                                  (1.82)
                                                                                             ()
                                         1961—70


                                        CA                                                                           .60
2.      Excluding Japan                ()              = .084
                                                           (3.58)
                                                                          -        .39
                                                                               (4.10)
                                                                                      ()
                                         1971—79.


3.      All                             CA
                                       CNP
                                                       =       .039 —
                                                            (1.49)
                                                                                    .20
                                                                                   (1.89)
                                                                                            ()                       .21

                                         1971—79


                                         CA            = —.0004                -          00$GNP/Popu1atiOfl)        .02
4.      All                             GNP                    (.03)                 (.47)
                                                                                                         1961—70
                                         1961—7 0



                                          CA               =       .03        —     .20 (I/GNP)+ .28 (M°11IGNP)
5.      All                             GNP                    (1.27)              (1.9)           (1.0)             .28
                                          1971—79


                                          CA                                                                         .61
                                                       =            .08       —     .39 (I/GNP)+ .09(M°/G)
 6.      Excluding Japan                                                                           (.43)
                                                                   (3.2)           (4.0)
                                             1971—79



 7.      Excluding Japan                ()   CA

                                         (1971—7 9)
                                        — (1961—70)
                                                               =     —.01
                                                                    (4.2)
                                                                                   —.65 (I/GNP)
                                                                                     (4.6)
                                                                                                                      .65



                                          CA
                                                                                    —.15 (S/GNP)                      .01
 8.      Excluding Franceb               GNP                   =     —.01
                                         (1971—79)                  (1.1)            (.34)
                                        —(1961—70)

 a Numbers in parentheses are t_statisticS
 b Missing Observations for France prevented inclusion
                                          IndicatGrS CNP from international Financial Statistics.
     Sources: CA from OECD Main Economic               inventory accumulation, from IFS. Savings,
                I is total gross investment, including              or 197l—79 indicates a
                S, are defined as I + CA. The notation (
                simple arithmetic average over the years in icate .
                                                                      L( (i97j79) indicates
                                                                                                       —(19.61-70)
                                    — )_7Q1. The full country list is as is
                         i—
                  in   Table   1.
                                                    TABLE 3

                        THE CURRENT ACCOUNT AND EXCHANGE RATE MOVEMENTS


                                                End 1973 — End 1979                      a
                                                                              Correlation        Correiation1

                       (CA/GNP)            % (E)                % (EP*/P)      of CA/GNP,        of CA/GNP,

Country                   74—79          (annual rate)        (annual rate)      % (E)           % (EP/P)

Large Eight

Canada                —.020                 5.0                 3.8              .09                .28
France                —.006                —1.2                —0.2             —.38               --.59

Germany                .010                —7.5                —2,1             —.28              —.29
Italy                 —.002                 7.5                —0.7             —.31              —.26
Japan                  .003                —1.0                 0.3              .58              —.71
Netherlands            .011                —5.4                —1.1             —.10              —.50
U.K,.                 —.012                 3.5                —2.6             —.14         .    —.06
U.S.                   .000                 3.0                 2.6             —.40              —.58


Small Six

Australia             —.023                 4.5                 2.5             —.11              —.54
Austria               —.029                —6.6                —1.6              .27                .29
Denmark              —.033                 —1.1                —1.3              .04              —.05
Finland              —.027                  0.7                —1.4              .01                .49
                     —.080                 —1.9                —1.0              .04              —.19
Norway
Sweden               —.016                  0.5                —1.1   .         —.29                .05




a Quarterly, 1974:1 — 1979:4                                              .




•b Annual, 1973 — 1979


Source: CA and GNP as in Table 1. The exchange rate for country I is calculated as
         log(E1) = [E                       where w. Is,the share of country j in
                       j3i log(E1)]/(1—w1),
                               Wj                                                        .

            total exports plus imports, on average, during 1968—73.           That is,

                 = (X + M) /        [ (Xk + 14k)]
                                          1968—73
                                                   with X., M. equal to the dollar

          values of total exports and imports for country j. E.. is an index of the
            end—of—period bilateral exchange rate between countries I, j, In units of
            currency I per unit of currency j CE1. E 1 in l975) The series E1. Is
            calculated from the International Financial Statistics, IMF, using the series -
            Lae for each country. EP*/P is analogously calculated as
            log(E1P*/P1)= [E
                              j?i                 3
                                 w4 1og(E.P4*/P1)], with P. the wholesale price index

            of   country j (also from IFS data).
                                          TABLE4

               REGRESSIONS OF %AE ON              QUARTERLY 1974:1-1980:4




                                                               -i _
                                           Independent VariableS
                                          CA
Country         Interval       ---                   (%tE)        (%E)2                d.w.



                                                                              0.00     1.69
                               .01   .08
                74:1 —        (.89) (.14)
Canada                                                            —.027        .02 .   1.98
                80:4           .01        .16          .16
                              (.89)    (.27)          (.81)       (.14)                         I.


                              — .007      —.79                                 .15     1.6
France          74:1 —
                               (1.2) (1.9)
                                                                               .15     1.77
                79:4          —. 007      — .72        • .06        .0005
                                                      (.28)        (.002)
                              (1.1)       (1.2)


                                                                               .16     2.21
                               —.006 —.81
                 74:1 —
GermanY                        (.91) (2.2)
                               —.012 —.82              —.30         —.27        .29    1.68
                 79:4
                                                       (1.7)        (1.5)
                               (1.7) (2.4)


                                016       — .45                                 .09     2.6
                 74:1 —
 Italy
                               (1.8)       (1.5)
                                          —.64         —.32         .07                 1.9
                 79:4          .020
                                                                    (.37)
                                                                                .19/
                               (2.0)       (2.0)        (1.4)


                               —.008 —1.13                                      .11     1.12
               74:1 —
 Japan                         (98) (1.8)
                               — .006 — .12                                     .28     1.92
               80:4
                                (.72) (.14)

                                — .008 —.19                                     .03     2.24
 Netherlands    74:1 —
                                (1 . 6) (.85)
                80:3            — . 014    —.20                                  .19    1.78
                                (2.4)       (.95)


                                            —.41                                 .04    1.46
                                —.012
 United KIngdom 74:1 —
                                (.15)       (1.0)_
                                            — . 34                               .13     2.10
                80:3            —.001
                                (.22)       (.84)
                                                                                 .09     2.40
                                .003        —1.6
  United States 74:1 —          (.49)       (1.6)
                                            —2.3          —.28       —.36        .27     2.03
                80:4            .005
                                                          (1.6)       (2.1)
                                 (.76)      (2.3)
                               TABLE 4 (cont'd)

                                   Independent Variables


                         C         GNP
                                               (%A) —1     '7E'-2
                                                           '            R
                                                                            2
                                                                                 d.w.
Country     Interval

Small Six

Australia   74:1 —                                                      .008     2.04
                       (.36)
            80:4       .005        —.279       —.07      —.006          .013     1.9].
                       (.35)       (.48)       (.35)       (.03)


            74:1 —                                                      .02      2.08
Austria
                       (054)       (84)
                       —.012       .180        —.290     —.35
            804
              •
                       (1.31)      (.88)       (1.5)       (1.8)        .18      1.61



            74:1                                                        .001     1.77
Denmark                            (.19)
                       —.006       —.12        — .03       —.24
            79.4                                                        .04      1.7 8
                       (.48)       (.32)       (.13)       (.91)


            74:1 —                                                      .000     1.93
Finland
                       (47)        (05)
                                               .06         .20          .039     2.04



                       —.0003      .019                                 0.0      1.82
Norway      74:1 -
                       (.03)       (.17)
                       0.0         .02         .09         —.22             06   1 95
            79:4                               (.46)       (1.03)
                       (0.0)       (.19)



Sweden      74:1
                       (1.16)             1)                        •
                                                           —.03
            79.4                   (1.61)      (1.62)      (.147)
                       (1.36)
                                         TABLE 5

                        ThE P!ACCELERATIONIST" HYPOTHESIS:
                                                           ANNUAL
                      CA AND EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES,
                                OBSERVATIONS, 197 3—1980
                                                                                          Percent of
                                                                                          Observations
                 Number of Years in Which:                                                    in
                                                                        Deficit           Support of
                                                      Surplus
                 Surplus—
                 Appt cc iat ion
                                    Deficit—
                                    Depr ec iat ion   Depr ec iat ion        aion HypotheSi

iht
Canada
                       0                 3                  1
                                                                              4
                                                                              3
                                                                                               37.5
                                                                                               50
  Nominal                                4                  1
                       0
  Real
                                                                              4                 50
France                                   2                   0                                  87.5
  Nominal               2                                    0                1
                        2                 5
  Real
                                                                              1                 75
Germany                                   1                  1                                  87.5
  Nominal               5                                    1                0
                        5                 2
  Real
                                                                                  0             67
Italy                   1                 3                     2
                                                                                  2             57
  Nominal                                 2                     1
                        2
  Real
                                                                                  3             62.5
Japan                                        2                  0                               67
   Nominal               3                                      0                 2
                         3                   3
   Real
                                                                                  2              57
 Netherlands               4                  0                 1
                                                                                  1              71
   Nominal                                    1                 1
   Real                    4

                                                                                  2              62.5
 U.K.                                         4                  1                               50
   Nominal                  1                                    0                 4
                            2                 2
   Real
                                                                                      0          75
 U.S.                                         3                     2                            50
                            3                                       3                 1
   Nominal                                    2
                            2
    Real
  Subtotal, Large 8                                                 8             16             60.5
                           19                18                                   .14            775
    Nominal                                  21                     7
                           20
    Real
Australia                                        0         2     75
                           1                5
  Nominal                                                  3     67.5
                           1                4    0
  Real

Austria                                                    6     25
                           0                2    0
  Nominal                                                  4     50
                           0                4    0
  Real

Denmark                                                    4     50
                           0                4    0
  Nominal                                                  4     50
                           0                4    0
  Real

Finland                                          1         5     25
                            0               2
  Nominal                                                  5     12.5
                            0               1    1
  Real

Norway                                           1         4     37.5
                            0.              3
  Nominal                                                  3     62.5
                            1               4    0
  Real

Sweden                                                     4     37.5
                            0               3    1
   Nominal                                                 4     37.5
                                            3    1
  Real                      0

Subtotal, Small 6                                         25     41.5
                            1               19   3
  Nominal                                         2       24     46.0
                            2               20
  Real


Total,(15) Countries                             11       41     52.0
                           20               37
  Nominal                                         9        38    57.0
                           22               41
  Real


             =          Large Eight, Nominal          p < .io.

                 7.1                                  p < .01
         X              Large Eight, Real

         X = 1.5       Small Six, Nominal             p > .10
             =   0.0   Small Six, Real                p > .10

         X = 1.3       Total, Nominal                 p > .10
             =   4.7   Total, Real                    p < .05



   a
       Pearson statistic
                                                                         TABLE       6

                           INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL IN PEGGED EXCHANGE RATE ECONOMIES

                (Government Bond Yield Minus German Government Bond Yield, end                                       of year)

                                                                                                     -                          Correlation of   (j_j*),
Country         1973            1974              1975    1976              1977         1978            1979        1980       CA/GNP (1973—79)


AUSTRIA
                —   .62         .38               1.11     1.25                3.3       1.61             .30        .72
 (j_j*)
                                                                                                                                          — . 34
 (CA/GNP)       —   .013 —.014                   — .009   —    .   037     — .063 — .025                 —.026       NA


BELGIUM

                -1.8         -.8                   .23        2.00             2.72       2.39            3.10       3.71                 -   .18
 (j_j*)
                    .027            .012           .004   — .001           —    .009     — .010          —    .031   NA
 (CA/GNP)



DENMARK
 (jj*)          2,57            3.93              4.78        2.35             6.36          8.17            8.10    8.67
                                                                                                                                              .03
               — .016       —                    — .014   — .046           — .037        —    .027       —    .045    NA
 (CA/GNP)                           .029


NORWAY
                —3.4            —2.5        ..   —1.0     —        .06         2.67          1.89            2.14    1.38
 (j_j*)
                                                                                                                                          — . 81
                —               —                         — .121          —14.3          —    .055       — .023      NA
 (CA/GNP)           .018             .048        — .086


   Sources:   The interest rate data for each year are the December observations of government bond yields from
               the IFS (LCI at the Country Code).
