NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STABILIZATION POLICIES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY:
SCOPE AND SKEPTICISM

Jeffrey Sachs

Working Paper No. 862

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
February 1982

Harvard University and NBER. This work is part of a project with
Michael Bruno, of Hebrew University, on the macroeconomics of
supply shocks. Errors in this analysis are, of course, my own.
Support from the National Science Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 1/862
February 1982

Stabilization Policies in the World Economy: Scope and Skepticism

ABSTRACT

Throughout the industrialized world, macroeconomic performance since
the mid-l970s has been very poor, and the prospects in the near term remain

bleak. While there is no consensus among macroeconomists regarding the
diagnosis (or cure) of these ills, the major competing schools of thought

have focussed most of their blame on macroeconomic policy. This paper
summarizes a series of studies, in collaboration with Michael Bruno,
suggesting rather that supply shocks coupled with real wage rigidities are

a central source of the poor macroeconomic performance. Various hypotheses
are mentioned as a source for the resistance to real wage cuts, and some
illustrations of the policy implications of supply shocks are provided.

Jeffrey Sachs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617)495-4112

Stabilization Policies in the World Economy: Scope and Skepticism
3,

Throughout the industrialized world, macroeconomic performance since
the mid-1970s has been very poor, and the prospects in the near term remain
bleak. It is sobering to reflect that all 24 OEC[) economies suffered a slow-

down in aggregate econnmic growth after 1973 (comparing average growth rates
for 1965-73 with 1973-79); all but one (Switzerland) experienced an intensifi-

cation of consumer price inflation. Overall, the annual GNP growth of the
OECD slowed from 4.9 percent during 1965-73 to 2.7 percent during 1973-79, and

it has slowed further since then. The slow growth has translated into rising
unemployment, which stood at about 7 percent of the OECD workforce in 1981 as

compared with a mere 2 to 3 percent in 1970. In the European Economic Community, the 1981 unemployment rate appears to have been a staggering 8 percent.
Bright spots in this picture are few indeed, but their ]cssons may

be instructive. After the steep recession in the OECD during 1974-75, the
U.S. alone of the major economies staged a rapid recovery; the unemployment
rate fell significantly below its 1975 peak, while it continued to rise in
Europe. Unfortunatc'lv, U.S. performance on most measures has deteriorated

sharply (and relatively) since 1979. Japan provides a case of extremely successful performance since the mid-1970s, after a very sharp jolt during 1973-75.
Among the smaller economies, the neighboring Nordic economies of Sweden and
Finland offer a vivid contrast of worsening and improving economic

develop-

ments, respectively since the mid-1970s.
There is no consensus among macroeconomists regarding the diagnosis

of these ills, the sources of relative success across economics, or most important for the purpose here, the right policy mix for sustained recovery. The
interpretations offered here, which must he regarded as tentative, lay grct

-2stress on the various adverse supply shocks that affected all of the OECfl

economies during the past decade. The interpretations are based largely on

JOiflt research

a

project with Michael Bruno, of Hebrew University, on the mdcro-

economics of supply disturbances in open economies.

I. The Central Role of Supj Pisturbances
The major competing schools of macroeconomic thought have focused
most of their blame for the current debacle

on macroeconomic policy. For the

Keynesians, recent policy has hocn too austere, overly directed against fight-

ing inflation. For the monetarists, the case has been almost the opposite:
that politicians have continued to drive up money growth to fight short-terr
unemployment, to the sacri lice of longer-term price stabi 1

classical macroeconomists,
"Surprises"

for

the new

the policies have simply been too erratic, with policy

explaining the fluctuations in

output growth.

Unfortunately, these important propositions have

almost

ity. And

been subjected to

no systematic, cross-country scrutiny. No strong comparative evidr'nce

has been set .forth to show that high

unemployment and slow growth have been

closely tied to more restrictive policies, or to more uncertain and volatile
policies, or that price stability has resulted from slow and stable money growth.

Recent tests of the "surprises" model, for

example, failed on Japanese data

(see Jun'jchjro Seo and Wataru Takahashjj. There is little doubt that tight
policies can explain high unemployment at certain times and places (the Thatcher

experiment in the LJ.. is a case in point; see Willem Buiter and Marcus Miller),
but it is doubtful that they provide

a general explanation for the recent ex-

perience. The almost universal slowdown in growth and rise in unemployment in
the OECD has characterized both activist and passive, as well as expansionary

-3and contractionary policy regimes. To cite just two
cases, neither the austere Barre policies in France nor the

expansionary Keynesian policies in Sweden

restored high employment or rapid growth to their economies.
I would suggest three lessons on macroeconomic performance and policy
from the tangled comparative record.

First, it is not the policy choices hut

rather the policy options that worsened in the l970s, with supply shocks driv-

ing the stagflationary process. Second, the appropriate policy response to
high unemployment or slow growth depends on the source of the unemployment, with
"Supply-generated" unemployment less tractable then the

garden-variety Keynesian

unemployment. And third, since national economic structures
larly in labor market and financial institutions, the

differ, particu-

same policy is likely to

have very different effects across economies.
Various "supply-side" shocks were of dominating importance in the

l970s. All industrial countries faced a massive rise in the real price of raw
materials inputs after 1970, following two decades of falling real input prices.
The oil price increases (in 1973-74, 1979-80) were the most stunning, hut by no

means the only majoi hikes in real commodity prices. Overall, the index of nonfuel primary input prices rose sharply relative to prices of final manufactured

goods in the 1970s (see Robert Lipsey and Trying Kravis). Accompanying thec
shocks was a persistent slowdown in total factor productivity growth in almost

all of the OLd). The synchronization of the slowdown with the raw material price
increases suggests a causal linkage running from prices to output (as suggested
by Martin N. Baily and Bruno, for example) but this linkage rcmdins an open ques-

tion. Many,

such

as David

Grubb, Richard Jackman, Richard Layard, and William

Nordhaus, take the productivity slowdown to be an independent event. A third
supply shock, from the point of view of the OECD, has been the

rapid expansion

of the newly ind&istri.Iizing countries (NICs) into traditional export sectors

-4of

the OECD economics (e.g. steel, shipbuilding, electronic components). This

import-competing growth of the NICs has worsened the OECI) terms of trade, and
perhaps more importantly, has shifted the locus of new world investment in key

industries decisively away from the developed economies. It is forecast, for
example, that about half of the world's capacity expansion in steel during
1980-1985 will be made in the developing economies, up from

percent in the

1970s.

On a theoretical level, the economics of supply shocks are fairly
well understood (see l3runo and Sachs (1981a, 1981b) and Sachs (1980b) for

general equilibrium analyses in the case of output-market clearing, and
Edmond Malinvaud and Robert Solow for the non-market clearing case).

Consider,

for example, a rise in real input prices. In a competitive, full-employment
economy a permanent input price shock reduces output on impact, and mo;t likely
sets in motion a path of capital decumulation, along which output and produc-

tivity grow more slowly than trend. For a given money supply, the nominal

price

and wage leve] S

effect

the

may either

rise or fall after the

of the shock is small, the rise

fall of other

shock; if the output

in real input prices probdbly requires

nominal wages and prices. And very importantly, the real

consistent with full employment (hereafter, the "full-employment real
wage") must fall on impact, and then must grow more slowly than trend as the
wage

process

capital accumulation proceeds.

of

From the point of view of macroeconomic equilibrium, then, there are
two problems. After the supply shock, the nominal price vector may be inappropriate given the existing money stock and exchange rate. If nominal prices
and/or wages are sticky, a standard demand management problem arises (with the

standard short-run inflation-unemployment tradeoffs, if they exist). Edmund Phelps
has described this demand-side issue of supply shocks in detail. The second,

-5involves

and more novel policy issue

the need to reduce real wages to their

new full-employment path. Most recessions up until 1973 signalled little about
the need for long-term real

wage adjustment, while the resolution of post-1973

recessions has depended on the deceleration of real wages from an earlier

trend. And for reasons that we shall see, such a deceleration is only likely
after a transitory phase of high unemployment, and is also likely to he hard to
bring about with standard macroeconomic policy tools.
For a number of years after 1973 (at least two years in most countries;
four to five in others) OECD real

wage growth remained strong relative to produc-

tivity growth, and profitability was sharply squeezed (see Sachs (1979) and Bruno

for details). The rate of return

on manufacturing capital fell steeply between

1973 and 1978 in most ecc•nomies. Only in the

U.S., where unionization rates are

extraordinaril>; low, was the profit squeeze largely avoided.

The evidence is

not strong on whether the real wage behavior reflects union wage-setting

or more general outcomes in the labor market. It is

se

significant though, that

in both the U.K. and U.S. there was a sharp rise in the union-non-union wagc
differential over the course of the 1970s.
The profit squeeze was closely linked to output, investment, and

growth behavior

after

1973, with the relatively favorable U.S. profit position

inducing a more rapid recovery (see Sachs (1979)). The links of wages to un-

employment

in

this

period are

best

documented for the U.K. (see James Symons

for a detailed presentation; R. Morley; Bruno and Sachs (1981h)), and econometric

work supports this link for Japan (flavid Lipton and Sachs). Indeed,

Japan provides a revealing comparison of adjustment to the first and second
oil shocks.

in the first, real wage growth remained high, and profits and

output were sharply squeezed; in the second, there was a dramatic drop in real
wage

growth for 1979-SO, which made

room for .Japan's terms-of-trade loss.

-6-

Output growth hardly dipped in the second episode (see Sachs (198Ic) and
Yoichi Shinkai for supporting evidence).

Real wages may fail to adjust for many reasons, and each of these

reasons has different implications for policy. We can divide the possible explanations into categories which emphasize:

(a) uncertainty, timing, or mis-

perception; and (b) union bargaining power. Most directly, sonic wages may be
predetermined by contract at the time of an unanticipated supply disturbance,
so

that real wages are

renegotiation

wise

is

unexpectedly driven above full-employment levels. If

costless, the profit squeeze would soon disippear, but other-

the squeeze must persist until the next bargaining round.

Herbert Giersch

has suggested such a view for the high real wage settlements in Germany in 1974
(in Germany, the misperception was twofold, involving both oil prices and tight
Bundesbank policy).

A related argument holds that unions, or both employers and unions,
failed to understand the link of higher oil prices and wage moderation, and
the ordeal of unemployment was necessary to "clarify" that link.

This simple

argument probably holds enormous weight. The supply shocks were a novel
phenomenon.

elasticity

that

There was no way prior to the late 1970s to evaluate
of labor demand

with respect

a persistent slowdown in
by employers

erat..on

general,

to

to real energy

productivity

the partial

prices, or to verify

growth had occurred. An assev-

employees of the need for real wage declines

is, in

of little avail, for employers have reason to dissimulate and

employees

have cause to ignore their employer's importunings. The inability of employers
to convey credibly to workers the need for real wage moderation has been elegantly

captured by Sanford Grossman and Olivcr Hart. Adverse shocks in

their

model bump against partial real wage rigidity, and therefore cause unemployment.
Their results directly transfer to our case. If this hypothesis is maintained,

-7we should expect to see a gradual process of wage moderation after a supply

shock, as workers gain evidence (through the

Persistence of unemployment) that

the adverse demand shift against labor has in fact occurred. Moreover,
we would
expect learning between the first (1973-74) and second oil

shocks (1979) re

garding union wage setting. According to Shinkai, Japan is a vivid illustra
tion of such learning, for formerly militant union federations explicitly
called for wage moder,tion in 1980, in
federation's

"offensive white

light of Supply-side developments. One

paper" declared: "Our wage demand (in 1980) is

based on our assessment of the impact of oil-price rise and

and aims at a real wage increase lower than

growth prospect,

the real GNP growth." (p. 19)

The previous explanations all apply in a basically competitive labor

troubling cases

market setting. More

emerge once we recognize the extent of

monopoly union power in OECD labor markets,
particularly throughout Europe.
In the U.S. we often forget that much

highly centralized, highly

of

European wage setting occurs in a

unionized context.

And when powerful unions face

off against employers, supply shocks may well redound on unemployment rather

than wage reductions. To our benefit, Tan McDonald and Solow have recently
offered a smorgasbord of models that make that very point. There is simply

no

presumption

rather

that an Optimi Zing Union will substantially cut reil wigcs,

than employment, following a supply shock; indeed, it may even raise

th em!

ii .

pl i cat ions for i)cinand Management Po

1 i Ci CS ifl

Opell conom los

From the very

aggregative standpoint then, supply shocks may raise
the "typical" problem that the nominal price and wage are out of line with
money supply and the exchange rate, and the novel case that real
wages exceed

their

full employment

level.

If output

markets

do not clear, we may adopt

-8Malinvaud's

typology: the first problem would push the economy into the re-

gime of Keynesian unemployment, and

the

latter towards classical unemploym('nt.

Demand stimulus is effective in the first case (subject to Mundell-Flemixig
limitations) but not in the latter, unless the demand stimulus itself (say an
exchange rate depreciation) can reduce real wages by accelerating inflation.
In recent models, particularly Sachs (1980b) and Bruno and

Sachs (1981a), I hate investigated these policy issues under a variety of labor
market assumptions (in these models, the output market is assumed to clear continuously, so that the economy is always at the boundary of Keynesian and

classical regimes). Consider one useful specification, which distinguishes
between the "bargained" real wage

the actual real wage w, and the full-

employment real wage w' (see Grubh,Jackman, and Layard for a similar formulation).
We assume that unions and firms bargain for a real wage (w), but set a nominal
wage that is only partially indexed (or perhaps fully indexed with a lag).

Actual wages (w) can deviate in the short run from B, because of unanticipated or accelerating inflation. The bargained wage itself is assumed to respond only to unemployment, in order to capture the partial real wage rigidity
I have discussed above.

Now, we can envision various relations among B, w, and
unemployment will result when w >
wage bargains.

If w >

w=

w',

Generally,

hut this can occur with high or low real-

unions and firms would settle on a lower real

wage, but because of partial nominal wage rigidity, they do not achieve it. This
is a case where a money supply increase or exchange rate devaluation can readily
reduce unemployment (at the cost of a higher price level).

Unemployment is

basically a monetary problem.
On the other hand, if w =
set

above

>

the

wage bargain is intentionally

(as discussed earlier, unions may misperceive

or may choose

-9-

unemployment in return for higher wages). In this case, a monetary expansion
can temporarily reduce w, and increase employment, but only in the short run.

Long-run, fu1l-ap1oyment equilibrium requires that w8 he reduced to
f

(or

B

.

that w be raised). For concreteness, suppose that Lw =
the unemployment rate.

'1 cn, 1/a(w - w

)

c(Ut),

where Ut

measures the cumulative unemploy-

ment that must be experienced before long-run equilibrium is restored. The
unemployment may he postponed through rising inflation, but it cannot he avoided

in the long run through expansionary monetary policy. Simulation exercises
show that expansionary policy very often results in higher inflation and deeper
unemployment along the adjustment path than does a passive policy.
It should he pointed out that a fiscal expansion may raise

and

thus moderate unemployment by favorably shifting the economy's terms of trade

(see Sachs (1980) for an example). Moreover, direct supply-side measures may
f

also raise w .

Space prevents elaboration of these two poss]bllltIes here.

I close with a talc of two countries, Sweden and Finland, that vividly
confirms the difficulty of preventing, rather than merely postponing, supplyshock unemployment.
The year-to-year GNP developments in the two countries in the nmid-1970s

wec:
1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

Finland

6.5

3.1

0.6

0.3

0.3

2.3

7.2

Sweden

3.8

4.2

2.5

1.6

-2.4

1.3

'1.1

Sweden

utilized very expansionary policies during 1974-76 to "bridge" the

world recession (see OLCD Economic Surveys for Sweden and Finland for recent

policy history), and indeed open unemployment did not develop
years

in the early

of the 1)01 icy (t bough hi &lden unemployment, such as work ers in government

job-training

programs, did). But neither did real wages moderate. A wage boom

—

and severe profit squeeze ensued, which ushered in a number of years of
very
poor growth. Moreover, the expansionary policies left a legacy of a greatly
expanded government sector. In Finland, the decision to abandon reflatjon
was taken much earlier (1975), with a view towards restoring profitability
and competitiveness in

Finland's

export sector. The output drop in Finland in

1975-76 was far more severe than in Sweden, and Finland's real wage gap (itS

measured by the OECD) was eliminated in 1976. The growth since 1977 has been

far

higher.

111. Conclusions and Fxtc'nions

The recessions in the 1970s were inherently more painful than pre-

vious episodes since they

signalled

the need for real wage moderation and a

period of slow economic growth. In some countries, the need for real wage
moderation

was accepted by

workers

without the ordeal of unemployment (e.g.

Japan, 1979-80), while in others, the adjustment process seemed to require a
recession.

In such countries, expansionary demand policies serve mainly to

postpone rather than prevent an economic
Of course a

downturn.

variety of additional issues should be rai seti

in

a com-

plete treatment of the recent supply shocks. Higher energy prices and competition from the NICs call for sectoral reallocation of resources, as well as
overall wage and price adjustments. One suspects that in a booming economy,
sectoral shifts of the
the

requisite

magnitude could be handled in

stride.

In

present environment, though, policy makers have supported moribund indus-

tries

and

protective labor legislation has slowed down the flow of workers to

more prothictive enterprises. These inefficiencies have magnified Iurope's
adjustment

probleni significantly.

— 11

—

Refer en cc

s

Baily, Martin N., "Productivity and the Services of Capital and Labor, "

Brookings Papers on Economic

Activity,

No. 1, 1981

Bruno, Michael, "Ra Materials, Profits, and the Productivity Slowdown," NBER

Working Paper No. bbO, December 1981
Bruno, Michael and Sachs, Jeffrey, (1981a), "Supply Versus Demand Approaches
to the Problem of Stagflation," in H. Giersch, ed., Macroeconomic Policies

for Growth and Stability, Kiel: Institute fur Weltwirtscheft an der Universitat
Kiel, 1981.

Bruno, Michael and Sachs, Jeffrey, (1981b), "Theory of an Input Price Shock
and

the Dynamic Adjustment

Process," presented at the Conference in Unemp]oy-

Newnham College, Camb-idge, 1981.

ment,

Buiter,

Willem and Miller, Marcus, "The

BrooUflgSPpersonEcon0jc_Activity,
Giersch, herbert, A Discussion
Institute Studies, 147,

Thatcher Experiment -

What

Went Wrong?",

1981 :2.

with Herbert

Giersch, American Lnterprise

1977.

Grossman, Sanford, and Hart, Oliver, "Implicit Contracts, Moral Hazard and
Unemployment,"

Grubb, D.,
London

No. 96,

Kravis,

Amcrica_Economic_Review, Papers and

Proceedings, May 1981.

Jackman, IL, and Layard, R., "Causes of the Current Stagflation,"

School of

Economics, Centre for

Labour Economics Discussion Paper

1981.

I. B.,

and Lipsey, R. E., "Prices and

Terms of Trade for Developed

Country Exports of Manufactured Goods," Working Paper No. 774, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Sept. 1981.

Lipton, David and Sachs, Jeffrey, "The Supply Approach to Oil Shocks and the
Slowdown in Japanese Economic Growth," in the Oriental Economist, 198].

- 12

-

Ma1invaud, Edmond, Profitability and UnJoyTnent, Cambridge, Cambridge
University
Press, 1980.

McDonald, Ian and Solow, Robert, "Wage Bargaining and Employment," Americn
Economic Review, December, 1981.

Morley, R., "Profit, Relative Prices and Unemployment," Economic Journa1,
'ol. 89, No. 355, September, 1979.

Nordhaus, William, "Economic Policy in the Face of Declining Productivity
Growth," presented at the International Seminar on Macroeconomics, Paris,

June, 1981, and forthcoming in the European Economic Review, 1982.
Phelps, Edmond, "Commodity Supply Shock and Full Employment Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, May, 1978.

Sachs, Jeffrey, "Wages, Profits, and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A Comparative
Study," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1979:2.

Sachs, Jeffrey (l9SOa), "Wages, Flexible Exchange Rates, and

tcroeconomic

Policy," Quarterly Journal of_Economics, June, 1980.

Sachs, Jeffrey, (1980h), "Energy and Growth Under Flexible Exchange Rates,"
NBER Working Paper No.

and B.
Under

Putnam, The

Flexible

582,

November, 1980, and forthcoming in J. Bhandhari

international

Transmission of Economic Disturbamces

Exchange Rates, Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1982.

Sachs, Jeffrey, (l9Slc), "The Macroeconomic Response to Supply Shocks: A

Comparison

of Japan and the United States," presented at the Japanese

Ministry of Finance,
Seo,

Conference on M...croeconomics, Tokyo, August, 1981.

Jun'ichiro, and Takahashi, Wataru, "Anticipated Money

Bank of .]apan Discussion

and

Real Output,"

Pa))er Series No. 10, November, 1981.

Shinkai, loichi, "Oil Crises mid the Stagflation (or Its Absence) in Japan,"
Discussion Paper No. 110, Institute of Social and Economics Research, Osaka

University,

Novenhc'r,

1981).

- 13 -

Solow, Robert, "What

to

do When OPEC Comes," in

S.

Fischer, ed., Rational

pectations and Economic Policy, University of Chicago Press, 1080.

Symons, James, "The Demand for Labour in British Manufacturing," London School
of Economics, Centre for Labour Economics Discussion Paper No. 91, 1081.

