                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EFFECTS OF REGULATION ON UTILITY FINANCING:
                       THEORY AND EVIDENCE




                      Robert A. Taggart, Jr.


                      Working Paper No. 866




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           March 1982




J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern
University. I am grateful to Suk Heun Yoon for able research
assistance and to the National Science Foundation for financial
support under Grant No. SOC 7T—0T251. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of' the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #866
                                                     March 1982



              Effects of Regulation on Utility Financing:
                          Theory and Evidence



                               ABSTRACT



     This paper examines the financing decisions of regulated public

utilities. It is argued that the regulatory process affects utility fi-

nancing choices both by conditioning the environment in which these choices

are made and by creating opportunities for firms to influence the regulated

price through strategic financing behavior. The nature of this regulatory

effect continually changes, however, as economic conditions change and as

regulators, firms and consumers adapt to one another's decisions. The

direction of the impact on utility financing, therefore, may differ both

over time and across regulatory jurisdictions.

     This theory of regulatory influence is tested by examining several

episodes in the financing experience of U.S. electric utilities from 1912 to

1979. Evidence of a regulatory effect on utility financing is found par-

ticularly for the early years of state commission regulation. Examples of

an adaptive response pattern on the part of regulators, firms and consumers

are also cited.



                                   Robert A. Taggart, Jr.
                                   J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
                                   Northwestern University
                                   Evanston, Illinois 60201

                                    (312) 492—3562
                 Effects of Regulation on Utility Financing:

                             Theory and Evidence



     The influence of regulation on public utilities' capital—labor choices

has been the subject of an extensive literature, beginning with the seminal

contribution of Averch and Johnson (1962) . By comparison, regulation's

influence on utility financing decisions has received relatively little

attention , even though this latter issue is of interest from two

standpoints. First, from the standpoint of the microeconomic theory of public

policy, any regulation—induced departures from an optimal financing mix may

have welfare implications for utility customers and securityholders and for

the economy at large. These implications have been alluded to in policy

debates,2 but have been the subject of little formal theoretical analysis.3

Second, from the standpoint of corporate finance theory, regulation may have

important effects on the capital market "frictions" that are thought to

determine an optimal capital structure.4 Both the tax considerations and

incentive problems that influence the debt—equity mix may be perceived

differently by firms subject to regulation than by those that are not.5

     The purpose of this paper is to present a theory and empirical tests of

the influence of regulation on utility financing decisions. In Section I, a

theory is developed incorporating the motivations of regulators, consumers and

the firm's securityholders, and it is shown that regulation can affect a

utility's financing mix in a variety of ways, depending on specific

assumptions about the regulators' behavior and the economic environment. In

particular, firms may be induced to use greater proportions of either equity
                                        —2—




or debt financing, depending on how hard—pressed economically are firms and

consumers and on whether regulators behave in a naive or sophisticated

fashion.

        In Section II, selected episodes in the financing experience of U.S.

electric utilities from 1912 to 1979 are analyzed. This lengthy time period

encompasses a broad range of economic environments as well as the evolutionary

development of regulation by state commissions, and it thus allows testing for

different types of regulatory Influences on utility capital structures. In

the early years of state regulatory commIssIons, for example, it is found that

firms may have been induced to use greater amounts of debt and preferred stock

financing than they otherwise would have, in an attempt to Influence the

output prices set by the commissions. In the period from World War II to

about 1970, on the other hand, It is argued that regulation probably had a

more passive influence on utility financing, and in the economically—pinched

decade of the 1970's, regulation may have induced some firms to use more

equity financing.



I. Regulation and Utility Financing: Theory

        A. Participants in the Regulatory Process and their Motivations

              The first step in analyzing regulation's influence on utility

financing is to develop a model of the motivations and decisions of the

various actors in the regulatory process. The set of actors in this model

consists of three groups: the regulated firm and its securityholders,

consumers of the firm's output, and the regulatory commissioners.

        The firm produces output,       in each period, t, and sells this output to

consumers     at   a price, P, that is set by the regulators in each period. The

price   is   determined by the regulatory "climate," Rt, which will be explained
                                  —3—




in greater detail below. Price in turn determines consumers' demand, and it

is assumed that the firm is obligated to produce enough output to satisfy

whatever demand occurs in each period.

     A possible representation of the productibn process is that the firm

chooses a capital stock, K, at the beginning of the period (i.e. at time t—l)

and a means for financing this capital stock. For the time being, we will

confine possible financing sources to debt, D, and equity, E, so for a given

capital stock the financing decision is fully specified by choosing a value of

D6. Once the capital stock and financing decisions have been made at the

beginning of the period, uncertainty is resolved, and the firm must employ a

variable input (fuel, say, or labor, or some fixed—proportion combination

thereof) in the amount necessary to satisfy demand.7

     The one other decision variable that the firm has under its control is

    the amount of lobbying pressure it exerts on the regulators in an attempt

to win a more favorable output price. As will be seen below, the regulatory

climate, Rt, depends on the firms's lobbying effort, 1ft   Lobbying effort is

assumed to be costly, however, so 1ft also affects annual expenses.

     The firm's annual operating expense, °t, which is taken to include the

cost of both the variable input and the firm's lobbying effort, depends on the

quantity of output to be produced, the amount of lobbying effort, the capital

stock and the financing mix at time t—i, as given by Dt_l. The latter

variable is included because such costs as negotiating with fuel suppliers may

be affected by whether or not previous financing choices have put the firm in

financial difficulty.

     The firm may also wish to invest at time t so as to augment the capital

stock available for next period's production. That is,
                                         —4—




                   =       +    It,                                                    (1)




where 1 is investment at time t.               is in turn determined by the firm's

expected cash flows, C,          as well as its mix of previously—issued

securities, Dt_i. The financing mix is included to reflect the idea,

suggested by Myers (1977), that a firm's outstanding long—term debt may affect

its willingness to undertake profitable investment projects.

     Putting together these several pieces, the firm's after—tax operating

cash flow in period t Is thus given by



     C = [P(Rt)Q(Pt)      —                                                            (2)
                                       lft,Kt_l,Dt_l)](l—T)—It(Dt....l, C),



where T is the corporate tax rate.

     In keeping with standard corporate finance theory, the firm is assumed to

make its decisions so as to maximize the total market value, V, of its

securities.8 V Is in turn taken to depend on the firm's projected operating

cash flows, as well as its financing mix. At time o, then, the firm chooses

10 and      In addition, perhaps,to a contingent plan for future investment,

financing and lobbying efforts, so as to maximize V0, where




                 V0 =   V(,D),                                                        (3)




and where    =                 ....,                )       is   the vector of operating cash

flows and D = (D0, D1, ...,     Dt,    ....)   is       the financing mix In each period.9

     The second group of actors in the model is consumers, who simply purchase

the amount they desire of the firm's output at the price set by the regulatory

commission. They do not necessarily accept the regulators' pricing decisions
                                   —5—




passively, however, but just as the firm does, may choose to exert lobbying

presures, 1ct' in each period. Both the amount of output purchased and the

expense devoted to lobbying effort are assumed to be chosen by consumers so as

to maximize utility.

     The third group of actors is the regulatory commissioners who are charged

with setting a price for the firm's output. The regulators are assumed to set

this price so as to balance the conflicting interests of the firm and its

customers, and thus their objective may he viewed formally as maximizing a

weighted sum of consumers' and producer's surplus. It is further assumed,

however, that the regulators have no precise algorithm for computing such

surpluses, but rather that they are continually groping for a solution in a

world of uncertainty and imperfect information.

     The regulators may be aided by broad judicial guidelines, such as

providing a "fair" return to capital, but the implementation of such

guidelines is assumed to depend on the actual investment and financing

decisions of the firm (and on how these are measured), as well as on the

relative strength of the lobbying efforts by the firm and consumers. As in

Joskow (1974), the commissioners may use the level of criticism and pressure

from these two constituent groups as a guide to how well they are serving

their judicial mandate. Prices may be altered in response to pressures from

both sides in such a way as to minimize the total volume of criticism.10 In

addition , as in Owen and Braeutigam (1978), the firm may try to further

influence the price—setting process by making its investment and financing

decisions, and by governing the flow of information to the regulators about

these decisions, in a strategic manner.11 The firm presumably has superior

information about its own economic condition, and it may be able to use this

advantage to alter the regulator's perception of the fair price or rate of
                                      —6—




return.

     In summary, then, the price that is set depends on the regulatory

climate, Rt, in each period, and that climate Is In turn conditioned by the

firm's investment and financing decisions, and by lobbying pressure from both

the firm and consumers. That Is,



           R. =   Rt(Ktl,Dtl,lft,lt).                                      (4)



     The ultimate effect of the arguments of Rt on the regulated price will

vary with the sophistication of regulators and consumers, the regulators'

weighting of firm and consumer interests, the economic environment and the

costs of lobbying effort. If regulators and consumers are naive about the

firm's operations, for example, the firm may be able to manipulate its

decisions so as to induce the regulator to set the monopoly price, without, at

the same time, arousing a countervailing lobbying effort by consumers. If the

commission is sophisticated and heavily slanted toward consumer Interests, on

the other hand, such manipulation may be of little use to the firm. Moreover,

the desire of both the firm and consumers to seek regulatory relief through

lobbying effort may    depend on the stringency of the overall economic
environment, as well as on the costs of such efforts.12



     B. How the Regulatory Environment Can     Influence   Utility Financing

          Decisions

                  With the motivations of these three groups in mind, we can now

turn to an examination of the factors affecting utility financing.13 The

optimal financing mix, for a given capital stock is that which maximizes the

firm's total market value. For simplicity, attention will be confined to the
                                     —7—




financing decision made at t0, and any effects on future financing decisions

will be ignored. Substituting (4) into (2), (2) into (3), and totally

differentiating (3) with respect to D0, holding I( and i constant, gives the

first—order condition for the optimal financing mix:'4


 dV         3Vo   3VodC       3V                   dl
   o                               o3C,3R     3R    c\                   (5)
 dD
   o        3Do   3C dDo      3C 3R3Do        31c dD0 /




       The first two terms in expression (5) represent factors that would affect
a firm's financing decision even in the absence of regulation. The partial

derivative, 3V/3D, for example, represents ways in which the firm's capital

structure affects its total market value, independent of the stream of

operating cash flows. These might include the tax saving from debt or

additions to value stemming from signalling aspects of the firm's capital

structure.15 The second term in (5) represents any direct effects that the

firm's financing decision might have on its future operating cash flows.

Increased use of debt, for instance, may increase the chance that financial

distress will interfere with the firm's operations in some future states of

nature. Likewise, agency costs associated with the firm's external financing

may manifest themselves in the form of lower operating cash flows in the

future 16

       The third term in expression (5) represents ways in which the firm's

financing decision may indirectly affect the cash flow stream by first

influencing the regulatory climate. If the financing decision affects the

regulatory climate, this may in turn affect the sequence of output prices set

by the commission and hence the operating cash flows.

       The first component of this term, (3V/3C)(3C/3R)(DR/3D0), is the direct
                                          —8—




effect of the firm's capital structure on the prices set by the regulators.

This "price—influence effect," which has been analyzed in detail by Taggart

(1981) is active primarily when regulators follow a mechanical pricing rule

that depends on the firm's financing mix. One example of such a rule occurs

when the regulator sets price so as to yield an allowed revenue based on

allowed rates of return to the various sources of capital. If the allowed

rate of retirn to equity is e, the imbedded interest cost on the firm's

oustanding debt is i, and the regulators know the firm's demand and operating

costs, the price in a given period t         might   be set so that



              —             =                                         (6)
                  O)(l—T)       1(l—T)Dt + eEt.


But if the allowed returns i and e are invariant to the firm's capital

structure, as has been asserted to be the case,17 and if e > i(l—T),(6)

clearly indicates that the firm can win a higher price by substituting equity

for debt.18

     An alternative price—influence opportunity might present itself if the

firm feels that the regulators are worried about the possibility of financial

distress. If it Is felt that the regulators set price so as to allow the firm

to maintain a particular fixed charge coverage ratio, for instance, the firm

may find it worthwhile to Issue more debt now than It otherwise would, thereby

increasing the probability that this coverage ratio will not be maintained at

the current price and thus increasing the chance for a higher output price in

at least some future states of nature.19
                                    —9—




      The remaining term in expression (5) representsways in which the firm's

 financing decision might alter consumer lobbying efforts. If the firm's

 attempts to influence price are successful, this may induce additional lobby-

 ing efforts by consumers, perhaps with some lag.2


     When expression (5) is considered as a whole, there appear to be two

general ways in which regulation can influence utility financing decisions.

First, as has been discussed in the preceding paragraphs, the firm's knowledge

that its financing choice can affect the regulatory climate, and potentially

the output price, may induce it to choose a different capital structure than

it would have in the absence of regulation. To the extent that there is a

socially optimal capital structure, this may in turn entail welfare costs. If

there are real resource costs associated with financial distress, for example,

and if the firm deliberately courts financial distress through additional debt

issuance, in an attempt to induce the regulators to raise the output price,

there is a cost imposed on society.21

     Second, the regulatory environment may affect thosefactors that would

ordinarily determine the financing decision and may thus cause a regulated

firm to choose a different capital structure from that of an otherwise


equivalent unregulated firm. A case in point might be the stability of the

firm's operating cash flow stream. If regulation produces a more stable

environment, and if the firm's proportion of debt financing depends on the
                                    —10—




perceived stability of future cash flows, the regulated firm may use more debt

than would an unregulated one.22 Another example is agency costs associated

with external financing. Jensen and Meckling (1976) suggest, for instance,

that regulation constrains managers from undertaking excessively risky

projects or otherwise undermining the bondholders' position and that regulated

firms are thus able to make greater use of debt financing.

     At a deeper level, however, these two routes by which regulation can

affect utility financing decisions stem from the same source. Whether by

design or not, regulation serves as a means for transferring wealth and risks

between the firm's owners and its customers. With the regulatory commission

acting as mediator, each group vies with the other to ensure that the outcome

of this transfer process will be favorable to itself. The firm's financing

decision in a regulated environment both reflects the outcome of this process

and at the same time influences that outcome.

     The firm's capital structure is itself a means for wealth— and risk—

shifting. In an unregulated environment, such shifting typically occurs among

different classes of securityholders, but under regulation the firm's

customers are also involved in the process. The customers have an implicit

claim on the firm in the sense that if the regulator succeeds in lowering

price below the monopoly level, wealth will be shifted from the firm to the

customers. The firm then has the same kind of incentives to recapture some of

this wealth by undermining the customers' position that shareholders might

have to undermine the bondholders' position. The possibility that the firm

can gain a higher price by issuing enough debt to court financial distress
                                   —11—




represents an attempt by the firm to shift risk to its customers. Thus the

firm's financing decision is part of a broader set of wealth—and risk—shifting

activities that occur under regulation. At the same time, if regulation makes

the cash flow stream more stable, thus allowing the firm to issue more debt,

then the financing decision is also reflecting the effects of these shifting

activites.

     The basic results of this section may be summarized in terms of the

model's implications for empirical observations. The primary implication is

that the regulatory process should have an identifiable effect on utility

financing decisions. This effect may stem from the firm's attempt to

influence the regulated price through its capital structure choice or from

regulation's impact on the economic environment in which the firm operates.

     A second implication is that the direction of this effect will vary with

both economic conditions and the behavior of the different regulatory

commissions. It was seen above, for example, that the firm's attempts to

influence price may lead to greater proportions of either debt or equity

financing, depending on the details of the price—setting rule used by the

regulators. Furthermore, regulation's effect on the firm's economic

environment may vary, depending on the pressures to which the regulators have

been subjected by both the firm and its customers.

     Finally, the discussion of the regulators' behavior in Section l.A.

suggests that the relationship between regulation and utility financing should

not be immutable, but rather a process of adaptive response. If the firm is

successful in influencing price through a particular financing strategy, this

should reduce the welfare of consumers who will in turn exert offsetting

lobbying pressure on the regulatory commission. An initially successful

financing strategy may eventually be blocked, then, as the regulators adopt
                                   —12—




different price—setting rules or otherwise change their behavior. We might

expect that financing strategies aimed at influencing price would be most

successful either during the early development of regulation or immediately

following the adoption of new price—setting rules, before the regulators have

had a chance to develop countervailing strategies. Furthermore, the firm's

desire to try to influence the price and the regulators' susceptibility to

such influence should depend on the economic pressures to which both the firm

and consumers are subject.



II. Regulation and Electric Utility Financing in the U.S: Empirical Evidence

     A. Secular Patterns in Electric Utility Finance

          A rough indication of long—term trends in U.S. electric utility

finance is given by the capitalization ratio plots in Figures 1 and 2. Figure

1 traces the ratios of long—term debt, D, common equity, Ec and preferred

stock, E to total capitalization, TC, for electric utilities.23 In Figure 2,

the long—term debt ratio for electric utilities is compared with that for U.S.

corporations as a whole.

     In broad outline, four major eras in utility financing appear to be

distinguishable. In the first two decades of the century, utilities increased

their debt and preferred stock proportions rather dramatically, at the expense

of common equity financing. Beginning in the 1920's and carrying through World

War II, this trend was generally reversed, with the debt ratio in particular

declining. The debt ratio then entered a period of increase from roughly the

end of World War II to 1970. Most of this increase seems to have come at the

expense of preferred stock, with the common equity series exhibiting no

pronounced trend. Finally, begining around 1970, the utility debt ratio has

declined almost without interruption while the common equity and preferred
                                   —13—




stock ratios have tended to increase.

     During some periods the financing experience of electric utilities has

paralleled that of U.S. corporations as a whole, but in others it has not. As

shown in FIgure 2, for example, the decline in debt financing during World War

II and the steady increase thereafter until 1970 occur both for utilities and

the corporate sector generally. The decline in debt financing by utilities

since 1970, however, seems atypical of the corporate sector as a whole. There

is also fragmentary evidence, not shown in Figure 2, that long—term debt

financing by the corporate sector as a whole declined between 1913 and 1922,

at the same time that utility debt financing increased dramatically.24

     In the ensuing paragraphs, the ability of the theory developed in Section

I to illuminate these trends is investigated. In particular, the periods

1912—'22 and 1970—'79, in which utility financing patterns diverge from those

of the corporate sector generally, are examined in detail.



     B. Utility Finance in the Early Years of State Regulation

          The earliest electric utility companies in the U.S. were regulated

by municipalities through the granting of special franchises to use the public

streets.25 Although Massachusetts established state regulation of gas

utilities in 1885, the era of state regulatory commissions is generally

acknowledged to have begun in 1907 with the establishment of such commissions

in New York and Wisconsin. Many other states followed suit almost

immediately, with twenty—seven such commissions being established between 1907

and 1914, and this movement continued, though at a slower pace, after 1914.

     The theory in Secton I suggests that any effects regulation may have on

utility financing are intimately associated with the price—setting process.

Since formal price regulation began only with the establishment of state
                                   —14—




commissions, then, the years immediately following 1907 provide an

experimental setting for testing the theory. In particular, the theory

predicts that the financing decisions of those utilities regulated by state

commissions should differ from those of utilities that are not so regulated.

Without further specification of the regulatory environment, however, the

theory does not predict the direction of these differences.

     The first step in testing for regulatory effects is to specify an

equation describing utility financing decisions in the absence of price

regulation. This equation is formulated in terms of period— by— period changes

in the firm's long—term debt, or



     ADt = 1A t + D
                  2t—l'                                                (7)




where Dt and       are the changes in the firm's long—term debt and total

assets, respectively, occurring between time t—l and time t.   Dt_i is the

level of the firm's long—term debt at time t—l. Equation (7) reflects the

idea that the firm wishes to finance some target proportion of its additional

assets in each period with long—term debt.26 Adjustment to this target is

tempered, however, by the beginning—of—period level of long—term debt, which

may have been above or below target.

     Equation (7) may be estimated using data from the Census of Electrical

Industries. Financial data covering the early period of state regulation are

available for the years 1912, 1917 and 1922 and these are reported on a

statewide basis. A simple test for regulatory effects, then, entails the

inclusion of dummy variables indicating whether or not the utilities in a

given state were subject to state commission regulation during the period in

question. Three such dummy variables are used: R12 takes on a value of unity
                                  —15—




if the state had a commission by 1912 and zero otherwise; R17 takes on a value

of unity if a state commission was established between 1912 and 1917 and zero

otherwise; R22 takes on a value of unity if a state commission was

established between 1917 and 1922 and zero otherwise.27 Although the theory

by itself does not predict the signs of the coefficients of these dummy

variables, anecdotal evidence from the period suggests that regulated

utilities at this time may have emphasized securities with fixed charges (debt

and preferred stock) in an attempt to win higher prices from the commissions.

Excessive capitalizations, involving security issues far in excess of the

reproduction cost of the assets were thought to be prevalent in this era.28

Such capitalizations could be viable only if commissions granted high enough

prices to support them. Firms may thus have increased their debt and

preferred stock proportions in order to present the commissions with heavy

schedules of fixed charges that would drive the utilities into bankruptcy if

high enough prices were not granted. To test for this possibility, preferred

stock is added to long—term debt in estmating equation (7), and the estimated

regulatory dummy coefficients are examined for positive signs.

     Given the available data, equation (7), with the three regulatory dummy

variables included, could be estimated for the periods 1912 — '17 and 1917—

'22. The results yielded only one significantly positive coefficient for the

regulatory variables, that of R22 in the perod 1917 —   '22.   This is consistent

with the notion that firms in states that formed regulatory commissions during

that period may have biased their capital structures toward debt and preferrd

stock in an attempt to win higher prices. Nevertheless, only five states

formed commissions between 1917 and 1922, and thus this finding does not

constitute overwhelming support for the presence of regulatory effects on

utility financing decisions.
                                      —16—




      When viewed in the light of Jarrell's (1978) results, however, the

 evidence may be stronger than it appears at first glance. Jarrell examined

 this same period and looked for evidence that the formation of state

 commissions resulted in significantly higher prices for firms in those

 states. He found no evidence that firms subject to state regulation enjoyed

 higher prices than firms with no state commission in 1912, 1917 or 1922. In

 fact, he found that prices of utility services were significantly lower in

 1912 in those states that formed commissions by 1917 than in states that did

not. By 1917, prices in the regulated states were still no higher than those

in the unregulated states but the gap had been significantly narrowed.

Jarrell interpreted these results as evidence that the demand by firms for

state regulation was heaviest in those states where firms faced the stiffest

competitive pressure prior to regulation. During the era of municipal

franchising, it was common for cities to award competitive franchises, and in

areas where competition was most effective, we would expect to observe lower

prices, on the average, prior to regulation. If the establishment of state

commissions was primarily for the benefit of firms, we would then expect to

see prices in these states rising toward the levels of other states as

regulation is instituted, and Jarrell argues that his results are consistent

with this expectation.

     A similar interpretation might be applied to utility financing during

this period. If the amount of debt and preferred stock that a firm wishes to

issue depends positively on both the level and stability of its cash flow

stream, then a fiercely competitive environment would be less conducive to

debt and preferred stock financing.    If indeed those states that formed

regulatory commissions early were ones in which utility competition was

heaviest to begin with, we would expect firms in these states to start Out
                                   —17—




using lower proportions of debt and preferred stock financing. These

proportions might then rise after commissions are formed, both as regulation

breeds a more stable environment and as firms try to influence the commissions

to grant them higher prices.

     The most convenient way to check the consistency of the results here with

this interpretation is to estimate equation (7) for the periods 1912 — '17 and

1917 — '22 together. Slope dummy variables can then be added to allow for

changes in the coefficients, and the coefficients can be tested for

significant changes between the two periods. The results of this estimation

are reported in Table 1. A constant term has been added to equation (7) to

allow for possible nonlinearities, and the variables other than the regulatory

dummy variables have been deflated by lagged assets to correct for

heteroscedasticity.

     The estimated equation fits the data well, and, as might be expected, the

explanatory variable that does the most work is the percentage change in

assets. The coefficient of Dt_1/A_i, which was expected to be negative, is

positive but not significantly so. The coefficients of primary interest are

those of the regulatory dummy variables. All of these are negative (although

the coefficient of R12 is not significantly negative), for the period 1912—

'17, suggesting that utilities in states that established regulation the

earliest initially employed lower proportions of debt and preferred stock

financing. In the subsequent period, 1917— '22, however, there are strong

indications that the coefficients of the regulatory dummy variables moved in a

positive direction.

     This evidence is consistent, then, with the notion that state regulation

produced an environment more conducive to debt and preferred stock financing

by electric utilities. The question that remains is whether the greater use
                                   —18—




of these financing sources is attributable to regulation's having produced a

more stable environment or to the firms' attempts to influence regulated

prices. The behavior of utilities in those states that established regulations

between 1912 and 1917 suggests that the environmental effect may have been

more important. This is because greater use' of debt and preferred stock

financing followed the establishment of regulation only with a considerable

lag, and be.ause there is no evidence of any positive relation between prices

in these states and the change in firms' financing patterns. Jarrell (1978)

found, for example, that prices in those states establishing regulation between

1912 and 1917 rose most by 1917 and that part of these gains were lost by

1922. Thus the major impact of regulation on prices seems to have occurred

before the impact on financing decisions, and a plausible inference is that

utilities altered their financing patterns only after they saw how state

regulation was affecting their environment.

     For utilities in states that established regulation between 1917 and

1922, however, the evidence does not rule Out a price—influence effect on

financing decisions. First, the change in financing patterns in these states

coincided with the establishment of regulation, and second, Jarrell's evidence

indicates that price increases in these states occurred between 1917 and

1922. Since the effect of regulation on utility financing depends crucially

on the behavior of individual state commissions, of course, it is not

surprising that these effects may not be uniform across states and that

different types of effects may have been at work in states regulated in

different years.
                                    —19--




      C. Adaptive Responses by the Regulatory Commissions to Utility Financing

           Strategies



           If it is accepted that at least some utilities were indeed

 successful in winning higher prices through the use of debt and preferred

 stock financing, the theory ifl Section i predicts that such success would be

 followed by an adaptive regulatory response. The success of such financing

 strategies would be detrimental to consumers who woUld presumably put more

pressure on regulators to take counteracting measures.29 Furthermore, these

consumer pressures should be stronger as consumers are more economically hard

pressed.

      In fact, after growing complaints about utility financial manipulations

in the l920's, state regulatory commissions began paying much more attention

to utility financing in the early l930's. Although most of the statutes

establishing state regulation in the first place gave the commissions the

power to review all utility securities issues, it is alleged that control over

financial policy was initially quite lax.3° In the wake of the financial

difficulties experienced during the Depression, however, many commissions

apparently began to take a far more active interest in financial regulation.

A 1931 revision of the Wisconsin public utility law, for example, empowered

the state commission to keep "all classes of capital securities in reasonable

relationships to each other" and even to halt the payment of common stock

dividends if these would impair the utility's financial integrity.31    In

several other states, moreover, it became common to examine bond indentures

closely and to "control the issuance of additional bonds under each mortgage,
                                     —20—




require sinking funds for most bond issues, specify provisions for

depreciation and maintenance costs and limit the payments of common stock
             ..32
dividends.

     The striking similarity between these statutory measures and the kinds of

covenants customarily written into bond indentures, suggests that regulatory

commissions became increasingly aware that utilities could follow financing

strategies detrimental to consumers.33 The utilities could try to shift

wealth from consumers to themselves through exactly the same strategies that

an ordinary firm might use to undermine existing bondholders' positions and

thus shift wealth from bondholders to shareholders. As the theory suggests,

however, attempts by firms to use these strategies were apparently met by

countervailing measures on the part of legislators and regulators.



     D. Utility Financing From World War II to 1970

             As Figures 1 and 2 indicate, a period of rising utility debt ratios

occurred from roughly the end of World War II to about 1970. Moreover, this

trend seems to parallel the financing behavior of U.S. corporations generally

over the same period.

     Two, possibly complementary, interpretations of this trend are consistent

with the model developed in Section I.      Both interpretations revolve around

changes in the economic environment which took place during this period,

creating an atmosphere more conducive to corporate debt. These changes

include dramatic increases in corporate tax rates, which enhanced the tax

advantage to debt, as well as perceptions that the economy was becoming more

stable as memories of the Depression grew dimmer.34

     The first interpretation is based on a change in regulatory attitudes.

It has been argued that in the wake of the Hope Natural Gas decision of 1944,
                                   —21—




regulatory commissions placed greater emphasis on the cost of capital and

became increasingly aware of the possibilities of debt financing for reducing

this cost.35 Regulators may thus have begun pressuring utilities to make

greater use of debt financing so that the tax savings could be passed on to

cons uiners.36 One way in which commissions applied such pressure was by

setting prices on the basis of a hypothetical capital structure, containing a

larger debt proportion than the utility actually possessed. But if the

regulated price is independent of the capital structure actually chosen by the

utility, all terms in equation (5) by which the financing choice,D, affects

the regulatory environment, R, vanish, and the utility's financing decision

will be dictated by the same considerations affecting that of an unregulated

firm. Thus, the same changes in tax rates and perceived stability of the

economic environment that induced corporations generally to issue more debt

may have had similar effects on utility financing.

     The second interpretation is based on Joskow's (1974) argument that

regulatory constraints may not have been binding during a significant portion

of this period, particularly throughout much of the 1960's. With only minor

interruptions, the trend in electric utility costs was downward from 1949 to

about l968. If Joskow is correct in asserting that consumers are likely to

complain only about prices that are rising in nominal terms, failing costs and

stable, or slightly declining, prices may have allowed utilities to reach

positions during this period close to what they could have achieved in the

absence of regulation. Thus utilities may have had little incentive to gear

their financing decisions toward influencing prices. In the absence of such

incentives, utility financing decisions would then have been based on the same

considerations affecting those of corporations generally.
                                   —22—




     E. Utility Financing in the 1970's

          As has been pointed Out in Figure 1, the long trend toward increased

utility debt was reversed around 1970, and electric utilities began to make

greater use of common equity and preferred stock financing. The 1970's were

also inflationary years in which utilities could no longer be content with

stable prices, but in which requests for price increases were met with

increasing consumer resistance. Regulators thus faced growing pressure from

both sides of the market, and regulatory activity, as measured by the number

of rate cases, increased dramatically.

     In such an environment, utilities would be expected to seek higher prices

through such means as lobbying with regulators and using price—influence

financing strategies. At the same time, however, consumers would be sensitive

to such strategies and could be expected to mount countervailing pressures

against the regulators. We might expect these strategies to be successful,

then, only in jurisdictions where regulators were more favorably inclined to

utility interests. Furthermore, the kinds of strategies employed might be

those that are least likely to arouse consumer resistance.

     One such strategy might be the one described in Section I.B., in which

allowed returns to debt common equity and preferred stock are invariant to

capital structure proportions, so that the firm can gain higher prices by

substituting common pity and preferred stock for debt. Regulators

sympathetic to the plight of the utilities might be inclined to go along with

this strategy, even if they were aware that required returns fluctuate with

capital structure proportions, because it would allow them to grant the

utilities higher prices without increasing the allowed returns to the

different sources of funds. Keeping the allowed returns the same might then
                                   —23—




blunt consumer resistance to these price increases.

     If this strategy was indeed being used, we would expect to find firms in

those states whose regulators were more favorably inclined toward the

utilities using less debt during the 1970's than firms in other states. An

obvious difficulty in testing this proposition, of course, Is to identify the

states whose commissions behaved favorably toward the utilities. This was done

using a composite of five investment firms' rankings of state regulatory

climates, which classified states as "very favorable," "favorable" or

"unfavorable," as of 1978.38

     Equation (7) was then estimated with three dummy variables (V,F and U)

added to reflect the three categories of states. If the financing strategy

described above was indeed In use, the coefficient of at least the "V' dummy

variable should be significantly negative, indicating less use of debt by

utilities In very favorable states for at least some period during the

1970's.39

     The equation was estimated for three periods, 1965—'70, 1970—'75 and

1975—'79. In contrast to the earlier period, described in Section II.B., data

were available for individual firms in every state from Statistics of

Privately Owned Electric Utilities in the United States. Data for each of the

three periods were available for a total of 164 firms, and the dummy variables

were keyed to the states in which the individual firms did the predominant

portion of their business.

     The results of this estimation are shown in Table 2. The coefficients of

the percentage change in assets decline steadily over the three periods,

indicating that target levels were declining for utilities generally. In

addition, the coefficient of the lagged debt—assets ratio becomes

significantly negative in the 1975—'79 period. Together, these coefficients
                                    —24—




 suggest that the electric utility industry in general underwent a period of

 financial retrenchment as the economic environment became more stringent.40

      Taken individually, none of the coefficients of the regulatory, dummy

 variables is significantly different from zero, and thus there is no strong

 evidence that the price— influence financing strategy described above was

 widely followed. The coefficient of the dummy variable for "very favorable"

 states does, however, change from positive to negative between the 1970—'75

and 1975—'79 periods, the only such coefficient to do so.41 Moreover, the

regulatory dummy variables taken as a group, while not significantly different

from zero for the l965—'70 or 1970—'75 periods, do become significant for the

1975—'79 period.42 By the latter half of the 1970's, therefore, something

about the various regulatory environments had changed so that this particular

classification scheme took on some power to explain utility financing

behavior.

     Taken as a whole, then, this evidence is at least weakly consistent with

the notion that utility financing decisions were influenced by regulation as

the economic environment became more stringent. In addition, although

financial retrenchment in the face of increased economic instability appears

to be the major cause of the decline in debt financing, some firms in the

"very favorable" states may have altered their financing strategies in an

attempt to influence price.43

     There is a variety of reasons that may explain why the evidence reported

above is not stronger. One of these is that regulatory commissions may indeed

adjust allowed returns for capital structure changes so that the hypothesized

financing strategy would not be effective.44 In many states, in fact,

consumer sensitivity to price increases may have forced the cannissions to make

such adjustments. In addition, the state classification scheme used above may
                                   —25—




not be accurate or constant over time, and even if it is, not all firms in a

given state may be in a position to employ similar financing strategies.

Nevertheless, the evidence does give some suggestion of regulatory influence

on tktility financing decisions, and hence the precise nature of this influence

may bear further investigation.



III. Conclusion

          The primary argument of this paper has been that regulation

influences utility financing decisions both by conditioning the economic

environment in which these decisions are made and by giving firms

opportunities to engage in strategic financing behavior. The channels through

which this influence occurs, however, are continually changing as a result of

a pattern of adaptive responses by firms, regulators and consumers. The

direction of the influence on utility financing, therefore, may differ both

over time and across regulatory jurisdictions.

     Although the changing nature of the process makes this regulatory

influence difficult to isolate at times, it does leave its traces in the data,

and a review of the trends in utility financing yields illustrations of the

pattern of adaptive response. While the bulk of scholarly attention has been

devoted to regulation's influence on the firm's real input decisions, then,

both theory and evidence suggest that the financing decision is an integral

part of the interplay between utilities, regulators and consumers.
                                                   FIGURE   I

                            ELECTRIC UTILITY CAPITAL STRUCTURE PROPORTIONS




.60

                                  D   - CENSUS BUREAU SERIES


.50                                                                                        — FPC SERIES




.40

                                                                                           -   FPC SERIFS
                      E'7
                        -    CENSUS BUREAU SERIES
.30




.20



                                                                                           — FPC   S ERIE S
.10




                             BUREAU SERIES
             a—CENSUS                          I                --     I

      1900     1910   1920        1930       1940        1950        1960    1970   1980
                                                FIGURE    2

                          COMPARISON OF LONG—TERJ4 DEBT—TO-TOTAL-CAPITAL RATIOS
                              ELECTRIC UTILITIES VS. ALL U.S. CORPORATIONS




.60




                                                                                         ELECTRIC UTILITIES
                                                                                  TC
.50




                'CENSUS BUREAU SERIES              F.P.C. SERIES
.40




.30                                                                           0
                                                                              TC - ALL U.S. CORPORATIONS

                                                                                       (I.R.S. STATISTICS OF INCOME)

.20




.10




  1900   1910      1920       1930      1940       1950       1960     1970       1980
                                             Table 1

                    Estimates of Equation (7), With Regulatory Dummy

                  Variables, for Periods 1912—'17 and 1917—'22 Combined


Independent                         Estimated        Standard
  Variable                         Coefficient         Error       Statistic

Constant                            —.101              .113         —0.89

(Constant)xDUM                       —.234             .159         —1.47

                                      .593             .020         29.59
    At— At_i
      At_i

                                    —.011              .040         —0.27
    At At_i
                xDUN
      At_l

                                      .270             .202           1.33
Dt_i/At_i

(    Dt_i/At_i)   x DUN               .243             .276          0.88

R12                                 —.050              .060         —0.83

(R12) x DUN                           .144             .085           1.68

R17                                 —.094              .043         —2.20

R17 x DUN                             .150             .062          2.43

R22                                 —.127              .070         —1.80

R22   x   DUN                         .287             .095          3.03



DUN = 1 for observations from 1917 —          '22,   0 otherwise

R2 = .950

S.E. = .119

Number of observations        92
                                       Table 2

                  Estimates of Equation (7), with Ieguiatory Dummy
                Variables for Periods 1965—'70, 1970—'75, 1975—'79



                               Independent Variables

                                   AtAt_l Dti
                        Constant    At_i    At_i         V       F       U


i965—'70
Estimated Coefficient     —.032     .552    .045       —.026   —.007   —.018
Standard Error              .057    .025    .080        .043    .042    .043
T—Statistic               —0.57    22.35    0.57       —0.60   —0.18   —0.43
R2 = .770
S.E. =   .090



l970—'75
Estimated Coefficient     —.056     .475   — .032       .008   .007     .031
Standard Error              .058    .019    .081        .044   .043     .044
T—Statistic               —0.96    24.69   —0.39        0.17   0.16    0.72
R2 = .798
S.E = .093


1975—'79
Estimated Coefficient      .080     .437 — .336        —.027   .023     .018
Standard Error             .045     .018    .067        .036   .035     .035
T—Statistlc                1.79    23.64   —4.98       —0.76   0.68    0.53
   = .783
S.E.   = .075

All equations have 164 observations.
                                      Footnotes




1.   See Bailey (1973) for a comprehensive survey of this literature.

2.   See, for example, Weidenbaum (1975).

3.   One   exception   is Litzenberger and Sosin (1979). This paper will be

     discussed in more detail below.

4.   In the absence of such frictions, Modigliani and Miller (1958) and others

     have shown that the firm's financing choice has no effect on its optimal

     investment decisions or on its total market value.

5.   Analyses along these lines have previously been applied to regulated

     financial institutions. Scott and Mayer (1971), Merton (1977) and Buser,

     Chen and Kane (1981), for example, discuss the incentive problems

     associated with deposit insurance and their effect on commercial bank

     financing decisions. Joskow (1973) describes the way price regulation in

     the property and liability insurance industry can alter firms' incentive

     to provide capital backing behind their policies. In the public

     utilities field, discussion has largely centered on the firm's perception

     of the tax benefits to debt in the presence of regulation. See Gordon

     (1967), Elton and Cruber (1971), Gordon and McCallum (1972) and

     Litzenberger and Sosin (1979).

6.   That is, Kt_1 =Dt_1 + Et...1, where Et_1 and Dt_i are stated at book value

     (or original cost of the capital stock). For simplicity, such factors as
     depreciation and inflation will be ignored here, so there is no

     divergence between book value and reproduction cost.

7.   Uncertainty may enter in a variety of ways. Demand may be uncertain at

     the time the firm chooses Its capital stock ,   for   example, in which case

     the amount of the variable input necessary to meet demand is uncertain as

     of t—l. Alternatively, the firm may have to set its capital stock before

     fuel costs or wage rates prevailing at time t are known. The exact source

     of the uncertainty Is not crucial to the analysis. It is important only

     that the firm's stream of operating cash flows is uncertain.

8.   The value—maximization assumption does mask an important underlying

     assumption. Conflicts of interest between both the firm's managers and

     its securityholders and between bondholders and shareholders are assumed

     to have been resolved. Although such conflicts may play a role In

     utility financing and investment decisions, this assumption allows the

     analysis to focus on conflicts between the firm, taken as a whole, and

     consumers and regulators.

9.   The form of (3) is intended to be general, although a specific example

     may render it more familiar. In the Modigliani—Miller (1963), tax—

     adjusted valuation framework, for instance, if expected operating cash

     flows are constant at the level C from t = 1 to         ,   debt outstanding
     is constant at D   ,   and   p is the appropriate discount rate for Cwe

     would have



          V= p +TD.

     Other, perhaps more complex, valuation expressions would also, however,

     be consistent with (3).
 10. Jarrell (1978) presents a formal model in which regulators maximize

      political support. An analogous model could be formulated here in which

      the regulators minimize political disfavor, as indexed by the lobbying

      pressures from firms and consumers.

11. An example of such behavior is provided by the Averch—Johnson (1962)

      model. Although the Averch—Johnson model assumes that the firm sets its

      own   price,   subject to a rate—of—return constraint, that model can

      nevertheless be interpreted as one ih which the firm biases its

      investment decision in order to influence output price as set by the

      regulators. See Baron and Taggart (1980) for a discussion of this

      interpretation.

12. Joskow (1974), for instance, asserts that consumers will offer little

      opposition to utility profits as long as the price of service is not

      rising in nominal terms.

13. The framework of Section l.A. could be used to analyze other utility

      decisions also, but attention will be focused here on the financing

      decision.

14. Time subscripts have been omitted from C, R, i and l and these

      variables should thus be interpreted as vectors. C, for example, is the

      vector of cash flows from t = 0 to t =

15.   See Ross (1977) for a discussion of such signalling considerations.

16. See Jensen and Meckling (1976) for a discussion of these agency costs. A

      good case in point is the underinvestment problem described by Myers

      (1977).

17. See, for example, Sherman (1977).

18. Expression (6) can also be modified to include both common and preferred

      equity, E and E. If e and e are the respective allowed returns (e
     will typically be taken as an imbedded cost), (6) becomes



                       =
     "Q—    Ot)(l—T)       i(l—T)D +    + eEt.


     If    > i(l—T), then, output price can also be increased by substituting

     preferred stock for debt.

19. A model of this type of price—influence effect is analyzed in Taggart (1981).

20. The firm's financing decisions may also indirectly affect the
     first—order condition for the firm's own lobbying efforts.

     For example, lobbying efforts by the firm may be less productive at the

     margin the closer Is the output price to the monopoly level. A

     successful effort to raise price through financing decisions, then, may

     decrease the marginal productivity of lobbying efforts.

21. In a related line of reasoning, Litzenberger and SosIn (1979) argue that

     regulators themselves induce utilities to issue more debt than they

     otherwise might. This increases the tax saving from debt, which can be

     passed on to consumers in the form of lower prices, but also imposes

     additional financial distress costs on society. There are no offsetting

     societal benefits, moreover, since the additional tax saving by the firm

     in effect helps to subsidize local consumers at the expense of taxpayers

    generally.

22. The amount of debt that is optimal may depend on the stability of the

    cash flow stream, for example, If the probability of incurring financial

    distress costs is an important consideration. Alternatively, as DeAngelo

    and Nasulis (1980) have argued, unstable cash flows may increase the

    chance that some of the firm's tax shields will not be fully used and

    this will reduce the value of the tax saving from debt.

23. The underlying data for Figure 1 were taken from two sources. From 1902
        to 1937, data on privately—owned electric utilities were published every

        five years by the U.S. Bureau of the Census in Census of Electrical

        Industries, Central Electric Light and Power Stations. In 1937 the

        Federal Power Commission (now the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission)

        began publishing the annual Statistics of Privately Owned Electric

       Utilities in the United States. The comparison figures for all US.

        Corporations in Figure 2 are from the Internal Revenue Service's

       Statistics of Income. All data are measured at book value. For some

       purposes, market value measures would be superior, but these are not

       readily available for the utility industry as a whole. Comparisons of

       financing ratios measured at estimated market value with those measured

       at book value for U.S. Corporations as a whole are made in Taggart

       (1981b). These comparisons suggest that, although there is more

       variation in the market value series, the two series exhibit broadly

   -
       similar   trends, particularly in the post—World War II period.

24. Between 1901 and 1912, for example, long—term debt issues accounted for

       23 pecent of total corporate sources of funds. During the period 1913—

       22, however, this proportion fell to 12 percent. See Goldsmith (1958).

25. A good capsule review of the early history of electric utility regulation

       may be found in Jarrell (1978). See also Glaeser (1927) and Troxel

       (1947) for further details.

26. Similar specifications, in which firms adjust their sources of funds to

       target levels have generally proved useful in describing financial

       behavior. See Taggart (1977), for example.

27. Following the convention of Stigler and Friedland (1962), it is assumed

       that effective commission regulation began three years after the

       commission was established by law In that state. Dates on which the
     various state commissions were established are available in Stigler and

     Friedland.

28. See Jarrell (1979) for evidence that reported capitalizations of

     utilities in regulated states exceeded levels that could be attributed to

     their real capital stocks. See also Thompson (1932) for a somewhat more

     lurid rendition of the same theme. The consolidation occurring in the

     industry during this period provides one possible explanation for these

     overcapitalizations. One utility may have bought out another at a price

     reflecting a substantial "goodwill" value and then capitalized this

     goodwill in the form of securities issues. It might then hope to realize

     the goodwill over time by asking the commission for high enough prices to

     service the securities.

29. Firms themselves, of course, can also follow adaptive strategies to try

     to ward off pressure from consumers. It became quite common in the

     1920's, for example, for utilities to try to sell special classes of

     preferred stock directly to their customers. Apart from economizing on

     issue costs, one of the motivations for this practice was presumably to

    minimize consumer pressure for rate reductions by giving them an

     ownership stake in the firm. See Clemens (1950), Chapter 5.

30. See Troxel (1947), Chapter 7, and Glaeser (1957), Chapter 7.

31. See Glaeser (1957), Chapter 7.

32. Troxel (1947), p. 160. The Securities and Exchange Commission also began

    exercising similar controls over utility holding companies under the

    Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935.

33. Although Jensen and Meckling (1976) suggest that these measures economize

    on monitoring activities that would otherwise be undertaken by
     bondholders, then, their real purpose may be to protect consumers from

     price—influence financing strategies by the utilities.

34. These changes in the economic environment and their Influence on the

     financing behavior of corporations generally, are discussed in Gordon and

     MalkIel (1981).

35. See Nichols and Welch(1964). Articles also appeared during this period

     exhorting regulators to worry less about excessive debt, as they had done

     in reaction to the previous periods, and pay more attention to the cost—

     saving benefits of debt. See Cook and Cohn (1959).

36. This Interpretation has been stressed by Gordon (1967), Robichek (1978)

     and Litzenberger and Sosin (1979).

37. See Joskow (1974), Table 4.

38. See Navarro (1981) for details of this ranking scheme. The classification

     is not exhaustive, as some states are not listed in any of the three

     categories.

39. In contrast to the estimation in Section II.B., preferred stock is not

     included as debt here.

40. It has been suggested that some utilities were prevented from issuing as

     much debt as they wished during this period by coverage ratio

     restrictions In their bond indentures. Results similar to those shown in

     Table 2 are obtained if the lagged interest coverage ratio is substituted

     for the laggged debt—assets ratio.

41. A test for the significance of this change, similar to those conducted in

     Section lIB., revealed that this change was not significant.

42. The F —   ratios   for testing whether the coefficients of the regulatory

    dummy variables as a group are significant are .414, .799 and 3.99 for
     the three periods, respectively. The latter ratio indicates significance

     at the 1% level.

43. Some anecdotal evidence can also be mustered in support of this

     contention. In a 1979 rate case in North Carolina (one of the "very

     favorable" states), Duke Power argued that it did not seek any increase

     in its 13.59% allowed return on equity, but rather that it needed higher

    prices so that it could actually earn the allowed return. A public

    wItness argued that the company had increased itS equity ratio since the

    last rate case and that the allowed return to equity should, therefore,

    be adjusted downward. This argument, however, was rejected by the

    commission. See     Public   Utilities Reports (1979).

44. Laber (1980), for example, rejected the hypothesis that allowed rates of

    return were invariant to capital structure proportions. He did, however,

    cite anecdotal evidence suggesting that the hypothesis may have been

    accurate in at least some states.
                                      References



H. Averch and L.L. Johnson, "Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory
     Constraint," "American Economic Review, Vol. 52 (December 1962), pp. 1052
     — 69.

E.E. Bailey, Economic Theory of Regulatory Constraint (Lexington, Mass.:
     Lexington Books, D.C. Heath, 1973).

D.P. Baron and R.A. Taggart, "Regulatory Pricing Procedures and Economic
     Incentives" in M.A. Crew, ed. Issues in Public Utility Pricing and
     Regulation (Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, D.C. Heath, 1980).

S.A. Buser, A.H. Chen and E.J. Kane, "Federal Deposit Insurance, Regulatory
     Policy and Optimal Bank Capital," Journal of Finance, Vol. 36 (March
     1981), pp. 51—60.

E.W. Clemens, Economics and Public Utilities (New York: Appleton—Century—
     Crofts, Inc., 1950).

D.C. Cook and H.B. Cohn, "Capital Structures of Electric Utilities Under the
     Public Utility Holding Company Act," Virginia Law Review, Vol. 45
     (October 1959), pp. 981—1006.

H. DeAngelo and R.W. Masulis, "Optimal Capital Structure Under Corporate and
     Personal Taxation," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 8 (March 1980),
     pp. 3—29.

E.J. Elton and M. Gruber, "Valuation and the Cost of Capital for Regulated
     Industries," Journal of Finance, Vol. 26 (June 1971), pp. 661—70.

Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (formerly Federal Power Commission)
     Statistics of Privately Owned Electric Utilities in the United States
     (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, annual).

M.G. Glaeser, Outlines of Public Utility Economics (New York: Macmillan,
     1927).

____________   Public   Utilities in American Capitalism (New York: Macmillan,
     1957).

R.W. Goldsmith, Financial Intermediaries in the American Economy Since 1900
     (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1958).

N.J. Gordon, "Some Estimates of the Cost of Capital to the Electric Utility
     Industry, 1954—57: A Comment," American Economic Review, Vol. 57
     (December 1967), pp. 1267—77.

            and J. NcCallum, "Valuation and the Cost of Capital for Regulated
     Industries": Comment, Journal of Finance, Vol.27 (December 1972),
     pp. 1141—46.
R.H. Gordon and B.G. Malkiel, "Taxation and Corporate Finance," in H. J.
     Aaron and J.A. Pechman, eds. How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior
     (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1981).

G.A. Jarrell, The Demand for State Regulation of the Electric Utility
     Industry, Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 21 (October 1978),
     pp. 269—95.

__________,"Pro—Producer Regulation and Accounting for Assets: the Case of
     Electric Utilities," Journal of Accounting and Economics. Vol. 1 (August
      1979), pp. 93—116.

M.C. Jensen and W.H. Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
     Agency Costs and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics,
     Vol. 3 (October 1976), pp. 3056O.

P.L. Joskow, "Cartels, Competition and Regulation in the Property—Liability
     Insurance Industry,"Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 4 (Autumn 1973), pp.
     375—427.

            "Inflation and Environmental Concern: Structural Change in the
     Process of Public Utility Price Regulation," Journal of Law and
     Economics, Vol. 17 (October 1974), pp. 291—327.

G. Laber, 'Capital Structure Decisions of Regulated Firms," unpublished paper,
     University of Vermont, September 1980.

R.H. Litzenberger and H.B. Sosin, "A comparison of Capital Structure
     Decisions of Regulated and Non—Regulated Firms," Financial Management,
     Vol. 8 (Autumn 1979), pp. 17—21.

R.C. Merton, "An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance Loan
     Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory," Journal of
     Banking and Finance, Vol. 1 (June 1977), pp. 3—11.

F. Modigliani and M.H. Miller, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and
     the Theory of Investment," American Economic Review, Vol. 48 (June 1958),
     pp. 261—97.

___________ "Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of Capital—A Correction"
      American Economic Review, Vol. 53 (June 1963), pp. 433—43.

S.C. Myers, "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing," Journal of Financial
     Economics, Vol. 5 (November 1977), pp. 147—75.

P. Navarro, "Electric Utility Regulation and Natknal Energy Policy,"
     Regulation, Vol. 5 (January/February 1981), pp. 20—27.

E. Nichols and F.X. Welch Ruling Principles of Utility Regulation, Rate of
     Return Supplement A (Washington, D.C.: Public Utilities Reports, Inc.,
     1964).

B.M. Owen and R. Braeutigam, The Regulation Game: Strategic Use of the
     Administrative Process (Cambridge, Mass: Ballinger, 1978).
Public Utilities Reports, 4th Series, Vol. 26 (Washington, D.C.: Public
     Utilities Reports, Inc., 1979).

A.A. Robichek, "Regulation and Modern Finance Theory," Journal of Finance,
     Vol. 33 (June 1978), PP. 693—705.

S.A. Ross, "The Determination of Financial Structure: The Incentive —
     Signalling Approach," Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 8 (Spring 1977),
     pp. 23—40.

K.E. Scott and T. Mayer, "Risk and Regulation in Banking: Some Proposals for
     Deposit Insurance Ref orin," Stanford Law Review, Vol. 23 (May 1971), pp.
     8 57—902.

R. Sherman, "Financial Aspects of Rate—of--Return Regulation," Southern
     Economic Journal, Vol. 44 (October 1977), pp. 240—248.

G.J. Stigler and C. Friedland, "What Can Regulators Regulate? The Case of
     Electricity," Journal of Law and Economics, Vol.5 (October 1962),
     pp. 1—16.

R.A. Taggart, "A Model of Corporate Financing Decisions," Journal of Finance,
     Vol. 32 (December 1977), Pp. 1467—84.

___________ "Rate—of—Return Regulation and Utility Capital Structure
      Decisions," Journal of Finance, Vol. 36 (May 1981), pp. 383—93.

            "Secular Patterns in Corporate Finance," NBER Working Paper
     No. 810, Cambridge, Mass., December 1981.

C.D. Thompson, Confessions of the Power Trust (New York: E.P. Dutton    &
     Company, 1932).

E. Troxel, Economics of Public Utilities (New York: Rinehart & Company, 1947).

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Electrical Industries, Central Electric
     Light and Power Statlons(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
     Office, 1912, 1917, 1922).

U.S. Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
     Government Printing Office, annual).

M.L. Weidenbaum, Financing the Electric Utility Industry (St. Louis: Center
     for the Study of American Business, Washington University, 1975).
