                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MACROECONOMICS OF STAGFLATION UNDER
                     FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES



                        Pentti J. K. Kouri



                      Working Paper No. 868




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           March 1982




New York University, Helsinki University and the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Paper presented at the 9lth Annual Meeting of'
the American Economic Association, Washington, D.C., session on
"Recent Developments in Macroeconomic Theory: Implications for
Government's Role," Monday, December 28, 1981. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #868
                                                         March 1982.




                           Macroeconomics of Stagflation Under
                                 Flexible Exchange Rates




                                          ABSTRACT




     The concerns of    macroeconomic policy in the industrial     countries in

recent   years have shifted the focus of open—economy ncroeconomics to new
and interesting problems. Although no synthesis, or a fully coherent theory
of policy,   has yet   emerged from   this research, the results have already led
to major revisions in views about the nature of the problems that policy has

to deal with.

     This paper provides a selective survey and discussion of son of the

results of recent research with errhasis on their inplications for policy.



                                              Pentti J. K. Kouri
                                              Department of Economics
                                              269 Mercer Street
                                              Second Floor
                                              NewYork University
                                              New York, N.Y. 10003
                       Macroeconomics of Stagflation Under

                             Flexible Exchange Rates



                               Pentti J,K. Kouri



 Introduction


         The concerns of macroeconomic policy in the industrial countries in

 recent years have shifted the focus of open economy macroeconomics to new

 and interesting problems. Although no synthesis, or a fully coherent theory

 of policy., has yet emerged from this research, the results have already

 Ie to major revisions in views about the nature of the problems that policy

 has to deal with,

         This paper provides a selective survey and discussion of some of the

results of recent research with emphasis on their implications for policy.




MoaomicInterdeedeflceafla MonetarLPolic under F1exixchane
Rates


        One of the main arguntents of the early advocates of flexible
                                                                      exchange
rates was that the flexible rate system would insulate the domestic
                                                                        economy
from fluctuations in the world economy while it would free monetary policy

to be used for domestic stabilization. Furthermore, it appeared that there

would be no need for policy co-ordination under flexible
                                                             exchange rates since
national policies would have only national effects,

        This implication is obviously at variance with the experience of the
                                                                                               2




 past   eight years, and recent theoretical research has developed new models

 with many channels through which external disturbances are transmitted des-

 pite the flexibility of exchange rates.

         It is helpful to discuss first the case when there are no capital

movements between countries, so that under flexible exchange rates the cur-

rent account must be equal to zero. The standard "textbook" model suggested

that with zero trade balance there is no transmission, except for the Laursen-

Metzler effect which works in the opposite direction, implying that a reces-

sion abroad has an expansionary effect on domestic demand and output. The

"textbook" model assumes that exports and home goods are perfect substitutes

so that any decline in exports can             be   absorbed by domestic demand without

friction. The model assumes further that domestic and                        foreign   prices are

fixed   and unaffected by exchange rate changes.
        As McKinnon has suggested, the "textbook" model implicitly assumes

a world in which countries are relatively independent of one another so that

exchange rate changes do not have much effect on the domestic economy.


        Modern open economy macroeconomics assumes in contrast that changes

in export and import prices have significant effects on the domestic economy.

In the extreme, the monetarist model assumes that all countries are "small

countries" and produce only traded goods.

        Several recent papers, including those of Bruno, Sachs, Branson, and

Rotemberg, replace the Keynesian assumption of nominal wage stickiness with

an assumption of real wage stickiness, which seems to be a more appropriate

characterization of wage behavior in the European countries.1

        This change in assumptions introduces a new channel through which fluc—
                                                                            3




 tuations in world demand are transmitted to the domestic economy, A

decline   in export demand, for example, causes a deterioration in the terms

of trade,     an   increase in the product wage in terms of domestic output, and

therefore leads to a decline in domestic output and employment.

        Monetary policy has no real effects in this model: it only affects

the exchange rate and the price level, The effect of fiscal policy on

output depends on its effect on the terms of trade. If fiscal policy takes

the form of an increase in government expenditure, it will have an expan-

sionary effect on output if the government's marginal propensity to spend

on imports is less than that of the private sector. In such a case fiscal

expansion at home will have a negative effect on foreign output if the for-

eign country also suffers from real wage rigidity.

        A model of two countries, one with real wage rigidity (Europe), and

the   other   with nominal wage rigidity (america), brings out an interesting

asymmetry: monetary policy of the first country has no real effects in

either country, while monetary policy of the second country has real effects

in both countries. This asymmetry has been suggested as an explanation of

the U.S,-Europe policy debate in the 1977—78 period.

       One implausible implication of the model with a rigid real wage is

that price stability can be achieved by means of monetary policy without

real effects. One way to modify the model in such a way as to introduce

some inertia of inflation is to recognize that there is a time delay in the

adjustment of wages to prices. The model of Modigliani and Padoa-Schioppa

of   "100% indexation"    demonstrates that a delay in wage adjustment gives rise
                                                                       4




to a Phillips curve with the rate of inflation depending on the deviation

of output from its full employment level and the deviation of the target

real wage rate from its "warranted" level consistent with full employment.2

With this modification, price stability cannot be achieved without output

effects. A once and for all decline in the money supply will have only a

transitory effect on output and employment as wages take time to adjust to

declining prices. A sustained reduction in the rate of monetary expansion

will, however, permanently increase the rate of unemployment. This feature

of the model arises because it implies a Phillips curve that is not vertical

even in the long run. Allowing for anticipatory adjustment of the "base

wage" to expected future inflation will, however, make the long-run Phillips

curve vertical.

      This simple model of the open economy is helpful in understanding the

transmission of both inflation and unemployment under flexible rates, and

also accounts for the problems of domestic monetary stabilization. The

initiating impulse might be a decline in export demand, causing a depre-

ciation of the domestic currency. If the central bank holds the money sup-

ply unchanged, new equilibrium will be reached with a higher price level and

higher unemployment. This unemployment cannot, however, be eliminated by

means of more expansionary monetary policy except transitorily. Restoration

of full employment requires that workers accept the decline in their real

compensation necessitated by the terms of trade deterioration. An attempt

by the central bank to support output and employment by monetary accommo-

dation will only succeed in generating a "vicious circle" of inflation and
                                                                            5




 currency depreciation. This simple paradigm goes some way towards ex

plaining the stagflation problem of many of the European countries in

the period after 1974.

        The model also explains the dilemma of price stabilization in an

initial situation of high inflation. With delayed wage indexation, price

stabilization implies a squeeze on profits in the adjustment period when

wages are still catching up with past price increases. Brazil and Italy

are two examples of countries where this problem stands in the way of dis-

inflation. The United Kingdom experience since 1979 is another illustration

of the depressing effect of monetary stabilization on profitability when wages

are insensitive to unemployment.

        As a practical matter, the kind of model outlined above can be easily

fitted into an "eclectic" Phillips curve model a la Gordon or Perry. In the

Phillips curve framework the difference between "real wage rigidity" and

"nominal wage rigidity" appears as a difference between "wage—price inflation"

on   the one hand and "wage—wage    inflation" on the other.

       Empirical   evidence   appears to be broadly consistent with the view that

the wage—price model is more appropriate in describing the dynamics of in-

flation in the European countries, whereas the wage-wage model is more ap-

propriate in the u.s case.

       Most of recent theoretical work has emphasized capital mobility and the

nature of the foreign exchange market as an "efficient speculative" market.

The early Mundell—Fleming model seemed to suggest that despite "perfect"

capital mobility flexible rates insulate the domestic economy from external
                                                                       6




shocks while monetary policy regains control of nominal GNP. Paradoxically,

the model suggested that contractionary monetary policy abroad is expansionary

at home: the expansionary effect of depreciation more than offsets the con—

tractionary effect of a higher interest rate.

      Exchange rate expectations, the effect of exchange rate changes on

domestic prices and wages, and the J—curve effect, change the implications

of the textbook model. Thus consider the effects of restrictive monetary

policy abroad on the domestic economy. A reduction in the rate of growth of

the foreign money supply leads to a reduction in foreign inflation only over

time. In the meantime, foreign real interest rates rise and foreign output

declines. Suppose that the domestic central bank holds thedomestic money

supply unchanged. Then, there will be a depreciation of the domestic currency,

some increase of the domestic interest rate, and acceleration of domestic wage-

price inflation, and a decline in domestic output. The decline in domestic

output comes about because of shifts in both the aggregate demand and in the

aggregate supply schedule. The depreciation of the domestic currency is likely

to be quite sharp because of the "overshooting" of the exchange rate to mon-

etary shocks.4

      Thus, far from implying "monetary independence", flexible exchange rates

make the domestic economy even more sensitive to monetary policies abroad, a

dependence that the 1980/81 experience with an appreciating dollar clearly il-

lustrates.

     A further implication worth noting is the dilemma of monetarist stabi-

lization policies under flexible rates. If a reduction in the rate of mon-

etary growth succeeds in reducing the rate of inflation, and therefore the
                                                                           7




 nominal interest rate, there will be an increase in the demand for money.

 If the central bank does not accoimnodate the decline in velocity, a deflation

 of the domestic price level is required before long—run equilibrium can be

 achieved. If exchange rate expectations are rational, then an expectation

 of such price level correction is reflected immediately as an overvaluation

 of the domestic currency. Dorribusch, in particular, has drawn attention to

 the "velocity problem", and the problem of "real appreciation."5

       With some time lag, "rational expectations macroeconomics" is finding

 its way to open economy macroeconomics. As is the case with closed economy

 models the problem is one of incorporating rational expectations and price

 flexibility in a way that still leaves some room for anticipated monetary

policies to have persistent real effects. Dornbusch and Calvo, amongst

others, have explored the implications of inflation inertia caused by stag-

gered wage contracts.6 Their results suggest that monetary and exchange

rate policies do have systematic real effects, and can be used to stabilize

output but only at the cost of destabilizing the price level.




Adjustment to Relative Price Changes



      Much of the recent theoretical research has been concerned with the

modelling of the "oil price shock" both for an oil importing country and

an oil exporting country.


      An increase in the real cost of oil imports is like a transfer payment that

domestic residents have to pay to the .oil exporting countries. In a Keynesian model
                                                                        8




with a fixed nominal wage rate, such a transfer reduces domestic demand and

leads to a decline in domestic output and employment if the exchange rate is

fixed. At the same time there is an increase in the price of domestic output

because of the increased cost of oil. Thus macroeconomic policy faces a

dilemma between the conflicting objectives of external balance, full employ-

ment and price stability.

      One adjustment alternative is to let the domestic currency depreciate

sufficiently so as to restore balance of payments equilibrium at full employ-

ment at the cost of a greater increase in the domestic price level.

      Such an adjustment alternative has two problems. One is that it cannot

be available to all oil importing countries because as a group they must ac-

cept a deficit equal to the surplus of the oil exporting countries. The other

problem is that devaluation will not work unless it succeeds in reducing the

real wage rate.

      In a pioneering paper Brurio and Sachs develop a model of the "oil price

shock" in which the real wage rate is rigid.7 In such a model an increase in

the real cost of oil imports leads to classical unemployment because it re-

duces the marginal product of domestic labor. There may also be a secondary

burden if the price of domestic exports has to decline relative to exports

of other oil importing countries so as to restore equilibrium in the balance

of payments. With real wage rigidity monetary policy can do nothing to al-

leviate the unemployment caused by the oil price increase.

      The contrast between the Keynesian model and the Bruno—Sachs model is

yet another illustration of how recent research has led to a different inter—
                                                                          9




pretation of the nature of the policy problem, with emphasis shifting from

 the demand side to the supply side.

      A number of recent papers have been concerned with the problems of in-

dustrial countries, with a large energy sector, such as the Netherlands,

Norway, and the United Kingdom.8 For such countries an increase in the relative

price of oil causes structural problems because it leads to a "real appre-

ciation" of the domestic currency. Thus if the exchange rate is flexible the

increase in "oil revenue",,, perhaps combined with an inflow of capital to the

energy sector, causes the domestic currency to appreciate. As a result, the

competitiveness of the "traditional" export and import competing sectors is

eroded, leading to a decline of output and employment in those sectors.

      Also in this case "Keynesian" macroeconomic policy cannot solve the

problem, for what is required is a reallocation of resources between dif-

ferent sectors of the economy, and'the problem of policy is how to guide

this process of resource reallocation.


      A similar problem arises with increased import competition that all

"old industrial countries" are experiencing from Japan and from the low—

cost newly industrialized countries in many of their traditionally strong

industries. A decline in the relative price of imported textiles, for

example, will require a reallocation of labor and capital away from the

textile industry to other industries that are better able to compete in

world markets. Because such reallocation takes time, and because the af-

fected industries tend to be labor intensive, import competition does pre-

sent a serious unemployment problem which cannot, however, be solved by macro-

economic policy. Instead, what is required are policies that support the
                                    9      -
process of structural adjustment.
                                                                        10




 Profitability and Growth

      A common denominator in much of the recent research is the emphasis on

 real wage rigidity. The increase in the real cost of energy, and increased

 import competition are changes that have reduced the equilibrium real wage

 rate in the industrial countries. Because actual real wages have not adjusted

 downwards, particularly in the European countries, classical employment has

 resulted.

     If this istbe problem there is another issue that arises. In a situation

of classical unemployment firms are not constrained by aggregate demand

and therefore the accelerator mechanism is not relevant in explaining

investment behaviour. Instead investment nOW depends on the rate of profit,

which in turn is a decreasing function of the real wage rate, and on the

cost of capital. Thus an increase of the real wage rate above its equilibrium

level leads not only to an once—and—for—all increase in the rate of unemploy-

ment, but it also leads to a decline in the rate of capital accumulation and in the

rate of growth0 If the real wage rate adjusts only slowly in response to

unemployment following a disturbance, there will be a long period of slow

growth and high unemployment. Restoration of growth at full employment in

this situation requires policies that encourage saving and capital formation,

promote technclogical progress and productivity growth, as well as 'incomes

policies' that help to reconcile wage claims with productivity.


Fiscal Policy

     The emphasis of recent work on real wage rigidity and on classical rather

than Keynesian unemployment has also led to revisions in views about fiscal

policy.
                                                                   11




     In a situation of classical unemployment an inease in government

demand for privately produced goods and services has no effect on total

output and employment, except in the case when it leads to an improvement

in the terms of trade, or discussed above. Instead there will be a crowding

out of private expenditure and/or an increase in the current account deficit.

The effect on the current account depends on whether the increase in govern—

ment expenditure is tax financed or deficit financed, and on the extent to

which future tax liabilities implied by deficit financing are discounted by

the private sector.

     In order for fiscal policy to increase employment it either has to take

the form of direct public employment or subsidization of private employment.

Even then there will be at least a partial crowding out of private employment.

If workers do not suffer from'tax illusion' an employment program financed

by wage taxes will lead to a reduction in private employment as workers shift

the tax burden to protect their after tax real wage. If, on the other hand,

an employment program is financed by corporate and capital income taxes, there

will be an adverse effect on private investment and future employment.

     As Soderstrom and Viotti have emphasized full employment policy is likely

to lead to an endogeneous growth of the public sector when the labour market

is characterized by classical unemployment.11

     A final point worth noting is that an increase in classical unemployment

may contribute to inflation by leading to a structural deficit in the budget,

which is then financed by money creation. For many developing countries in

particular but also for some of the European countries this mechanism explains

the emergence of high and chronic inflation in the 1970's.
                                                              12




Conclusion

     The emphasis of recent research on the supply side does not imply that

aggregate demand policy does not matter, nor does it rule out aggregate demand

fluctuations as a cause of fluctutations in output and employment. But the

simple fact is that the growth of nominal demand from 1970 to 1980 was enormous

in comparison with the growth of nominal demand in the previous two decades

in all industrial countries. Most of this increase in nominal demand went

into prices while growth of output declined dramatically and unemployment

became a major global problem for the first time after the Great Depression.

It must be the case that supply side factors have contributed to the decline

in output growth and to the emergence of worldwide unemployment.

     The research work discussed in this paper does not suggest easy solutions

to the macroeconomic malaise of the industrial countries. It does suggest,

however, that restoration of growth at full employment requires policies that

support adjustments in the labour market, and the reallocation of resources

between contracting and expanding industries, and encourage saving and private

capital formation. Most importantly, the research also emphasizes the inter-

dependence between countries in an increasingly tightly integrated global

economy, and the importance of co—ordination of macroeconomic and trade

policies to reduce the costs of transition to lower inflation and the costs

of adjustments necessitated by the energy price increase and by changes in

the international division of labour.
                                       Footnotes



 1.   Bruno and Sachs    (1981), Branson and Rotemberg (1980)

 2. Modigliani and Padoa Schioppa (1978)

 3. Sachs (1979)

 4. Kouri (1981)
      0
 5.   Dfrnbusch (1980)

 6. Drnbusch (1980) and Calvo (1981)

 7. Bruno and Sachs (1981), op. cit.

 8. Buiter and Purvjs (1981)

 9. Bruno (1980)

10. Kouri (1978)

11. Soderstrom and Viottj (1978)
                                   References



 1. Branson, W. H. and 3. 3. Rotexnberg, "International Adjustment with
     Wage Rigidity," European Economic Review V. 13, No. 3, Ma 198

 2. Bruno, M. "Impart Competition and Macroeconomic Adjustment Under
     Wage Price Rigidity," NBER Working Paper No. 522, July 1980

 3. Bruno, M. and 3. Sachs "Supply Versus Demand Approaches to the
     Problem of Stagtlatian," in: Macroeconomic Policies for Growth and
     Stability: A European Perspective, 3. C. B. Mohr, Tubingen, 1981

 4. Bunter, W. and D. Purvis, "Oil, Disinflation, and Expert Competitiveness:
     A Model of the "Dutch Disease", NBER Working Paper No. 592, 1981

 5. Calvo, G. "Staggered Contracts and Exchange Rate Policy" unpublished
     manuscript, 1981

 6. Dornbusch, R. Open Economy Macroeconomics, New York: Basic Books, 1981

 7. Kouri, P. 3. K. "Profitability and Growth," in a Small Open Economy," in:
     A. Lindbeck, ed., Inflation and Employment in Open Economics, North Holland,
     1979

 8. Kouri, P. 3. K. "Macroeconomic Adjustments to Interest Rate Disturbances:
     Real and Monetary Aspects," C.V. Starr Center Discussion Paper No. 81—17,
     New York University, June 1981

 9. Modigliani, F. and T. Padoa-Schioppa, The Management of an Open Economy
     with "100% Plus" Wage Indexation, Essays in International Finance, 130
     Princeton University, 1978

10. Sachs, 3. "Wages, Profits and Macroeconomic Aduustment: A Comparative
     Study," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2. 1979

11. Soderstrom, H. T. and S. Viotti "Money Wage Disturbances and the
     Endogeneity of the Public Sector in an Open Economy," in: A. Lindbeck,
     Op. cit.
