                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WELFARE ASPECTS OF GOVERNMENT
                     ISSUE OF INDEXED BONDS



                        Stanley Fischer



                     Working Paper No. 874




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           April 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper P874
                                                     April 1982




         Welfare   Aspects of Government Issue of Indexed Bonds



                                ABSTRACT



     Government issue of bonds indexed to the price level has long been

recommended by economists, to no observed effect. Recently skepticism has

been expressed about the real effects of such government action, or indeed

of any government financial intermediation. This paper examines two main

approaches that might argue for government issue of indexed bonds. The first

asks what financial intermediation can be provided by government that the

private sector cannot provide. The answer is that the government can use

its taxation powers to make possible intergenerational risk sharing that

private markets cannot. This argument suggests government issue of bonds

indexed to wage income. The second approach discusses optimal forms of

government debt issue in light of the government's ability to manipulate

the payoffs on debt which has an uncertain real return. In this context

indexed debt has the potential advantage of enforcing consistency in govern-

ment financing and actions.



                                           Professor Stanley Fischer
                                           Hoover Institution
                                           Stanford University
                                           Stanford, California 94305

                                           (415) 497—9175
                                                            Revised March 1982


          WELFARE ASPECTS OF GOVERNMENT ISSUE OF INDEXED BONDS


                             Stanley Fischer*



      Economists' discussions of the welfare aspects of government issue of

indexed bonds are of less practical than intellectual interest. Governments

in inflationary difficulties issue indexed bonds and those that can avoid it,

do not. It is nonetheless worth discussing whether economic analysis provides

any rationale for government issue of either indexed or nominal bonds, or in

general for government financial intermediation.'

      Recent analyses of government financial intermediation suggest government

issue of indexed bonds is at best irrelevant (Levhari and Liviatan, 1976, and

Wallace, 1981) and may well be harmful (Peled, 1978). In this paper I make

two main arguments. First, there is a role for government financial

intermediation to provide intergenerational risk sharing that private markets

cannot——but this does not directly suggest government issue of price—level

indexed bonds. Second, the question of why governments do not issue indexed

debt is the wrong one to ask: the more appropriate question is why governments

issue nominal debt. In this context, I argue that the presumption of stability

of the price level combined with frictions that are associated with indexed

debt, led to nominal debt as the standard form of government liability. As

the presumption of price level stability disappears, indexed debt is more

likely to be and should be issued.

      Because the paper is directed to government issue of indexed bonds, I

do not discuss private non—issue of such bonds. That question was taken up

in an earlier paper (Fischer, 1977). It would be a mistake to build too

convincing a theory explaining private non—issue of indexed bonds since price—

level indexed mortgages have now been privately introduced in the United States.2
                                     2



1.    Review

      It is well known that many of the most distinguished of past economists,

including Jevons (1875), Marshall (1925), Keynes (1927) and Fisher (1934)

advocated government issue of index bonds. Jevons, Marshall and Fisher spent

more time discussing the virtues of creation of a reliable price index than

those of issue of index bonds; they seem to have taken it for granted that

once a reliable index was available, it would be used in both private and

government transactions3—--unless the price level was stabilized through

appropriate monetary policy.

      Subsequently other economists have argued for government issue of

indexed bonds; few economists have shared the opposition of practical men

and central bankers, though skepticism has recently become more common.

      The arguments in favor are:

      (1) Indexed bonds would provide the economy with a safe real asset

it otherwise does not have, and which is needed for optimal risk sharing.

      (ii) Monetary policy could operate more accurately if indexed bonds

were introduced (Tobin, 1971). Indexed bonds are seen as a closer substitute

for physical capital than are other government liabilities. Monetary policy

should aim to control q, the market price of installed capital; such control

is more accurately achieved through changes in the quantity of indexed

rather than nominal bonds.

      (iii) Government issue of an indexed bond would (a) encourage saving

and reduce inflationary pressure, and (b) encourage portfolio holders to

shift away from money toward bonds, implying that deficits can be financed

at a lower real rate than is possible when nominal bonds are issued (Bach

and Musgrave, 1941, in the context of wartime financing).
                                      3



      (iv) ". . .by imposing upon the government a contingent liability

dependent on its failure to check inflation, the flotation of stable

purchasing power bonds would exert a wholesome pressure upon Congress to

adopt aggressive anti—inflationary policies" (Bach and Musgrave, op. cit.).

      (v) By creating inflation, the government has systematically cheated

purchasers of nominal bonds, particularly small savers. This is not desirable

and would not happen if indexed bonds were made available to the public

(Friedman, 1974, Tobin, 1971).

      In this paper I concentrate on arguments (i), (iv), and (v), briefly

commenting on the remaining points.

     The recent skepticism about government issue of an indexed bond is

based largely on a number of neutrality theorems for government finance and

financial intermediation:

     Ni (Barro, 1974) Debt financing of deficits has no different effects

      than tax financing.

     N2 (Levhari—Liviatan, 1976) Government intermediation in indexed bonds

     has no real effects.

     N3 (Wallace, 1981) Open market operations between money and bonds have

      no real effects.

      N4 (Peled, 1978) Any efficient equilibrium attainable with indexed

      bonds can also be attained without them; if indexed bonds make a

      difference they make things worse.

      An associated meta—theorem is

      N5: If indexed bonds were a good idea, the private sector would

      already have invented them.
                                     4



     Theorems Ni and N2 turn on the internalization of the governinentts

budget constraint by the private sector. Thus, for instance, when the

government in Levhari—Liviatan issues index bonds in exchange for nominal

bonds, it is simultaneously incurring a liability to pay out more in real

terms and less in nominal terms in the future. These future liabilities

will one way or another be paid off by the private sector, which therefore

is not fundamentally in any different position than it was before. This

argument assumes both types of debt were in existence before the government

undertook its intermediating activities.

      Theorems N3 and N4 depend on the interpretation of money as purely a

store of value, the role it typically plays in overlapping generations models.

When money acts only as store of value, there is little or nothing that bonds

can do that money cannot, particularly when the stock of money can be adjusted

to affect its real rate of return.

      Assumptions other than those underlying Ni through N4 have been pursued.

In particular, Helpman and Sadka (1979) derive rules for the optimal financing

of the government's budget, where the choices are among taxes, bonds, and

money. The choice between taxes and bonds is meaningful because it is

assumed individuals maximize over a finite horizon and no lump—sum taxes are

available. The choice between bonds and money is determinate because money

is viewed as providing productive services that bonds do not. This notion

is represented by putting money in the utility function. The Helpman-Sadka

framework produces results that differ from Ni, N3 and N4, though they do not

explicitly discuss N3 and N4. Because their framework is one of certainty,

they do not consider government financial intermediation.
                                     5


      In this paper I first examine the question of the government's potential

role as financial intermediary (argument (i) above), and show that the

government can indeed make a positive difference by issuing securities and

using its taxing power to produce appropriate patterns of returns. The

difference arises from the government's ability to use taxes to enforce

intergenerational risk sharing.

      I then briefly discuss using an optimal tax framework, like that of

Helpman and Sadka, to analyze optimal forms of government debt issue when

there is uncertainty. It is in this context that the Modigliani—Miller type

neutrality theorems outlined above are relevant: the framework suggests that

the government will optimally run deficits or surpluses on occasion, but it

does not provide any guidance to the type of debt that should be issued or

bought.

      To understand government issue of nominal versus indexed bonds, it is

necessary to move to arguments like point (iv) above. The paper therefore

discusses government issue of nominal and indexed debt in a context where

dynamic inconsistency of government policy is possible. I conclude with a

brief discussion of the remaining arguments reviewed above for government

issue of indexed bonds.
                                           6



2.     Government Financial Intermediation for Intergenerational Risk Sharing

       In this section I outline a simple model in which government financial

intermediation makes intergenerational risk sharing possible.4 The assumptions

are those of the Samuelson (1958) overlapping generations model. To begin

with, assume there is only one type of person, N born each period. Each

person lives two periods and has a utility function defined over consumptions

in the two periods. Random non—storable endowments are received in each

period.

       The consumer maximizes expected utility:



(1)           E[U(C, C')lI]


and receives endowments:



              W1(t) >   0,   W2(t+1) > 0



 in the two periods of life. The distributions of the endowments are

 identical over time and not serially correlated, with




 (2)                             W
              w1(t) + W2(t)



 C is the first period consumption of an individual born in period t;     C1
 is second period consumption of that individual.        is information

 available in period t.

          In the simplest environment, all individuals within each generation

 are identical in tastes and endowment. There is no reason for trade among

 members of any one generation and nothing to trade with members of other
                                           7



generations. Each generation therefore consumes its endowments. For

convenience, assume the utility function is separable and logarithmic, in

which case



(3)          E[U( )]   = in        + E in wr1


is the utility of the representative individual.

       Assume further that



(4)             =              >      ,    = E(W(t))   <
                    E(W1(t))


but   that with finite probability W1(t) takes on values



                         1
             W1(t) <--


Intragenerational      Trade

       Trade within a generation can take place if there are differences in

tastes or endowments. For instance, if endowments are identical and the

function U( )   in   (1) is the same for all individuals, but rates of time

preference differ, the more patient will lend to the less patient. Markets

in all second period contingent commodities may exist, and each individual

can be thought of as maximizing subject to a wealth constraint given by

the market value of the endowment. If tastes are homothetic, and given

the same U( )   functions      and distributions of endowments, a single second

period composite asset can be created. But in general that will not be

possible.
                                     8


      If the utility functions differ in risk aversion, the less risk averse

will be willing at a price to destabilize their consumptions relative to the

pattern of endowments in the second period, enabling the more risk averse to

have a more stable pattern of consumption.

      Will this intragenerational trading produce a safe real asset? A

complete market equilibrium will call for a full menu of contingent

commodities, with agents either buying or selling the contingent commodities

in different proportions, depending on their tastes and endowments. If there

is a full set of contingent commodities, then a safe real asset can be

created, which will pay off one unit of consumption in each second period

state of nature.

      Whether such an asset will actually be created when there is a full

set of markets depends on costs of transactions. Any type of model in which

there is some type of fixed cost for dealing in an asset will lead to

repackaging of contingent commodities in forms that fit the excess demand

patterns of consumers for second period contingent commodities. For instance,

a safe real asset is most likely to be produced if there is some notion of

essential consumption, represented for example by the Stone—Geary utility

function U(C—C), C > 0, where U'(O) is infinite, and if many people have no

second period endowment at all.

      If there is not a full set of contingent commodities, then invention of

a safe bond changes the consumption possibilities of economic agents. Assuming

that transaction costs are ultimately the reason for nonexistence of particular

markets, invention ofa safe real asset would again be more likely under the

circumstances outlined at the end of the previous paragraph.
                                     9



      The role of government in a model of this type is limited, perhaps to

ensuring that contracts are carried out. There might be some difficulties

in this regard if, for instance, the second period endowments are wages, and

if human capital is not tradable. In that event the government ideally would

want to intervene to reproduce the private sector equilibrium.5

      Given the constraint of no intergenerational trade, the equilibrium

attained in models of this type with a full set of contingent markets can be

described as constrained Pareto efficient. But there may be possibilities

for intergenerational trade, along grounds made familiar by Samuelson (1958).



Optimal Intergenerational Allocations

      The possibilities for intergenerational trade depend on the pattern of

endowments. For instance, if the desired pattern of trade always involves

transfers from young to old, the introduction of money or government bonds

will bring about a better equilibrium than is possible with purely

intergenerational trade. The allocation is better in that every generation

is made better off——so long as it is assumed that the horizon is infinite.

      The assumed pattern of endowments here highlights the possibilities for

intergenerational risk smoothing. Specifically, the assumption in (2) is

that the total endowment each period is nonrandom and constant. It is only

the division of the endowment between the generations that is uncertain.

      Clearly allocations are possible in which every generation has a

nonrandom pattern of consumption over its lifetime. But direct

intergenerational trade is not possible. The introduction of money will

not itself solve the problem since sometimes the optimal arrangements will

call for transfers from old to young, which cannot be achieved with

money held by the old.
                                                 10



      Return now to the case where tastes of all agents are identical. An

optimal allocation in some sense is one in which consumption in each period

for each individual is certain, and in which the allocation between young

and old reflects time preference. For instance, if the utility functions

are logarithmic as in (3), consider the solution to the following problem:



(5)        Max V(W,y) =           in   (W-y) +    in y
           {y}


which implies



              =               t
                        = C2

(6)

           W-y =
                    w     =        t
                   -j             C1




      This allocation is optimal in the following sense: suppose individuals

are told before knowing their first period endowments what the probability

distribution of the endowments is, and what the technical possibilities for

trade are. Then they will choose this allocation.6 This optimality

criterion may be objected to on the grounds that it seems to imply prior

(to their existence) agreement by economic agents on the rules of resource

allocation.

      The issues here are deep and not simply resolved. But the criterion is

appealing because it is clear that some criterion of this type is in practice

used in establishing property rights, in the sense that it is assumed the

rights will be binding on agents as yet unborn and that notions of fairnss

are used in discussing the establishment of the rules.7 There is certainly
                                    11



no presumption in most societies that anyone is free to opt out of paying

taxes if benefits fall short of contributions, except in the limited sense

that emigration is typically permitted.

      There is need for some criterion of optimality since the allocation

implied by (6) is not ex post a Pareto improvement for all generations.

Some generation might have been lucky and had high drawings in both periods

of their lives. They would lose under the allocation (6).



Institutional Arrangements: Can the Private Sector Do It?

      How is this allocation to be achieved? There are several possibilities,

all involving the use of taxes.

      (i) The simplest in the present model is for the government to take

command of all resources and allocate them between the generations as implied

by (6).

      (ii) The endowments of the old could be confiscated in each period and

given to the young. At the same time the first old generation could be given

fiat money, as in the original consumption loans model. The old sell money

to the young in exchange for goods; the allocation is the same as (6).

      (iii) The government could act as a financial intermediary, each

period buying the rights to the second period endowment of the currently

young, and paying out to the currently old the amount that generates the

resource allocation (6). It may also be necessary to use taxes and transfers

to effect the appropriate allocation.

      The first two institutional arrangements require direct government

intervention. The question pursued now is whether the third set of

arrangements requires any government action, or whether alternatively a
                                            12



private financial intermediary could produce the allocation (6), without a

government role. The question is whether use of taxation is necessary to

achieve (6) when financial intermediation is available. If not, a private

financial intermediary could be set up that would generate zero cash flow

each period, balancing its payments with its receipts. If taxes and transfers

are needed, government action is necessary.

       To study the operation of the financial intermediary, it is convenient

to assume there is a discrete number of states of nature, indexed by j,

j =   1, ••, J.       Let p7.(t) be the price in terms of period t goods for

delivery of one unit of the consumption good in state of nature j in period

(t+1). The probability of state j occurring is q., and q. is constant over

time. Taxes in amount T.(t) are levied on the old in state of nature j in

period t, and transferred to the young. The taxes may be negative.

         The currently young maximize



                                              J
(7)            E[U( )] = Zn C1.(t) +                  q. Zn C2.(t+1)
                                                               J
                                            j=1




subject to


               J                                       J
c1.(t)    +         p2.(t)C2.(t+l) = W1.(t)       +         P2(t)(W21(t+1) —   T.(t+1)) + T.(t)
              j=1                                     J=1


                                     Y(t)
                                           13



The new notation is: C2.(t+1) is consumption by the old in state of nature j

in period (t+1); W2.(t+1) is the endowment received by the old in state of

nature j in period (t+1); W1.(t) is the endowment of the young in state of

nature i in period t. It is known that state of nature i has occurred.

       The optimization results in:



(8)         C1.(t) =          Y(t)


(9)         C2(t+1) =                   Y(t)      =   1,   J
                                p.(t)


       To attain the optimal allocation (6), it is necessary that



(10)        C1.(t) =



(11)        C2.(t—1)
                                w               i = 1,     J
                          --!


From (8) and (10),



(12)        Y(t) =   W




From (12), (9) and (11),



(13)        p2.(t) =     q.


Thus actuarially fair prices should be charged for contingent commodities.
                                             14



         Using (13), we return to (12) to obtain




              T(t) +   wi( )     +       q.(W2.(t+1) -          T.(t+1))   W



or




(14)          T(t) + w1(t)           w1 +               (t+1)



On   the right—hand side of (14), we have a term which is the expected                 value of

second    period taxation of the old. Assuming taxes                  are only state and not

time    dependent,


(14)'         T.1 + W
                    11
                       = W1 + T

where T is    the expected value of second period taxation.

         From (14)' it is clear that the optimal allocation can be achieved for

more than one value of T.            It is natural to set T to zero, in which case




 (14)"         T.      —                          i =   1,   •.., J
                           W1.



Thus the financial intermediation scheme cannot operate without use of taxes

 and transfers, though it can operate with expected taxes equal to zero.

          Given the result that contingent commodity prices are, in the optimal

 allocation, actuarially fair, we can describe the operations of the financial

 intermediary quite simply. Its resource flows are shown in Table 1. Each
                                    15




          Table 1: Resource Flows to the Financial Intermediary



               Inf lows                             Outflows

Endowments of the old                             Purchase of endowment of
                            W2(t)

                                                  current young



Purchases of index bonds    B(t)         B(t—1)   Payments to holders of

by current young                                  index bonds (currently old)



                                         T(t)     Net transfers to the young
                                    16



period it buys the second period endowments of the current young at their

expected value, as prescribed by (13). It also pays out claims owned by the

current old. These can be thought of as indexed bonds, paying the same amount

in each state of nature. Resource inflows come from the endowments of the

current old, which were purchased last period, and from sales of index bonds

to the current young. Any excess of inf low over outflow is handled by making

a distribution to the young; alternatively any excess outflow is paid for by

taxing the young.

      It is worth noting that the financial intermediation solves two

allocational difficulties. First, the intermediation makes intergenerational

risk sharing possible. Second, the government makes it possible for each

generation to choose the optimal time profile of consumption. The first

function can be performed without the second being satisfied. For instance,

suppose that both generations alive at the same time can contract before

their endowments are revealed. They will in general want to trade in

contingent commodities. But such trading will still leave further gains

from intergenerational trade, in that given the pattern of endowments

described by (4), each generation would likely want the opportunity of

saving in the first period.



Dynamics of the Financial Intermediary

      The financial intermediation scheme can be instituted in a period in

which the division of resources between the generations is about average,

and in this case will make the first period old better off and raise the

ex ante expected utility of all subsequent generations. For example, again

using the logarithmic utility function (3), consider the introduction of the
                                                     17



scheme in period t,         with   purchase by the government of the rights to

            for which it pays W2. It sells to the young an amount of bonds

B(t) implied by



(15)          Max £n (W1(t) +               —   B(t)) +    2n B(t)
             {B(t)}


or




(16)          B(t) =                   +
                          --- (W1(t)

The government's net resource flow in period t                 is

(17)          B(t) —                             —
                             = -i1•• [w1(t)          w2]



If W1(t) is equal to W1 or close to that level (see assumption (4) that

     >     W), the scheme generates a first period surplus that can be given

to the old.

         The dynamics of first period consumption are given by



(18)                  =       +                      —
                                           (W1(t)


This converges to (6). Provided W1(t) is close to W1, the scheme increases
the ex ante expected utility of all generations. However, if the scheme were

started when the first generation had very high W1(t), there would be a large

demand for bonds. The next generation would accordingly have low first period

consumption and could therefore be made worse off, in an expected utility

sense, by the introduction of the scheme.
                                    18



Choosing Among the Schemes

      At the present level of abstraction there is nothing to choose between

these schemes. Additional elements would have to be included in the model

to make the choice determinate. If there are differences in tastes, and if

the government cannot discriminate between economic agents, then the direct

allocation method (i) is less likely to be optimal. The difficulty is that

the total amount allocated to the young generation may be wrong. There will

subsequently be trading within that generation, but there is no mechanism for

them to trade with other generations. Neither of mechanisms (ii) nor (iii)

suffers from this particular difficulty.

      Choice between (ii) and (iii) requires more explicit modeling of the

effects of taxation of second period endowments (in (ii)) as compared with

purchase of the endowment (as in (iii)). If the endowments are lump sum,

as so far assumed, there is again no basis for choice. However, we might

assume that the endowments represent, for example, labor income and that

labor supply responds to wages. In that case the imposition of taxes under

scheme (ii) in general distorts the labor supply decision. But there is

similarly a severe moral hazard problem under scheme (iii) where individuals

have sold their labor income forward. In principle a contract could be drawn

up that would specify the amounts to be worked in each state of nature; with

such an agreement the optimal allocation could be attained. But if the

government cannot discriminate between workers, it is difficult to see how

such optimal agreements could ever be negotiated.

       This is to say that it is very unlikely that there is a way of

attaining the optimal allocations. There is no way the government can

bring about that allocation without either buying claims on future
                                             19



endowments (presumably human capital) or taxing. If it is not possible for

the government in effect to deal in human capital, it will have to use

taxation along with security issues to improve the allocation of resources.

It will in general be able to improve the allocation of resources by engaging

in intergenerational transactions, but because it does not have lump—sum

taxes, it cannot achieve a first best allocation.8 And because it cannot

achieve the first best solution, it will not generally be optimal to eliminate

uncertainty entirely.



Aggregate Uncertainty

       To this point it has been assumed that the aggregate endowment is

certain, although its distribution between the generations is not. Suppose

now that W(t), the aggregate endowment, is uncertain. It will still be true,

unless the endowments are perfectly positively correlated, that there will be

risk—sharing grounds for government financial intermediation.

       There are again J states of nature, j = 1, "•,            J.   The optimality

criterion for the logarithmic utility function now becomes



                                  J                        J
                   Max                  q.
(19)                                         2n
                                                  C1.(t) + k=1
                                                            n c2k(t+1)
            {C1.(t), C2k(t+1)} i=1


            subject to C1.(t) +
                                      C2.(c)      WJt),   i=   1, ••., .3,   for all t.



The optimal allocation specifies the consumption levels for both generations

in each state of nature. It is:
                                      20


                                 w
(20)        C1.(t) =         =
                       C1.

                                 w.
            c2.(t) =         =
                       C2.



Here W. is the aggregate endowment in state of nature i.

       This allocation can once again be brought about through the three

schemes, including government financial intermediation in scheme (iii),

described above. Prices and transfers are chosen to replicate the

allocation (20). These prices are no longer equal to the probabilities

of the states of nature, but in addition reflect aggregate endowment in

the state of nature. The financial intermediary will no longer buy second

period endowments for an amount equal to their expected value. Nor is it

natural any longer to think of the financial intermediary dealing in indexed

bonds, since the amount consumed in each second period state of nature will

depend on the state and no longer be state independent.

       Of course, if the intermediary chooses to provide a full menu of

contingent commodities, it is possible to buy an indexed bond in the sense

of a financial asset that provides a payoff that is constant. But with the

postulated patterns of endowments and utility functions, there is no one who

will want to consume identical amounts in each state of nature.

       If the financial intermediary wants to reduce the number of assets in

which it deals, the natural index to use is the aggregate amount of goods

available in each state, since consumption for each individual will be

proportional to the aggregate endowment in each state. This is a result of

the assumption of identical homothetic tastes.
                                    21



3.    Government Financial Intermediation and Indexed Bonds

      The analysis above establishes that there may be a role for government

financial intermediation that private markets cannot provide. It demonstrates

that meta—theorem N5 above does not establish the optimality of the status quo

in all situations.

      But the role of government as financial intermediary has to be related

to the source of the private sector's inability to provide the appropriate

bundle of assets. If the government's advantage derives from its claims on

future labor income, then it is likely optimal for the government to sell

claims on labor income in different states. Claims on the income of capital

are already tradable. The institution of social security does provide some,

though nontradable, claims on future labor income.

      The improvement that can be expected from financial intermediation of

the type described in the previous section depends on the correlation of

returns on human capital with returns on other assets. Those returns are

in fact highly correlated. Further, the wages earned by different generations

of labor alive at the same time are also strongly correlated. No great

reduction of risk for the individual should therefore be expected from optimal

risk—sharing arrangements provided by the government based on its ability to

tax future labor income.

      The case for government financial intermediation outlined above

implicitly uses as its definition of an indexed bond, a bond that pays off

the same amount of goods in each state of nature. But since there is no

money and no price level, the bonds are not indexed in the conventional

sense that the amount of money paid out to bondholders is related to the

behavior of the price level. To discuss the issue of indexed bonds in this

sense, the model has to include money and prices. I now discuss a framework

that seems ideal for analyzing government financial policy in such a context.
                                       22


4.     Optimal Government Financing and Index Bonds

       Consider a model in which individuals maximize over two period life-

times, supplying labor services, using money, and able also to save by the

accumulation of capital. The government has only distorting taxes at its

disposal. Potentially, any asset could serve as medium of exchange. But

it is technically difficult to pay interest on securities that change hands

in the day—to—day process of exchange and for that reason there is a separate

noninterest—bearing asset, money, that serves as medium of exchange. Technical

innovations in the process of exchange occur randomly. This last assumption

is an important one, for it means that there are specific risks associated

with the return to money and that money therefore will not necessarily serve

in such a model to produce exactly the same pattern of returns as real assets.

       Consumers maximize an expected utility function of the form:




(21)
             EE[C. Cr', Lt, ft±1 s]]]


where f( )   represents   the services provided by the holding of money.

L is the amount of labor supplied. Random variable         is a technological

factor representing the ability of money to perform its utility or labor-

saving services; uncertainty about future values of       generates uncertainty

about future price levels as of any given values of the remaining variables

in the economy. Inclusion of real balances in the utility function is a

method of ensuring a demand for money even if interest is earned on other

assets.
                                    23


      First, return to the optimal intergenerational risk sharing with

aggregate certainty model of Section 2, omitting government and labor

supply from (21). Suppose there is a given constant money stock. The

constant money stock does not in this context generate efficient

intergenerational risk sharing, since uncertainty about the rate of return

on money does not provide the certain one—for—one intertemporal tradeoff

that society faces between consumption of the generations.

      This price level uncertainty provides a role for government in the

model of Section 2, either as issuer of an indexed bond or to conduct

monetary policy. Monetary policy will consist of transfers to the old that

produce price level certainty. With money as a safe asset, there is no need

for indexed bonds, provided appropriate resource transfers are made between

the generations. If monetary policy cannot operate rapidly enough to

stabilize the price level, money will be an unsafe asset and there will be

room for indexed bonds. Indeed, the government might want to lend in nominal

terms to the private sector, enabling it to hedge the risks of price level

changes. At the same time the government would continue to issue the safe

or indexed bond.

      Analysis of optimal government policy in such a model requires full

specification of the optimal tax problem. A model of the above type under

certainty has already been analyzed by Helpman and Sadka (1979) who show,

under the assumption of no lump—sum taxation, that the government optimally

will sometimes want to use deficit financing. When uncertainty is introduced,

we should think of the model in terms of contingent commodities. The optimal

state—contingent taxing scheme for given patterns of government spending will

involve purchases or sales of contingent commodities.
                                   24


      Borrowing implies merely that the government collects resources today

that will be paid for by delivery of commodities in future contingencies——

which commodities will be provided through taxation, money issue, or future

borrowing. The positions that the government takes in various markets for

contingent commodities can be viewed as determining the optimal financing

of the debt. In this sense, the type of debt issued by the government

matters: if it takes another position, the real equilibrium is changed.



                         Financial Operations

      Once government positions in each market for contingent commodities

have been optimally determined, the government can engage in financial

intermediation by taking, at the equilibrium prices of contingent commodities,

positions of zero net worth across contingent markets. For instance, it can

buy contracts for future delivery of wheat and sell contracts for future

delivery of corn. If the profits or losses are merely to be handed back to

the private sector in a neutral way, then these further financial

transactions have no real effects. For the government to return the

proceeds in a neutral way, it holds constant optimally determined planned

spending, taxes, and transfers within each state of nature, aside from

those arising from its financial intermediation activities. Thus it

disposes of its wheat by selling the wheat to the market and distributing

the profits or losses——it is doing nothing except churning the market.

Such financial intermediation cannot in a complete contingent market setup

do any good.

      What is the relationship between the public finance framework of

optimal debt determination outlined above and the five neutrality theorems,

Ni through N5? Ni does not apply because individuals maximize over only
                                    25



two periods, and therefore cannot engage in intergenerational risk sharing.

To the extent that the horizon is lengthened or effectively made infinite,

more intergenerational risk sharing should be expected from within the

private sector. The case for government issue of special types of debt

would then depend on the absence of markets for human capital and the

inability of individuals from different families to arrange smoothing that

is possible through pooling of the risks of within—generation wage incomes.

      There is a sense in which neutrality theorem N2 holds.

Namely, there is under reasonable assumptions a determinate optimal pattern

of government spending, taxation, and money issue in each state of nature.

This optimal pattern implies net supplies of contingent commodities. It is

possible to superimpose on this pattern a variety of government financial

operations that have no real effects provided the underlying real activities

of the government are unaltered. But it is precisely that underlying pattern

of real activities that implies the optimal pattern of government financing.

      Neutrality theorem N3 does not hold when it is optimal to pay interest

on debt and when it is technically impossible to do so on money, as shown by

Helpman and Sadka. Theorem N4 depends on the availability of lump—sum    taxes.
N5 was discussed extensively in Section 2 of this paper.



Government Issue of Indexed Debt

      In the above framework, optimal government policy implies a particular

pattern of net supplies and demanof contingent commodities by the government.

The type of securities——that is, packages of contingent commodities—--issued by

the government will depend, as in Section 2, on the advantages the government

has over the private sector in issuing valued securities, and on the small

frictions associated with the packaging of assets. For instance, if many
                                   26


investors have very high risk aversion and no future endowments, they would

essentially want to buy only indexed bonds. Rather than require them to mix

their own indexed bonds, or leaving the job for private financial institutions,

it could be cheaper for the government to do so.

      The framework is not, however, totally compelling, except as a way of

organizing thought, for its fails to explain why governments have traditionally

been assumed to have an obligation to issue safe debt. Nor does it handle the

question of which markets in contingent commodities are in fact available at

any time Without knowing why markets are missing——and many are missing——we

cannot in some ultimate sense pronounce on the desirability of alternative

forms of government deficit finance.
                                       27



5.    Government Debt Issue: An Alternative Approach

      The general presumption that government deficits should be financed

by the issue of safe debt probably arises from the fear that the government

is big enough to manipulate the returns on any other type of debt in a way

that will be disadvantageous to the lenders. In more modern terms, the issue

is one of the dynamic inconsistency of policy (Kydland and Prescott, 1977,

Fischer, 1980). Given this view, indexed debt would be the standard form of

government liability, particularly since the government is exceptionally well

placed to affect the inflation rate.

      From this perspective, the right question to ask about government debt

is not why it is not indexed, but how it ever came to be nominal. One

argument that may have some appeal is that the government by promising to

pay off in dollars (or the currency of the country) is making the only

promise it can with certainty keep, since it prints the dollars. However,

nominal debt predates fiat currencies,9 so this cannot be the explanation.

      The predominance of nominal government debt in countries with relatively

stable inflation histories derives from frictions associated with indexed debt.

The first friction is the delay in the collection and publication of price

data, which means that indexed debt is not conveniently used in short—term

transactions. Second, as often pointed out, variations in relative prices

imply that different price indexes are appropriate for different people and

purposes'°: when inflation rates are reasonably predictable, there is no

assurance that the appropriate real value of indexed debt is more predictable

than the value of nominal debt.

      Once the economy has accustomed itself to using nominal debt and

institutions, and given the frictions associated with indexed debt, there

are costs to innovating by introducing an indexed bond, and no assurance
                                     28


that the social surplus from doing so is appropriable by the innovator.

There is no presumption, even if there were no government advantage in the

issue of indexed debt, that indexed debt would be introduced by the private

sector at precisely the right time. Indeed, given a nominal tax system,

there is a presumption that some government action is needed to get the

process under way.

      Government innovation comes when the pressures to move away from

nominal contracting become strong enough: these pressures arise in part

from the exhaustion of devices for enforcing cheap nominal financing of

deficits. They arise also from the dissatisfaction of existing lenders to

the government who have suffered from the effects of unanticipated inflation

on the real value of their assets.

      The notion that indexed debt is an incentive for more consistent

behavior by government, argued in point (iv) above by Bach and Musgrave, is

appealing, particularly given that governments typically do not appear to

behave in the ways that economists' models of optimizing governments suggest

they should. However, it is interesting briefly to explore the question of

whether governments should always honor past commitments. The existence of

a nominal debt makes it possible for the government very cheaply to impose

a capital levy (by inflating). The best of all possible worlds, if

governments acted optimally, might be one in which governments had the

option of imposing a capital levy in this way in emergencies, like wars.

Provided there is a political cost to violating past obligations, it may

be optimal to set up arrangements in which they can easily be violated.11

      Taking this logic a step further, we note the argument by Levhari—

Liviatan (1976) that the direction of the effect of past commitments on

 current actions is ambiguous. If, in an emergency, inflation is the first
                                    29



line of increased government revenue, then the existence of indexed debt

may make the government response to difficulties more rather than less

inflationary.

      Lest these speculations obscure the main message, I repeat the

argument of this section. Given the ability of the government to affect

the payoffs that it makes on debt whose return is uncertain, the general

presumption would be that governments should finance themselves with

indexed debt, as a means of encouraging consistent behavior. The

predominance of nominal debt results from frictions associated with the

use of indexed debt, and relies heavily on the presumption that price level

behavior is reasonably predictable. Once that presumption is lost,

governments will likely have to issue indexed debt in order to finance
              12
themselves.
                                       30



6.       concluding Comments

         Finally I turn to arguments (ii), (iii) and (v) for government issue

of indexed bonds. Argument (ii), that monetary policy could more accurately

affect q if there were indexed bonds, assumes that real bonds are a closer

substitute for capital than are nominal bonds. Empirically this turns out

not to be the case. It would nonetheless be useful to know what a market

real rate of interest is and how it varies through time, and for that reason

issue of an indexed bond would be of assistance to monetary and fiscal
                  13
policy makers.

         Argument (iii), that issue of indexed bonds would reduce the interest

cost borne by the Treasury for financing the debt, and also promote saving,

has been extensively investigated. If government debt issue is neutral, in

the sense of N2, then government issue of indexed bonds would have no real

 effect. If the government issue of indexed debt changes its patterns of

 taxation and money issue, then the effects on interest rates and saving

 depend on how taxes and inflation rates are changed by the introduction of

 the indexed debt. An individual with given wealth, and given future tax

 payments, will be willing to hold indexed debt at a lower real return than

 nominal debt if the remaining assets available are on balance not hedges

 against inflation. Certainly, given the adverse effects of inflation on

 equity returns, the presumption is that individuals would be willing to

 hold indexed bonds at lower real rates than nominal bonds——holding constant

 future tax payments. The effects of the issue of indexed bonds on saving

 depend on the responses of saving and labor supply to changes in the real

     interest rate, topics on which there is little empirical knowledge.14
                                    31


      Finally, consider argument (v), that government issue of indexed bonds

is desirable on distributional grounds. In the United States the adverse

distributional consequences have been associated particularly with the U.S.

savings bonds program. The ability of the government to continue obtaining

financing through these instruments indicates a lack of access, for whatever

reason, to higher yielding dominating assets, and strongly suggests that a

part of the market would be made better off by government issue of indexed

bonds, or alternatively as now proposed, floating rate notes.15

     At the theoretical level, this paper should be viewed as an exploratory

attempt to analyze the question of optimal government financial policy.

Previous analyses have tended to take the types of assets to be issued by

the government as given. There is as yet no satisfactory theory of what

types of assets governments should issue, and such a theory may require

further analysis of reasons for the absence of particular markets.

      Because the analysis is exploratory, it cannot reach any firm conclusions

on the desirability or otherwise of government issue of indexed bonds. There

is no strong welfare argument for government issue of an indexed bond, at the

abstract level of this paper. But nor is there a strong argument against such

an issue. And the analysis certainly provides little explanation or

justification for the issue of nominal bonds.
                                     32



                                  Footnotes


*Visiting Fellow, Hoover Institution and Research Associate, National Bureau

of Economic Research, on leave from M.I.T. This is a revised version of a

paper prepared for the Conference on Indexation and Economic Stability,

Funacao Getulio Vargas, Rio de Janeiro, December 16—17, 1981.   I am grateful

to my discussants Eduardo Modiano and Stephen Ross and to participants in

seminars at M.I.T., Stanford, and Berkeley for comments and suggestions, to

Jeffrey Miron for research assistance, and to the National Science Foundation

and Hoover Institution for financial support.


1. For earlier examination of the issues, see Fischer (1975), Levhari and

Liviatan (1976), and Peled (1978), as well as references cited below.


2. See the Deseret News, September 10, 1981.    I am indebted to J. Huston

McCulloch for this information.


3. Eagly (1967) suggests that Jevons and Marshall advocated use of a price

index in private rather than government transactions. However, reading of

Jevons (1884) and Marshall (1925) supports the view outlined above. Collier

 (1969) and Fisher (1934) both survey the literature.


 4. In his paper for this conference, Joseph Stiglitz (1981) independently

makes very similar arguments.


 5. For analysis of social security and taxation as methods of overcoming

 the absence of human capital markets, see the excellent paper by Nerton

 (1981). Merton also discusses the case where the government has only

 distorting taxes at its disposal and cannot produce the first best

 allocation of resources.
                                    33



6. Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980), P. 340, provide references and discussion.

See also Peled (1978), who discusses the criterion under the heading Equal

Treatment Pareto Optimality, referring to discussion by Nuench (1977).

Peled is wary of the criterion, arguing that it is not compatible with a

requirement that individuals have the right to refuse to participate in a

cooperative procedure if that is costly. He conjectures that whenever the

optimality criterion used by economists is stronger than that used by

individual agents, private equilibria are likely to be non—optimal.


7. Robert Barro, in his summary discussion at the conference, argued that

use of this criterion was incompatible with the notion that individual

utility is not affected by the utility of subsequent generations. However,

the criterion can be thought of as follows. Suppose an intergenerational

arrangement can be introduced that will make existing generations better

off. How likely are future generations to repudiate the arrangement?

Future repudiation is more likely if subsequent generations see that, at

the time it was introduced, the scheme was known to benefit one generation

at the expense of specific future generations. But if it was reasonable to

think at the time of introduction of a new set of arrangements that future

generations would be benefitted, the future generations are more likely to

uphold the scheme. It will be seen below that introduction of governtnent

financial intermediation between generations can satisfy this criterion,

benefitting the current generation and increasing the utility expected for

all future generations.


8. Bhattacharya (1981) examines a related case.
                                           34


9. Nor can it seriously be believed that government debt of any type is

totally safe, in light of possible revolutions, debt repudiation and so

forth.


10. Michael (1979) examines variations in consumption bundles and associated

price indexes in a cross—section study.


11. Keynes, Essays in Persuasion, Flarcourt Brace, 1932, is worth quoting:

                the benefits of a depreciating currency are not restricted to

            the government. .   . .Those   secular changes. .   .which in the past
            have depreciated money, assisted the new men and emancipated them

            from the dead hand; they benefited new wealth at the expense of

            old, and armed enterprise against accumulation. .        .   (p.   87)

Of course he was only half serious: he concluded that it would be better to

handle redistributive and inheritance problems directly than through

(unanticipated) inflation. (p. 92)


12.      It is difficult to see why the Treasury should not undertake an

experimental issue of indexed bonds, sold at auction. These could be

discount bonds, promising payment of a given real sum on a specific future

date. Tax treatment of the returns would have to be specified. The simplest

arrangement would be to make the returns nontaxable. Such a bond could quite

easily yield a negative real return in equilibrium.


13. This assumes that either monetary or fiscal policy decisions might

optimally react to changes in the real interest rate, a position I hold.


14. Bhattacharya (1979) examines the theoretical arguments.
                                    35



15. This argument takes the existence of the U.S. savings bonds program as

given. Ronald McKinnon suggested that the program would lose its rationale

if interest rate controls on financial intermediaries were lifted. In the

last few years the outstanding volume of savings bonds has been falling. At

the end of 1981 it was $68 billion, only about 6% of the value of total time

and savings deposits at financial intermediaries.
                                   36



                                References


Atkinson, Anthony and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), Lectures on Public Economics,

    New York, McGraw-Hill.

Bach, G. L. and R. A. Musgrave (1941), "A Stable Purchasing Power Bond,"

    American Economic Review, 31, 4 (Dec.), pp. 823—25.

Barro, Robert (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth," Journal of

    Political Economy, 84, 6 (Dec.), pp. 1095—1117.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto (1979), "Welfare and Savings Effects of Indexation,"

     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 11, 2 (May), pp. 192—201.

___________ (1981), "Aspects of Monetary and Banking Theory and Moral
     Hazard," Research Paper No. 611, Graduate School of Business, Stanford

     University.

Collier, Robert L. (1969), Purchasing—Power Bonds and Other Escalated

    Contracts, Taipei, Buffalo Book Co.

Eagly, Robert (1967), "On Government Issuance of an Indexed Bond," Public

    Finance, 22, pp. 268—284.

Fischer, Stanley (1975), "The Demand for Index Bonds," Journal of Political

    Economy, (June), pp. 509—34.

___________ (1977), "On the Non—Existence of Privately Issued Index Bonds
    in the United States Capital Market," in Inflation Theory and Anti—

    Inflation Policy, Erik Lundberg, ed., London, Macmillan.

___________ (1980), "Dynamic Inconsistency and the Benevolent Dissembling
    Government," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2, pp. 93—107.

Fisher, Irving (1934), Stable Money, New York, Adelphi.

 Friedman, Milton (1974), "Monetary Correction," in Essays on Inflation and

     Indexation, Washington, D.C., American Enterprise Institute.
                                    37



Helpman, Elhanan and Efraiin Sadka (1979), "Optimal Financing of the

    Government's Budget: Taxes, Bonds or Money?", American Economic Review,

    69, 1 (Mar.), pp. 152—160.

Jevons, W. Stanley (1875), Money & Exchange, Appleton.

__________ (1884), Investigations in Currency and Finance, Macmillan.
Keynes, J. M. (1927), Evidence to: Committee on National Debt and Taxation,

   Minutes of Evidence, London, pp. 278, 286—87.

Kydland, F. and E. C. Prescott (1977), "Rules Rather than Discretion: The

    Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy. 85(3),

    pp. 473—93.

Levhari, David and Nissan Liviatan (1976), "Government Intermediation in the

    Indexed Bonds Market," American Economic Review, 66 2 (May), pp. 186—192.

Marshall, Alfred (1925), "Remedies for Fluctuations of General Prices,"

   Memorials of Alfred Marshall, A. C. Pigou, ed., London, pp. 188—211.

Merton, Robert C. (1981), "On the Role of Social Security as a Means for

    Efficient Risk—Bearing in an Economy There Human Capital is Not

    Tradeable," NBER Working Paper No. 473.

Michael, Robert T. (1979), "Variation Across Households in the Rate of

    Inflation," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1 (Feb.), pp. 32—46.

Muench, Thomas J. (1977), "Efficiency in a Monetary Economy," Journal of

    Economic Theory, 15, pp. 325—344.

Peled, Dan (1978), "Government Issued Indexed Bonds — Do They Improve

    Matters," University of Minnesota, unpublished.

Samuelson, Paul A. (1958), "An Exact Consumption Loans Model of Interest

    With or Without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political

    Economy, 66, 6 (Dec.), pp. 467—482.
                                   38



Stiglitz, Joseph (1981), "On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public

    Financial Policy," Princeton, December, unpublished.

Tobin, James (1971), "An Essay on the Principles of Debt Management," in

    James Tobin, Essays in Economics, Vol. 1, Chicago, Markham.

Wallace, Neil (1981), "A Modigliani—Miller Theorem for Open—Market

    Operations," American Economic Review, 71, 3 (June), pp. 267—274.
