NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT! ANOTHER MINIMUM WAGE STUDY

Mary Eccies
Richard

B. Freeman

Working Paper No. 878

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

April 1982

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 1f878
April 1982

What! Another Minimum Wage Study?

ABSTRACT

The Minimum Wage Study Commission was established in 1977 to aid
Congress in investigating the effects and possible consequences of two

proposed changes in the minimum wage law: indexing the wage to inflation
and providing for a youth differential. This paper seeks to determine
to what extent the Minimum Wage Study Commission's work has been helpful
in policy debate, and compares the Commission's findings with those of

the more conservative American Enterprise Institute. The paper also examines
whether the Commission's final product was worth three years of study
and $17 million.

Our overall finding is that the Commission's report appears to

have had little or no policy impact. The research did little to expand
upon similar studies done prior to 1977, and cannot be said to be worth

three years and $17 million. However, policy—makers still regard the
report as a useful and credible examination of the effects of the mini—

mum wage on the economy.

Mary Eccies
Joint Economic

Committee

Washington, D.C.
(202)

225—1918

Professor Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 868—3915

What 1

Another

11The minirrini wage

to

Minimum Wage Study?

has been around for decades. It is always nice

have study corrtnissions, but we have commissions running out

of our ears in this government. We have had studies by private
organizations, by labor, by Government, by the Chamber of Comnerce.

I cannot see anything that this Ccrrunission is going to be able
." Former
to do that private groups or labor unions cannot

Rep. Robert Baurnann (R Md.).

Vote

on establishing the Minim'in Wage Study Coimuission:

Deiicrats

Republicans
Total

233 yes;

45 no

68 yes; 73 no
301 yes;

118 no

During Congressional consideration of amendments to the Fair Labor

Standards Act in 1977, there was considerable uncertainty and political
division over two potentially important proposed changes in the minimum

wage law: indexing the wage to inflation, and providing for a youth differential. After some debate the House voted to establish a Minimum Wage
Study Cortrnission (MWSC), which it charged with investigating a dozen topics,

including the effects of increasing the minimum on inflation, employment
and unemployment; the ability of the minimm wage to ameliorate poverty;

and the economic consequences of proposals for automatic indexing of the minimum wage and for setting a special sulininimum rate for young workers.
Over a three year period, an eight member Commission headed Initially
by Gerald Feder and through most of its life by former Rep. James O'Hara (D Mich.)
funded a large body of economic research on minimum wage issues, at a cost of
$17 million,. Altogether, the Commission's contracts involved over 90 researchers,

consultants and discussants (including one of us). There were also
several studies carried out by the Commission's own staff economists and two
surveys of emploeyrs conducted by government agencies.
On May 24, 1981, the Commission issued a 250 page report suninarizing
its findings and setting forth conclusions and policy recairnendations.

Six

additional

the year.

volumes containing research papers

were

published later in

—2—

Because the Corrinission was established by a Democratic Congress,

with Corrmissioners selected by Demjcratic cabinet officers, Republicans

consistently voiced doubts alx)ut the potential impartiality of the proposed

coincidentally, the American Enterprise Institute (AEI), a
conservative think tank, shortly thereafter initiated its own major study
of the rniniimirn wage.
study.

Not

extent has the

To what

Minimum Wage Study Cortmission' s ork been

Did the research funded by the liberal Cc—

helpful

in policy debate?

mission

yield results different fraTi

Overall,

was

the

million? What

that funded by the

conservative

AEI?

Commission' s pnxluct rth three years of study and $17

can

be learned fran the Commission experience

about

the value

of study corrinissions to those outside the research camunity?

To answer

these

questions we have reviewed the seven

volume Report

a

studies

of the Miniimxn Wage Study Coninission, and

the minimum;

Labor

and

Coninittees

have interviewed

series of other AEI

members and staff

on

of the House and Senate

which have jurisdiction over the Fair Labor

Standards Act,

and thus tend to be the nst important Congressional consumers

of

research

on the minimum wage.
The Commission research
Table 1 presents in capsule form our
the MWSC and the AEI

organized

graphic profile of minimum

Standards

of

Act;

overall

the research by

according to the following topics: daio—

wage vrkers and compliance with the Fair Labor

emplOyment effécta;

the youth sutniinimum;

surrinary of

employment effects

on youth

and

income distribution; macroeconanic effects on real

wages and inflation; nonwage job effects.
Because the Comnission did not undertake

studies

of foreign ex-

periences, the political issues involved in support of the minimum wage,
or the pathological effects of teenage unemployment

on

crime, we have

TABLE 1:

Studies: Mininnnn Wage Study Comnission

vs. American EriterpriseJnstitUte

1. Deiwxjraphic Profiles and Compliance
ninuaTi WStjy_Cormu ssion
Author

Author
Inr'titute

48% of all rninirrum wage workers are
16—24 years old, 37% are women 25 years

arid over, relatively large proportions
of minimum wage workers in groupe of:
teenagers 16—17 (62) , 18—19 (33%),
workers over 65 (39%) , vorron (185)

blacks (l8,), students (56%)

,

part—

time workers (36¼), and poverty

for Social Research

1980 survey of low—wa:je estab-

lishments finds almost half of

near—minimum wage workers under

20, the majority white though
higher proportion of nonwhite

workers in low—wage wrk than

overall, higher proportion in
South.

families (43%); only 9i of adults
20—64.

Ehrenberg & Schumann

Sellekaerts & Welch
In 1973—1930, found noncompliance con-

sistently higher in los-wage sectors, and

in the South, arcnq females, nonwhites and
teeriagers than in corn lenenary groups.
In 1979 violation survey ncn—Souths rate
exceeds South's; overtime violations nost
prevalent. In 1978 CPS sample, overtime

provisions violated at least in part 73%
of the time.

Considerable roncompIance with
overtime pay provisio:.r; overtime

pay yields greater LeIits to

middle & upper incorrv f:&milies

than to lower income 63rd lies; increases in overtime di iferential
will create modest nuzi:cr of jobs.

Arnarican Enterprise_institute
Bell
Kneisser
öof levi—wage worket are not
Using CPS, finds over 60% of all las—wage
workers are female; under 40% are teenagers, household heads; concentration

30% are in families below the poverty level, in families above the poverty level.
tendency to live in the South of Great
Plains regions.
Schumann
Ehrenberg
Fleishor
D.O.L. retail trade surveys in 1962, 1965— Same basic conclusions as Ehrenberg
66 shows over 90% compliance for U.S.,
in South, from 71% in 1962 to
lower
87% in 1966 (in eligible workers covered).

rates

and Schumann above.

2. flnploymont Effects——In General

nurn_Wage tid Corruniss ion
Madden & Cmer

Ahow&Ki llingsworth

an ad hoc nridel a 2% increase leads
to a .2 to 2.4% drop in teenage soploymont, a .2% rise to a .8% drop for adults.
Under a structural model, a 2% increase
Under

leads to a .5 to 1% drop for teenagers,

No statistically significant
results as to intarsLate dis-

tribution of sales or employment

in wholesale

& retail trade.

a negligible drop for adults.
Survey

of low—wage sector effects finds

little conclusive evidence of adverse

omplotnt effects.

Hcckman & Sedlockek
Using South Carolina worker data, a
20% minimum wage increase makes over
80% of S.C. workers worse off, either
through clisamployment or lower wages.

¶PQ*

Wessels
Minimum wage significantly increases
labor-force p.articixmt:ion 01 young adult
Iceulca arid rules over £5, significantly

decreases labor particistti.on for young
males, all with relatively email

For senu-onal eatton fans workers in

late 1960s,

63% of large drops in n—

ployrncint attrituted to extended minimum wage coverage.

elasticities.
Knu:n

Gardner

all
Significant disrmolo'rset ctfccts
localities on lowest—skill workers as they
are replared by medium—skilled, new labor
market entrants.

For

Fleishnr

rdon

retail trade in th 1960s, given a ]ahor
('05t
nf 5, ]uts
i:-3 5%;
I —o of wirin ci
imi

utorer

yrltivo to rr•:t. .1 ry

fl. trade.

farm workers, a rise of 5% in
mran hourly wage leac s to a minimum
5%

reduction in employment.

No significant effects on private
household worker eJTp)oyment.

—4—

TABbE 1 (cont.)

Fnp1oyment Effects for Youths aed Youth SuhniniJTLU

3.

MininurnWarje_SudyComrassOfl

yer & WI so
Without iiniuum wage, chplovnicnt of
non-student young men ould be up 6% at
least, av'raga youth wage lcT%'er with th€
mininiuo.

Brown

Size of effects of youth differential

on teenage and especially adult employment uncertain; proaleos vi th res—

tricted differential.
Pet terejill

o'n, irojKohen

Survey of youth eoployrrent studies

shows

reasOnaiiy consistent tirr-ser1eE results

Eiimiratirtg minimum for youths would
increase

employment eirong

youth,

indeterminate imeact en non-youth

that 10% minlicum wage increase causes a
1 to 3% reduction in inpiovccut for 16—19

low-wage workers.

FIanrmesh

Freeman, Gray, Ichnio:ski
Student submininum has led to increase

year aids, less consistency for 20—24
year aids & subgroups; their runs show a
.5 to 1.5% drop.

In private runfarm sector, a 1.0% mininuan

wage ircrease leads to a 1.2% drop overall; in student person ho'irs rked by perhigher in rranufactiring, lowei in services haps 1.7% at a cost of cerhaps 1% of
aed retail trade. In private nonfaxm sec- employment of full-time non-student
tor, a 10% minimum wage increase leads to
a 1.2% drou overall; higher a ra-inufac—

workers.

turing, lower in services ard retail trade.

Estiiratas that a 25% youth differential
u1d ircrease eaplocsnt by ahout. 3%.
Pmerican.EntpriSe Insti tote
Pagan

Cunningham

For whites, €nip]ocnt is

reduced,

part—

thee work discouraged, and school attendance reduced,

non-robust results for

Legafreinirrurn raises wages in youth

intensive sectors; some evidence that
rnaner programs have raised employ-

ment, that minimum reduces employment
for some teenage groups.

blacks.

Al-Salam, Quester & Welch

Fleishiir

)fxparision of coverage

In

of miarnuts ges

has reduced proportion employed by 0.4
ard created a gap between black and white

retTl trade, significant negative

impact on employment for young males,
inconclusive results for females.

msle teennjers of roughly 0.04 as ''eli;
cohort size is important determinant of
proportion

employed.

latti1a

For 14-19 year olds,

(fl

increase

in schcxl

significant results

enrollments, roughly

(11 to rnnitU'1e of decrease in non—
student latar force.

Cotterill
Rc'view suggests significant problems

of

exclusion of other low age groups

by differential to youth1
especially in retail & service areas.

Cetternan
Study of 13-19 year old rraios gives in—

significant results for dinnaployment,
c>:copt for significant in rota] 1 trade
($.25 increase leads to 25% drop in black

csolo'.-ront, 16% in white) ; inter—industry
shifts occur, with high—skilled teens;
employment chances improved.

4. income Distribution
phrmun,

!'L

Tadrn & Sick]c

In cn'vk u;r.o: o;ti,ons fail ir. below the

poverty lln, uorLulr dye

crlts by rare;

3onnon & Browning
Theari3 simulations, found even di s—

females a:-r'cm to do sliqhtl better than
m1]cs; varied results for O7 ago—sex

tn hLion of benefits over all inca' a
levels n.l discmplcrnrr.t effects
1c.vcrirr the benefits, cjvrsv-allv snail

eaocx)iimg

distributioril effects, within inca-a

cjrcg s.

inco'c
higher

d2h
2Y
:]u!-d ') rt?'oft: rri'c1;ttizn .t-..,'-y.'n in—

rulcjs £UO •'•'-': :r.:_, cmi
On Uo o.d.y 'viiil :,:i..i. '
. in'.ion
F,u'n
iner':,cm inLr ibn on.
dj,vjd.j'',

,

am

..

crcs-s increma 1'"- W,r,"rS.

'r,'

'.tie

1fi(x-Oi

ty increaser (00 of Icy?—

households lose ix-cau;c of

'prices, lG

of hiqh—income

holdm; cein incx'Oc)

.hous

1ticr & i.-uy

Cr'S '-st', 20% iy.rras n 'iri—

'OiJC (n.' ':e5 f31tC 101 I

1'OI''O

tn tia, v-'or 1%, block cnc.ino .2;
h.ac-—inca,e families coin o;'nolutely
r.:mn...

-.5—
Psmerican

riso

Institute

Parsons
Using MIS, found nal1 wage gains for lowwage
by cmplosent
reductions; arrount to less than $150 per

adult fenales, offset

?'Cu%1och

tiThii index,

net negative
effect on equality.

year.

5. Macroecorcnics

Aspects

Minimum Waqe Study Carroission

to l.3 of xrk force forced out of labor

Farber
10% change in minimum leads to less
than .5 % change in union wage.

Boschnn & Grossman

Cox & Gaxaca

ttOr9i1]
1% niimma wage increase leads to a .3

market; average wage rise of 1 to 2%.

Increases in minimum wv;e depress current

nployiient in some industries, no effect

on acjgregete arplo1a2nt or average wage

rate; effect of indosation urortain.

Sel.iekaerts
10% minirrrn
;aoe increase causes a rise
of 05% in unempioyent rate & .76%
.

rise

in average wages; initial impact of
indexajLi on urer thin: is tar effect bene(e.g. increased efficiency).

ficial

10% rise leads to a .15 rise in
aggregate real wage bill; an increase
in high-wage enlooient, decrease in

low-wage & overall.
Wolff & Nadiri
Raising minimum wage -as cositive

effect on output the: t ftcrie distri-

bution,
raises

rises.

negative

on cmt-h-yment, and

prices more rapidly as minimum

P.meri can Enterprise Institute
!Cu1ioch

Direct effect on inflation negligible,
even if minimum wage is indexed.
6.

t'on-Wage Job

Effects (On—the—Job Training, etc.)

Minimtrn Wage Studyççsmrnission

Lazear & Miller
NES, to obvious retardation effects of
the niiniiiuru wage on wage growth.

Using

Amer can EnEprise Institute
Fleisher

while wage rates are higher in
covered than noncovered sectors, adding
the wage advantage of working to repor ted
wages causes wages in uncovered sector
Using

NES,

to exceed those in covired sector for
students

Hashimato

Using MIS, some reduction in Onthe-job Training (OJT) (2.5%) found
for young white males; inconclusive

results for

blacks.

and non—students.

Wessels

Miniarra wages have slight negative or
neutral effccts on lalor participation,

slight-. effects on priors, and a positvo
or neutral effect on quit rates.

Leighton & Mincer
Minimum wages discourage OJT
especially at lower educations

levels; mixed results on job
turnover.

-

Source

Papers

reviewed are contained either in Volumes h—Vu of the

of f-br'_Minimum Naqe Stedv Comninsion

(MNSC), published in July,
1981; in the ?arican Enterprise Institute's (AEI) conference volume,

The Economics of alMiim (ed. Siren ottenborg, published
1981); P-'dt :iinim-ac,
by Enald Pnrnons; Miniinumtcsqe
R11ationinretailTj-H', by Eel ton Fleisher; :inimlesun_
the-,joTinr. b i ri Fhsu.ro ii r'cn'- 1rir—e Br'rrits
and

lbrkinq Con-Itt-ions, by alte- Wc'sscls; ar-I The I:a:-cLof the 1in rim
t-'aclConEcgiorul_Iaberrkebs, hy Ronald Kruor. Studios are referred
to by authar. MIS refers to the National Longitudinal Survey ("Parries

Survey") funded by the

Dcpaatment of Labor.

—6—
cznitted

the AEI studies on those subjects fran the table.

Our reading of the results of the research is that there is no
discernible liberal MWSC or conservative AEl bias to the studies: the
professional economists selected by the two groups produced results generally

consistent with each other and with previous firdings on the minimum. If
one did not know which study had been funded by which group, one could not

guess fran the results. In several cases the MWSC work yielded results
nore unfavorable to the minimum wage than the AEI work, in other cases,

the reverse is true. Persons predisposed against the minimum can read the
MWSC research studies and the staff stuimary of the research without worrying
about

distortions due to

for the minimum can

distortions

On

read

political bias by the MWSC; conversely,

persons predisposed

the AEI-sponsored research without worrying about

due to political bias

by the AEI.

the issue of the diserrplonent effects of the minimum, the

vast bulk of the research studies funded by the two groups show mDdest/

rioderate impacts consistent with the professional consensus. With respect
to the youth subiiinimuin, which tends to be favored by conservatives, the

important administrative probls while the MWSC studies
hardly be termed as negative. On the issue of inflation the conclusion

AEI study
can

noted

of

both sets of studies was that the minimum does not have sizeable impacts on

inflation. Turning to income distribution effects of the minimum, a similar
conclusion seems warranted, with both MWSC aid AEI showing only slight increases
or decreases in inequality as a result of the minimum.

Overall, we find that the MWSC and

AEI studies

fall well within

the general findings of the literature that the minimum wage has
effects on the economy
studies
rriunity.

as

only nodest

a whole. On net, neither the MWSC nor the AEl

yielded results that will

raise the eyebrows of the research can—

—7—

The Coimiission reconuriendatjons

Volume I of the Coirmission report gives the recaimendations of the

corrrnission. While the central chapters of the final report deal with the
effects on employment, inflation, and poverty, nearly a third of the dis—
cussion--and nst of the specific policy reoiimiendations—-concern relatively
narrow issues of exemptions for particular industries and enforcement
matters. Only two of the Corrumission' s recoirinendations address major policy

questions. By a vote of 6 to 1 with one present, the Corrinission rejected

the youth differential; by a vote of 5 to 2 with one not voting it advocated
automatic indexing of the minimum wage to adjust for inflation. By a vote
of 5 to 1, with one voting present, and one not voting, the Commission
voted down a proposal to permit local experimentation with a lower minimum

for youth. With respect to other policy issues, the Commission called for

restrictions in the current differential wage for full-time students;
increases in the salary test for exempting certain professionals from overtime requirents; and the repeal of a large number of narrowly-drawn exemptions to the Fair Labor Standards Act.

Both the positions and the general tone of the report express favorable
attitudes toward the minimum wage, prompting an angry dissent from one
member of the Commission. Commissioner S. Warne Robinson attacked the final

report as blatantly biased toward labor unions and "an undistinguished piece

of work" that did not adequately use the research findings. Indeed, the
latter criticism seems valid; the conclusions do indeed seem unconnected

to the research results. Rarely, if at all are specific research studies
referenced in the Commission recorrrnendations: for instance, the recorrmnendation

for restricting the current student suhminimum has ro link to the NWSC
funded research on the operation of the subtninimumn.

In short, the Carinission caine in with a final report to which one
Commissioner lodged serious objections, from which one often voted just

—8--

present, and another often did not vote, and which did not appear to rely
heavily on funded research.

Policy—makers' response to the report
The MWSC was instituted by a Dancratic Congress under a Dro—

cratic administration; in the three intervening years, the political climate
changed, putting Republicans in control of the White House and. Senate. These

changes are important in understanding the reaction to the Coiriruissioner's

report.
When the MWSC final report and reccxnriendations were released on

May 24, 1981, they did not attract nuch attention. Press coverage was
minimal, consisting of routine treatment by the wire services and a few

articles in specialized publications like the Daily Labor Report (Bureau

of National Affairs). There were no briefings on the findings for press
or Capitol Hill, presumably because of the obvious absence of political
interest in minimuii wages at the time by a Congress prccupied with the
tax and budget proposals of the Reagan Administration.

Anticipating that rrost congressional offices ould simply file the
report away until legislative action appeared irore imminent, we interviewed
tkose with the strongest reason to follow the work of the Caiimission:

rners and staff of the Senate and House Labor Corrinittees. The Corrinittee
members and staff we interviewed generally knew the report existed but were

far from equally knowledgeable about its contents. Some committee staff

had read or skimmed the material; others planned to look it over during a
slow week. Corrinittee members typically had neither read nor glanced at nor

seen a staff sirmary of the Cormuission's wrk. Rep. Millicent Fenwick

(R, N.J.) said that she hadn't heard of the Carinission or its prodit
"until this minute". In only a few of the interviews did the members indicate
much awareness of specific findings or recorrinendations.
Given the absence of the rninixrnim wage from this year 's legislative

—9—

agenda, the "back burner" treatrrent of the report by Congress does rot
preclude

greater attention to the work in the future. When sane action on

the minimum wage is anticipated, the Lalx)r Carmittees will start the

hearings process. Dccratic aides, at least, say the Corrrnission's studies
will be useful as backgrourx:1 and that individual researchers may be sought

out as withesses.
Anong those familiar with the Corrrnission Report, evaluations split

along partisan lines. Republicans found it biased--an inevitability given
the make-up of the Commission. "It just gave a recitation of organized
labor' s demands on the minimum wage," said Sen. Orrin Hatch (R, Utah),

Chairman of the Senate Labor Caumittee. Republicans also agreed with

Pobinson' s indictment that the Camiission' s conclusions igrored the research

findings. While

the report and its recorrinendations could be easily dis-

missed, some suggested the underlying studies might still be worth looking
at. Deriocrats conceded the Conmission's slant toward

defended

labor

but strongly

the professional quality of the investigation. "The research

isn' t tainted.., or even partisan," said an aide to the House Education
and Labor Ccttmittee. "Most of the academics doing the studies were rela-

tively conservative".

During the intex'iiis, staff and members tended to interpret various
Corrrnission findings according to their predispositions on the issues. Tlose
opposed to a sulininimum wage for youth, for example, considered the reported

effects on enployment small and emphasized the possibility that young workers

would be substituted for low-paid adults--a result the Commission said could

not be ruled out. Supporters of a suhnininiurn viewed the emplonent effects

as appreciable and took note of the lack o evidence on the issue of sub—

sitution. "I favor a youth suhninimurn, but if a valid study shows significant firing of adults I could change my mind," said Rep. John Erlenborn

(R, Ill.). Rep. Paul Sirron (D, Ill.), noting that an earlier study had
caused him to change positions and support a sulininimurn, said he'd be

—10—

open-minded about anything new from the ConTnission. "But we do tend to

go through these things to look for information that agrees with our po-

sitions and buttresses our
The

prejudices,"

he said.

existence of the Minirruirn Wage Study Cairiission may have in-

fluenced the policies of the Reagan Administration on the question of the

differential, at least indirectly. Surprising many Republican supporters of the suhninimum, the Administration did not take a position on
youth

the issue in the spring of 1981: Secretary of Labor Paynond J. Donovan

said that the department was waiting to see the Sti1y Cournission's report
before making reccimnendations on the suthdnimum.

It is possible, however, that the reference to the report was just
a convenient excuse. Business interest in the idea of a suthilnimurn had
begun

to wane. A fight over establishing a suthiinimum for young workers

or any other group would open the Fair Labor Standards Act to all kinds of
amendments, inclining another series of increases in the minimum wage.

In addition, some pivotal groups, like the fast-food industry, had apparently
expressed

doubts about the feasibility of a suhninimum, since it would

violate the principle of equal pay for equal work.
On the other hand, the idea had some natural appeal to a Repub-

lican Administration. It provided an "incentive" to employers witbout
costing the government any ironey. Perhaps if the Corrrnission's research had

found that

lowering

the minimum produced large numbers of new jobs for

youth, the Administration might have decided to corrinit

itself.

Evaluation

Overall, the Cormiission's report appears to have had little or no

policy impact. while in a different political climate, the recomnerxlation
for indexing the minimum wage might have been given serious Congressional

attention, the reception of the report suggests it would have been taken
as a partisan document under any circumstances.

—11—

Peturning to

our

original question, was the Corrimission's product

vrth three years of study and $17 million?

Our answer is no.

To begin with, the research did not generate anything strikingly
new in the minimum wage literature. On rrost questions, the findings corro-

borate those of similar studies done prior to 1977. If, instead of embarking on a broad research plan that duplicated a lot of existing s'xrk,
the Cc*rtission had surveyed the literature and identified the gaps and then
initiated a limited number of studies it might have perfonned a nore

useful

function. For a fraction of the cost, it could then have funded a few
projts that would clearly have added to the knowledge base. In particular, on the issue of the youth sulxniniiium, much might have been learned
from

a three year

experiment

of the measure in several cities.

Lessons on the value of study coninissions

"I'm against these studies. No one ever looks at them—not even
the reconTnendations." Rep. Fenwick (R, N.J.).
Does our

conclusion

about the Minimum Wage Study Conmission Report

imply that such corrmissions invariably have little impact on policy-makers?
Our answer and that of

viewed is

irost of the Members and staff

we

inter-

no.

As

a counterexample, several of those we interviewed

referred

to

the National Corrmission on State Workmen's Canpensation Laws (set up in

1971) as a comnission whose report had a significant impact. Chaired by
Johr Burton,

for

the Carimission was given high marks for

professionalin;

developing nodel legislation that was useful to state

wo' compen-

sation programs, and for achieving agrerent on key policy reconinendations.

"When you have unanimity, it's a sign that a study has led them (the Corn—
missioners)

dog-eared

someplace," a Senate aide explained. Another, producing

copy, said he still referred

to

when a workers' compensation issue arose.

his

the nearly ten-year-old report

—12--

Mcre generally, members and staff expressed preferences for narrowly-

focused reports with clear policy orientations. "1 like to see specific
recortinendations--not just a lot of infornation," said Rep. SilTon. Reports

that analyze the effectiveness of programs are especially useful. While
positive evaluations are obviously good airinuruition in a debate, aides explained, even negative findings can help members legislate changes in programs

that avoid the pitfalls. Aides also indicated interest in empirical work,
as long as it wasn't too technical. "We see a lot of studies by the General
Accounting Office or by various interest groups that just aren't very

solid," said one. "They're based on a few cases, and have no statistical

validity."
To

have a policy impact, in our judgment, a study oortrnission must

have:

involvement by recognized experts and balancing of idlogical
interests, to minimize doubts about the credibility of the in—
vestigation;
strong policy orientation in final reports with results based
on the research studies funded by the cormiission;
consensus, if not unanimity, in conclusions.
As our comparison of MWSC and PEI funded research on the mini-

mum wage indicates, initial conservative concerns about 'bias' in the
research funded by MWSC proved wrong. While not exciting, the MWSC research

generally produced credible estimates of the effects of the minirmxrn wage

on the econany. Lack of connection between the research findings and the
Commission recommendations, lack of unanimity in the Commission recormndations,

and the changed political climate, however, make this a case in which the
research results have had little impact on policy and, in our view, are
unlikely to have much impact on policy in the future.

