                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         TIME-SEPARABLE PREFERENCES A1D INTERTEMPORAL-
             SUBSTITUTION MODELS OF BUSINESS CYCLES



                        Robert J. Barro

                         Robert G. King


                     Working Paper No. 888




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                            May 1 982




The National Science Foundation has supported this research.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #888
                                                    May 1982




     Time-Separable Preferences and Intertemporal-Substitution Models
                            of Business Cycles

                                 Abstract


      Time—separability of utility means that past work and consumption do not
influence current and future tastes. This form of preferences does not restrict
the size of intertemporal_substitutjoi
                                       effects--notably, we can still have a
strong response of labor supply to temporary changes in wages. However, there
are important constraints on the relative responses of leisure and consumption
to changes in relative-price and in permanent income.
      When the usual aggregation is
                                    permissible, time-separability has some impor-
tant implications for equilibrium theories of the business cycle. Neglecting
investment, we.\find that changes in perceptions about the future--which might
appear currently as income effects--have no influence on current equilibrium

output. With investment included, no combination of income effects and shifts
to the perceived profitability of investment will yield positive co—movements
of output, employment, investment and consumption. Therefore,-misperceived
monetary disturbances or other sources of changed beliefs about the future
cannot be used to generate empirically
                                       recognizable business cycles.
      Some richer specifications of
                                    intertemporal production opportunities may
eventually yield more satisfactory answers. Because of the positive correlation
between cyclical movements of consumption and work, equilibrium theories with
time-separable preferences inevitably predict a procyclical behavior for the real
wage rate, arising from shifts to labor's marginal product. Empirically, we
regard the cyclical behavior of real wages as an open question. Aside from
analyzing autonomous real shocks to productivity, we suggest that such shifts
may occur as firms vary their capital utilization in
                                                     response to intertemporal
relative prices. However, we still lack some parts of a complete theory.




                                                  Robert J. Barro
                                                  Robert G. King
                                                  Dept. of Economics
                                                  University of Rochester
                                                  Rochester, NY 14627
                                                  (716) 275-3895
     Intertemporal substitution of goods and leisure is a central component

in modern equilibrium theories of the business cycle. These models seek to

explain macroeconomic phenomena under the twin disciplines of rational expec-

tations and cleared markets. In particular, when intertemporal margins of

substitution are relevant to economic agents' current market decisions,

equilibrium theories are capable of rationalizing a broad class of phenomena,

as Lucas (1977) stresses. In such models macroeconomic quantities at a point

in time reflect (i) economic agents' intertemporal preferences for goods and

leisure, (ii) intertemporal production opportunities, and (iii) expectations

held by economic agents.

     As yet, there has been little systematic research aimed at identifying

those aspects of preferences and production opportunities that are consistent

with the observed cyclical behavior of quantities and relative prices. This

paper discusses a benchmark case. Economic agents are immortal families

with time-separable preferences for goods and leisure. Production opportuni-

ties are neoclassical, with current output depending on current labor services,

previously accumulated capital, and exogenous technological conditions. Sur-

prisingly,   these two assumptions substantially restrict the types of disturbances
that can generate positive co-movements of aggregate production, employment,
investment   and consumption, which we take to be a minimal empirical description

of the dominant component of business fluctuations.

     In Section I we describe the implications of
                                                    time-separable utility
for individual demands for goods and leisure.    One set of implications

relates individual response to changes in intertempora]. relative prices
                                    -2—




to    individual response to changes in lifetime income. These restrictions

on demands for goods and leisure play a central role in our subsequent

macroeconomic analysis. Another set of results indicates that time-

separable preferences are consistent with several common assertions about

intertemporal substitution of goods and leisure. First, current labor

supply will respond more elastically to a temporary increase in the wage

rate than to a permanent increase, even if we consider income-compensated

changes. Second, compensated increases in the real interest rate will

increase current labor supply and decrease current consumption demand.

In this section we also discuss some departures from time-separable utility.

These   alternatives imply that the usual list of "state" variables for an
individual--asset stocks, etc. --must be augmented to include past leisure
and   consumption.   The history of these variables affects current "tastes"
for goods and   leisure.

       The discussion then turns to macroeconomic analysis under two alternative
specifications of technology. In Section II we assume that production oppor-
tunities   are static in the sense that goods are not storable and production

activity is   accomplished within a single period. In this setup time-separable

preferences imply that current quantities of consumption and leisure are

isolated from future events, such as prospective changes in technology.

These changes show up as wealth effects on current supply and demand. We

demonstrate that the market-equilibrating movements in rates of return fully

offset these wealth effects. This exercise is important for two reasons.

First, it emphasizes that the relevance of intertemporal substitution to the
                                  -3-




equilibrium behavior of quantities depends on substitution in both preferences

and production opportunities. In the case   of   static production opportunities,

substantial intertemporal substitutability of goods and leisure is compatible

with negligible equilibrium variation in quantities. Second, more specifi-

cally, the results of this section have strong implications for theories of

the business cycle constructed along the lines of Barro (1976). These models

stress that monetary disturbances have real effects because a representative

agent over- orunder-estiniates the future value of money. However, if agents

have time-separable preferences, then movements in rates of return neutralize

the impact of variations in perceived wealth.

     If capital--that is, previously accumulated stocks of goods--is a factor

of production, then current quantities are no longer isolated from future

events. However, under time-separable preferences, we cannot generate

positive co-movements in consumption, investment, and work effort as

responses to future shocks--either to income, the perceived marginal pro-

duct of capital or both. This conclusion is important for those monetary

theories of the business cycle--such as Lucas (1975) and King (1982)--that

stress cyclical variations in investment and asset values arising as a

consequence of misperceived monetary disturbances. The finding also restricts

the impact of future shocks in real-business-cycle theories, such as King

and Plosser (1981), which specify time-separable preferences.

     In order to. generate positive co-movements of consumption, investment

and work effort, we must have a procyclical pattern in the terms of

trade between goods and leisure--that is, the real wage rate. With.the

neoclassical production structure employed in this paper, proyc1ical
                                   -4-




variations in the real wage can arise only if there are appropriate shifts

to the schedule for the marginal product of labor. The possibilities for

technological disturbances are stressed in the real-business-cycle analysis

of Long and Plosser (1980). However, our hunch is that richer structures

of intertemporal production opportunities will ultimately permit the current

marginal product of labor to respond to intertemporal prices. These pos-

sibilities may provide links to future conditIons and, perhaps, to monetary

shocks. These linkages do not exist in our present setup.



I. Allocation of Goods and Leisure over Time

     Our analysis of economic aggregates begins with an individual price-taking

consumer, who has preferences defined over a time stream of consumption, (C0,

C1, ...), and work effort, (L0, L1, ...).    Throughout, we neglect consumer
durables, so that consumption and consumer expenditure coincide. At the

present time, date 0, the household evaluates its total utility as



              U =
     (1)
                    U(C0, C1, C2, ...; L0, L1, L2, ...; q0),


where q0 is a vector of variables that are important for "tastes." Utility

derives from consumption and "leisure" (time spent away from work) at these

various dates, so that we assume aU/aCt > 0 and U/Lt <         0.
     The individual participates in markets for consumption goods, labor

services and credit. The real wage rate in period t is w and the real rate

of return on one-period loans between periods t and t+l is r. The present-

value price of a unit of consumption in period t > 0 is equal to l/[(l+r0)

(l+r1) ...   (l+r1)].     Analogously, the present-value price of a unit of

                                             fort > 0.
leisure is w/[(l+r0)(l+r1) ...
                                   (l+ri)]               Defining the discount-

factor,      to be one for t = 0 and to equal l/[(l+r0)(l+r1) ...
                                                                    (l+r1)]
                                             —5—




for t >       0,   the household's intertemporal budget constraint (over an infinite

horizon) is



        (2)
                         11tt
                                +
                                    Pw()]        =              +
                                                                     1,
where          is initial assets and             is non-labor income for period t.
         10                                iTt
        Individual        demand behavior for current goods and leisure, as well as

the remainder of the household's plan, derives from maximization of equation

(1), subject to the budget constraint in equation (2). The general forms of

the current demand and supply functions are as follows,



    •(3a)
                        C(l, p1, p2, ..., W01 W1p1, w2P2, ...,            ci0, cL),


    (3b)
                        L(l, p1, p2, ••   ., w0,     w1p1, w2p2, ..., Q0,        q•
In these demand functions we are assuming that changes in relative prices are

income-compensated.                 is a measure of lifetime income/wealth, measured in

current commodity units, so that ac0/ai0 = 1,                              =
                                                                                TTt
                                                                                      + wL   -
                                                                                                 C,
              =         and ac20/aw =
                   Pt              PtLt.
        What       information do we have about the forms of these demand and
supply functions?             Lucas (1977, pp.       16-17) discusses some observations
that are important            in restricting these functions. First, consumption and

leisure       appear to be superior goods,            so that   an   increase    in income/wealth
motivates          an increase in consumption demand and a decrease in labor supply.

Second, individuals exhibit a willingness to alter their allocations of work

over time in response to wages that are temporarily high or low. Thus,

current and future leisure are substitutes. Third, permanent changes in
                                       -6-



the real wage do not seem to. have a major effect on labor supply. This

result reflects the absence of possibilities for intertemporal substitu-

tion, as well as the income effect from a permanent change in the real

wage.




Time-Separable Utility

       The expression for total utility from equation (1) is often specialized

to a time-separable form. This specification appears in studies that range

from the demand for goods and leisure over the life cycle--as in MaCurdy

(1981) --to capital theory, as surveyed by McKenzie (1980). We consider

the time-additive




             U =                                                   L2) +
       (4)
                   u°(C0, L0) + 1-L.         L1) +   (.—)2u2(C2,

We   assume a simple form of time preference, where utility for period t is

discounted to a starting date, to, by the factor, 1/(1+y)t_tO•             (y is a posi-

tive constant and we have set t0 equal to zero in equation (4).) This

formulation ensures time-consistency in the sense of Strotz (1956). That is,

in a situation of perfect foresight, optimizing households will follow through

on plans formulated at date zero as the starting date, t0, advances.

      Equation (4) embodies the idea that actions taken in period t (or utility

achieved in period t) do not affect utility in other periods. However, we do

not require the utility functions to be identical in each period. Thus,

variations in the form of u can account for life-cycle elements or time-

varying features of the aggregate economy (such as shifts in government

spending that substitute for private spending).

      The form of equation (4) suggests that goods and leisure may interact

differently within a period than across periods. Thus, for example, current
                                 —7—




consumption, C0, may substitute for the contemporaneous amount of leisure,

determined by L0, in a manner different from future consumption or leisure.

Looking forward in time, there might seem to be no special rationale for this

asymmetry. However, we can equivalently think of time separability as

restricting the manner in which past consumption and leisure influence current

preferences. Equation (4) says that a person's tastes for current and future

quantities of consumption and leisure do not depend on that person's history

of consumption and leisure. Accordingly, the consumption-work plan that

someone formulates at the present time, say date 0, can depend on previous

settings for consumption and work only to the extent that these earlier

choices show up in current state variables, such as wealth, knowledge,

productivity, and so on. The past can matter through budget constraints,

but not through shifts in "tastes." In other words the current taste

parameter, q0 in equation (3), does not depend on lagged values of

consumption and work.

     We can indicate some possibilities for intertemporal interactions that

are ruled out by time-separability. If a person works hard in some period--

that is, Lt is high--then fatigue may be a significant consideration in

future allocations of work and consumption.   In this case work is like a

durable good, in the sense that the level of fatigue is a current state

variable. In particular, the satisfaction attached to leisure may be

especially high when the accumulated amount of fatigue is great. Looking

ahead, the prospect of a high level of work during some future period,
                                                                         L,
would raise the value of relaxation beforehand--that is, individuals would

choose low values for Lti. Lt2. etc. Analogously, the memory of past
                                     -8-




consumption experiences (or prospects of future ones) may bear on subsequent

(previous) tastes for consumption and leisure.

       If we do not impose time-separability on utility, then past flows of

consumption and work can appear as current state variables in analyzing the

plan for consumption and   work--that      is, as elements of the taste parameter,

q0, in equation (3). We could not restrict the pertinent state variables to

measures of initial wealth, technology, etc. This viewpoint conflicts with

the    bulk of existing macroeconomic analyses,2 which do not incorporate the
history of consumption and work as state variables. In other words most
existing macroeconomic theories assume implicitly        that utility functions are

separable   over time. We do not intend to quarrel with this viewpoint       in the

present   paper--rather, our main argument     is that insufficient mileage has

been   derived from this powerful assumption.
       The treatment of utility as   time-separable would be satisfactory for

most   purposes if the memory of past consumption and work had important
effects on subsequent   tastes for consumption and     leisure only over a brief
interval.    For purposes of business cycle analyses, we are thinking that

departures from separability would matter significantly only for days or

weeks, rather than for months or years. So, a period of unusually hard

work might have little direct effect on the taste for leisure after one or

two months. (Recall that we are not ruling out influences that work through

the budget constraint--the discussion here concerns the effects of past

choices on the form of the utility function, as specified to apply from the

present date onward.) In order to focus the issue with an extreme example,

consider the intense work effort of U.S. residents during World War II.

Abstracting from effects on the country's capital stock, people's information,
                                     -9-




etc., did this history of hard work have a major prolonged impact on the

tastes for consumption and leisure from 1946 onward? More specifically, did

lingering fatigue from World War II imply a persisting downward shift in the

willingness to work? It is precisely this type of effect that we neglect by

postulating time-separable utility.

     While introspection cannot be definitive, our inclination is to proceed

under the assumption that time-separable utility is a satisfactory approxima-

tion, at least for the purposes of most macroanalyses. Thus, we rule out a

role for the history of consumption and work as current state variables.

Although this assumption is implicit in most macroeconomics, the full impli-

cations have not been clarified and exploited. These implications provide

potentially refutable empirical propositions. Therefore, we generate bases

for assessing time-separable utility that should ultimately prove more

convincing than introspection about the nature of people's preferences.



Implications of Time-Separability for Demand Functions

     Routhakker (1960, pp. 247, ff.) and Goldman-Uzawa (1964, pp. 392, ff.)

describe the implications of block-addivite utility for the forms of consumer

demand functions. (In our case each block corresponds to the consumption and

leisure from a single time period.) Block additivity implies that there is

a specific relationship between income effects and compensated price effects,

when the prices pertain to goods from different blocks (that is, different

dates). Our appendix provides a detailed description of the demand-behavior

of a price-taking consumer who is selecting quantities of M goods each

period,       j
                  = 1, 2, ..., M).    Each good has a present-value price,
                                              -10-




where the Pt are discount factors, as discussed previously. Consequently,

the agent's intertemporal budget constraint over an infinite horizon has
                       M                              M
                                       c 10 +                                    is an endow-
the form,

ment of good j
                 (p
                 at
                            i
                                                      j=l p.z..1), where

                       date t.3 The set of necessary and sufficient conditions

that follow from time-separability are

                      d                   d      d

                                      i ai
                 ax                   a        ax.
                      kt
     (5)                        =                     for t    T,   and   for all (j,   k)   =   1,   ..., M.
                                          0      0


Inthis expression the left side refers to an income-compensated relative price

effect. On the right side, the positive number, A/p, does not depend on the

choices of goods or periods.

     For our simplified case of leisure and a single consumption good, let

x1 = _Lt    and x2. =               In our case we are dealing with relative prices
                           C.
with consumption as the numeraire, so that the present-value price of date t

                           is             and the price of date t consumption, x2 =
leisure, x1. =   _Lt
    is        If we think of t as representing the present, while t                represents
any future period, then the left side of equation (5) is the income-compensated

effect of any future present-value price on today's leisure or consumption.

The equation relates this substitution effect to two income effects, one

contemporaneous and the other pertaining to the future period in which the

price change takes place.

     For the bulk of our analysis, we focus on the implications of time-

separability for the quantities of consumption and leisure that are chosen

at the same date. Using equation (5), we find that time-separability implies

the following relation between relative-price and income effects,
                                               —11—




                   ax2trJT
                      lap p.           ax /ai
                                         2tO
         (6)                       =                ,    for   t    t    and   j   = 1,   2.
                     it     •rjt         it     0

The left side of equation (6) is the ratio of the                  responses. of today's con-

sumption       and leisure to an income-compensated change in the future price,
           This expression equals the ratio of the responses of today's                        consump-
tion    and i:eisure   to a change in lifetime income. We refer to conditions such
as   equation (6) as cross-preference relations for consumption versus leisure.

Such cross-preference relations playacentral role in the eqwilibrium analysis

below.

        The intuition behind equation (6) is straightforward. Consider the

choices of x1. and x2 for any period t.
                                                        Time-separability           implies that

quantities of leisure and consumption at other dates are important for

decisions at date t only through the budget constraint. Thus, we can
break    the agent's decisions into two stages: (i) for a given amount         date            of
t expenditure, ei         divide this amount optimally between leisure and goods;
and (ii) select a pattern of expenditure                over time that maximizes utility,
                                                                                           M
                                                               p e =
subject to the lifetime budget constraint,
                                                         t=Ott           10
                                                                               +
                                                                                      (p-;=i
                                                                                           p.z.t).
We can think of "static" demand functions for leisure and                          goods, which are

4t(et,     1 2t           and 4t(et,                    where the time t dependence derives

from time-varying features built into ut above. These functions treat

expenditure for the period, e, as given. The individual responds to

a change in lifetime wealth, lo, by altering the pattern of expenditure.

Let the change for period t be ae/3I0. Further, an individual responds

to a compensated change         in the      present-value   price       of a good in some

other period, pp., by altering expenditure in period t. Let that change
be 3e/aPp.. Then, the income and compensated price effects satisfy

th,e following conditions,

                          d
          d
       _______   —    3x1           aet
                                              '
                                                          d
                                                        ax2       —
                                                                  —
                                                                       2t   d
                                                                                 ________
       app                       app.                   3PPJ                      aPTPJT




         d           •dt                                 dt             dt
       ____    = 3x           3e.
                                          '
                                                        3x2   —
                                                              —
                                                                      x2        3e1

       31o           3e       310                                     aet


The cross-preference relation from equation (6) follows by inspection. The

key point is that changes in prices for date T                        induce    reallocations of expendi-

ture toward or away from period t. The individual treats these changes in

expenditure as identical to those arising for any other reason, such as

a change in income, 10.

        Note   that we assumed that changes in the present-value price for period
               were income-compensated. 1-Lowever, all that counts in the previous
 derivation is the impact of this price change on ei                            the   total expenditure
 for   period t. Consequently, uncompensated changes in prices also

 satisfy the cross-preference relation, as set out in equation (6).

        We have focused on the present-value price, pp.. Our derivation

 of the cross-preference relation in equation (6) remains valid if we

 consider instead any one-period rate of return,                                or real wage rate, w

 (where t        t). In particular, we can replace pp in equation (6) by

 either r (for all values of -r) or w (fqr r                           t). The cross-preference

 relation holds for either income-compensated or non-compensated changes in

 r (for all t)            or W      (for      T   t).
                                            -13-




Current Consumer Demand and          Labor Supply
      We focus now on representations for current consumption demand and

labor supply, C and L, under the assumption that preferences are time-

separable. We are interested in two kinds of properties. First, we want

to develop several implications of separability that will be important

for the equilibrium analysis below. Second, we want to discuss whether

time-separable preferences are compatible with certain individual obser-

vations on consumption demand and labor supply.

      Time-separable preferences imply the following cross-preference

condition, which relates real-interest-rate effects to income effects:


                 ac L5                aC'

                 r0 r0
In equation (7) we refer to an           income-compensated     change in r0, while holding

fixed all other rates of return, r1, r2, ......, and the array of real wage rates,


w0, w1, ...      Thus, we are examining income-compensated changes in p1, p2,
and
      w1p1, w2p2, ...,
                             all   of which derive from a change       in   r0. Equation (7)
remains      valid if the change in r0 is not income-compensated.

       The form   of    equation (7)   holds       if we substitute any prospective

one-period rate of return, r. for r0. In the aggregate comparative-statics

analysis below, the following form of this condition will be useful:




                r acd        aL5      [c1
       (8)               /                   /        ,      for   all t = 1, 2,
                Laro
                                     -14-




      Another property that we will employ concerns the relationship between

responses to changes in interest rates and responses to changes in future

real wage rates. This condition is




              r3a       aLSE   1cd       LSI
                    /                           for
      (9)
              L           Oj Lt
                                     /
                                          tJ
                                                      all .t =   1,   2,




As with the interest rate, we can interpret changes in future real wage rates

(appearing on the right side of equation (9)) as income-conipensate4 or not.

Note, however, that equation (9) will not hold for the current real wage rate,

wo.



Income and Substitution Effects

      Time-separability of utility says nothing about whether goods (consumption

and leisure in various periods) are superior or inferior. However, any two

superior goods (consumption or leisure) from different periods must be sub-

stitutes (see equation (5)). For example, if              0 and            0,

where t     r, then the compensated price effect, aC/p, must be positive.

      In the bulk of our subsequent analysis, we assume that consumption and

leisure in all periods are superior goods. Equation (5) then implies that

all goods from different periods are substitutes. This result means that

the current choices for consumption and leisure both decline with a compensated

change in any prospective rate of return, r, where t > 1.         Current consumption

and leisure both rise with a compensated change in any prospective real wage

rate, w, where t > 1.
                                  -15-




     Under time-separable preferences (with restrictions on the form of u

to ensure that consumption and leisure are superior), the behavior of indi-

viduals accords with Lucas's observations. Specifically, there are two

reasons why individual labor suppliers will respond more elastically to a

temporary change in their wage than to a permanent change of an identical

amount. First, since current and future leisure are substitutes, higher

future wage rates will tend to depress current labor supply at any given

current   wage rate. Put alternatively, permanent wage changes do not exert
intertemporal-substitution effects on labor supply. Second, a temporary
increase in the wage has a smaller income effect than does a permanent
change.   These two features imply that time-separable preferences are com-

patible with the secular evidence on labor supply--permanent thanges in real

wages have negligible or negative effects- -as well as the short-run evidence- -

temporary changes in wages have substantial positive effects.


ggregation

     We assume that the properties of individuals' demand functions--notably,

the cross-preference relations inequations (7)-(9)--carry over to the aggre—

gate level. This assumption permits us to do macroeconomics in the usual

manner, where we focus on the behavior of a representative agent. However,

we have not as yet considered any detailed justification for this assumption,

nor the sensitivity of our conclusions to departures from its validity.4

     If such aggregation is permissible, then we need not worry about the

distribution of claims on the credit market, but rather can focus on a

representative agent. The internal character of the loan market implies that

such a representative- individual will have a zero net position.   Uncompensated
                                       -16-




changes in any rate of return will then have a zero income effect. Therefore,

properties of compensated changes in rates of return carry over to uncom-

pensated       changes at the aggregate level. In the bulk of our analysis, we

assume that consumption and leisure are superior goods in all periods. It

follows that an increase in any prospective rate of return lowers current

aggregate consumption demand and raises current aggregate labor supply.



II. Equilibrium Analysis with Static Production Opportunities

        We consider here the implications of time-separable utility for a basic

equilibrium business-cycle model, where goods are not storable and production

activitycccurs within a single period. (Barro (1976, 1980) employs this model

to analyze the real effects of imperfectly perceived nominal disturbances.)

        In this model we think of households and firms as integrated units,

rather than explicitly analyzing a market for labor services.5 In particular,

households produce non-durable goods in the quantity Y by means of their own

labor effort, L. The production function for each household is



                       =
        (10)
                           F(L;

where          is a shift parameter.

    The marginal product of labor is positive, but diminishing in L. The

schedule for the marginal product determines the real wage rate--that is, the

shadow price of time relative to goods in each period__w, which affects house-

holds' choices as discussed before. To start with, we fix the set of parameters,

   which fixes the schedule for the marginal product of labor in each period.

We introduce the services from capital stock as a productive input in a later

section. At this stage each household's stock of capital can be regarded as

fixed--in particular, there is no investment.
                                         -17—




     Households face current and prospective real rates of return,
                                                                                  r,, r1,
We can think of these returns as applying to one-period, real-valued loans on

a consumer-credit market. Using equation (2), along with                =
                                                                            wLt   +   ' we
can write each household's budget constraint as


                    -         =
                        Yt)       10,


where the Pt are the present-value prices for commodities in period t.

The level of output varies with the amount of labor input in accordance with

the production function in equation (10). The income term, 10, which may be

positive or negative for a particular individual, depends on the individual's

starting position for net claims on the credit market.

     Given the parameters of the production function,
                                                                 ct,, c, ...,
                                                                                the   rates

of return,
             r0, r1, ...,
                              and its income position, 10, each household chooses

labor effort, Lt, and consumption demand, C, in each period. The choice of

work, Lt, determines the supply of goods, Y, from equation (10). We can write

each household's choices for demand and supply of commodities in the current

period, date 0, in the functional forms,


     (11)       C = C(cL0,        10, r0, ...),


     (12)      Y = Y(ct0,lo, r, •.).

The omitted arguments of the functions in equations (11) and (12) are future

values for the production parameters,                         and rates of return,
                                                a1, a2 ...,



    The cross-preference relations from equations (7) and (8) apply to each

household's choices of current consumption and work effort. Output supply
                                           -18-



depends   on work effort through the production function in equation (10).

Therefore, the cross-preference relations hold also in terms of current

output supply- -namely,




       (13)
                  aC/ar0       =   ac/ai0       =   ______ ,        for   all t =   1, 2,
                  aY/ar0           aYIaI0


In equation (13) we are considering uncompensated changes in rates of return,

r0 and   r.    That is, these changes apply when income, 10, and the prospective

rates of return for other periods are held constant.

      changes in future parameters of the production function,
                                                                              ' entail
income effects and shifts in the schedules for the marginal product of labor.

The latter effects amount to changes in prospective real wage rates. Changes

in lifetime income, and in prospective real wage rates both satisfy the cross-

preference    condition for current consumption demand and labor supply (equations
(7) and (9)). Hence, the effects of changes in                    on current consumption
demand and    output supply satisfy the cross condition,


       (14)
                 3C/r0     =       acg,c    ,         for   all t = 1,   2,
                 aY/3r0
      As discussed in the previous section, we assume that aggregate representa-

tions for commodity demand and supply can be written in forms that parallel

those of equations (11) and (12). In particular, we assume the validity

of the cross-preference relations from equations (13) and (14) when expressed

in   terms of aggregate variables.
                                       -19-




      Since consumption is the only use of output in the present context, we

have the market-clearing condition,



       (15)
               -   =
                       --
                       C0(a0, 1o r0, ...) = Y0(a0, lo, r0,      j,


where V0 is current aggregate output, C and Y are aggregate functions, and

     is an aggregate income term.



The Basic Result

      The initial disturbance that we consider is a change in          An increase

in     means an improvement in the representative person's lifetime income

prospects. We can      generate   this type of change in the present model by

postulating an upward shift in the anticipated position of future pro-

duction functions. If we think of purely parallel upward shifts in

these functions- -where the schedules for the marginal product of labor

do not change--then a pure income effect is involved.

      Equation (15) permits us to calculate the effects of this type of dis-

turbance on current aggregate output and the real rate of return. We take

as givens the omitted arguments of the functions in equation (15), which

include the future (anticipated) real interest rates, r1, r2, •••6        We also

neglect prospective shifts to future schedules for the marginal product of

labor. We consider here only changes to perceived future production oppor-

tunities that can be categorized as pure income effects. These shifts are

equivalent to changes in the income term,
                                  -20-



      The results are



       (16)
               dr
               4           av1
                         - —J /
                                1v-
                                    J            > 0 if all goods are superior,
               d10         3Ij     r0     9rQj




       (17)
               dI.0 [Io r0 a10 ar0
                                          [r0      aroj


We   can think of these results as follows. Assuming that current consumption

and leisure are superior goods; therisè in perceived aggregate income raises

     and lowers V (reduces work effort). Because currently desired saving

declines, the current real rate of return, r0, rises. This conclusion

follows from equation (16) if aV/ar0 > 0 and a/ar0 < 0, which hold

unambiguously if consurntion and leisure are superior goods in all periods.

The rise in the real interest rate, r0, achieves commodity-market clearing,

partly by stimulating current output supply (by inducing more work today) and

partly by lowering current consumption demand.

      The effects on current output are offsetting. The positive forces

are the income effect on demand, a/aT0, and the intertemporal-substitution

effect on supply,            Offsetting these elements are the negative

income effect on supply, aVIaTQ, and the negative intertemporal-substitution

effect on demand, a/3r0. The net impact on output depends on the composite

term, (a/T0)(aV/3r0) -      (/r0)(aV/9T0).         (In Barro (1976, 1980), the

analogues to these forces are combined into a net term called H, which

involves elasticities rather than sensitivities of commodity demand and

supply.)
                                  -21-




     As indicated in equation (17), the conditions needed for a net positive

response of current output cannot obtain if utility is time-separable (and

the implied cross-preference relation holds in aggregate form). Rather,

the net response of current output to an aggregate income effect is zero.

This result does not require any limitations on the sizes of any individual

substitution or income effects- -for example, the substitution effect on

supply, V/3r0, can be arbitrarily large. Rather, the outcome reflects the

cross-preference relation, which limits the various sensitivities in

relation to each other. Suppose, for illustrative purposes, that we had

already prescribed the magnitudes of the income and rate-of-return effects
            -d--       -d
on demand, aC0/ai0 and aC0/ar0. It remains possible to observe any value

for the substitution response of supply, aV/ar0. However, under time-

separability, higher values for this sensitivity must be accompanied by

equiproportionately higher magnitudes for the income effect on supply,

          Given time-searable utility, it is infeasible to vary the

intertemporal-substitution effect, aV/ar0, arbitrarily while maintaining

that the income effect, aV/aT0, is--for example--of negligible significance.

(This conclusion assumes that the sizes of the demand sensitivities are being

held fixed.)
     Our basic result is the invariance of current output from pure income

effects. We derive this result from an alternative perspective in the

following section.



Defoe's "Island" Model

     Consider the situation of an isolated individual--Robinson Crusoe.7 A

positive income effect can arise here if Crusoe anticipates the arrival of
                                    -22-




some free goods in a future period. (Crusoe expects for some future period

a higher position of the production function but, for the sake of argument,

no change in the schedule for the marginal product of labor.) With no

investment opportunities and time-separable utility, Crusoe's behavior

today is divorced entirely from that at other times. In particular, changes

in this period's work and production have no implications for any state vari-

ables that will apply for later periods. Hence, today's optimal choices of

consumption and leisure are invariant with any shifts in future prospects.

The invariance of current output from income effects holds immediately for

Robinson Crusoe. (However, the shadow discount rate that connects tomorrow's

consumption or leisure with today's,r0, does tend to rise when future pros-

pects improve.8)

     The argument for Robinson Crusoe carries over to the aggregate of

individuals in a market economy when there are no investment opportunities

and utility functions are time-separable. Decisions on today's aggregates

of work and production do not matter for the levels of aggregate state

variables in future periods. (The distribution of claims on the credit

market could be affected.) If only the aggregate levels of these state

variables matter for aggregate choices--as we have been assuming--then

current behavior is separated from perceptions about future conditions.

Hence, current output is invariant to aggregate income effects that result

from changes in future prospects.



General Implications

     The invariance of current output applies in our model to any change in

prospective conditions. These include any source for a shift in the
                                    -23-




perceived aggregate income term, lo, Changes in prospective technological

parameters, ' combine income effects, which amount to shifts in I, with
alterations in future schedules for the marginal product of labor. Because

of the separation between time periods--when we exclude investment and

assume time-separable utility--there is no spillover from these changes

in future prospects to the current choices of work and production. Formally,

we can derive this result for a change in at(t = 1, 2, ...)   by using the
cross-preference relation from equation (14)




Non-Separable Utility and Fatigue

       We can clarify briefly how a specific form of non-separable perferences

would alter the previous results. Suppose that today's utility from leisure

depends on "fatigue"--namely, the greater is the amount of past work (possibly

expressed as. a distributed lag of prior work levels), the higher is the

marginal utility of today's leisure relative to today's consumption. In

this context past work becomes a pertinent state variable for the current

period.

       Consider again the consequences of an aggregate income effect--that is, a

rise           We hold fixed the prospective schedules for the marginal product

of labor in future periods. From the perspective of Robinson Crusoe, we

can think of the prospect of more goods--but not a higher marginal product

of labor--in some future period. In this situation people expect to take

more leisure in the future period where goods have become more abundant.

Accordingly, there is less cost attached to being fatigued at this future
                                   -24-




date. Therefore, people become more willing to work harder during periods--

including the present--that precede this time of abundance. In our previous

discussion we found that the equilibrium quantities of today's work and.

production were invariant with a pure income effect. Because the new element

that considers fatigue is favorable to current work, we will now conclude that

current work and production are higher on net in response to a positive income

effect.   (In equilibrium, the positive effect of the higher rate of return,

on    in equation (15) will end up dominating over the negative income effect.)

     Improvements in future labor productivity, which mean rises in some

future real wage rates, are likely to imply increases in future work levels.

In this case it becomes more important to rest today in order to prepare for

the subsequent strenuous activity. Therefore, we will find that current work

and production are now reduced by any disturbance- -such as a rise in a future

schedule for the marginal product of labor--that leads to an increase in

future work effort.

     We assume in our main analysis that cumulated fatigue is not an impor-

tant consideration over time intervals that. are interesting for macroeconomics.

Therefore, we abstract in our principal discussion from the types of effects

that were discussed in this section.




Monetary Theories of Business Fluctuations

     If nominal disturbances are mistakenly perceived as representing

shifts in intertemporal relative prices, then such shocks can be non-

neutral toward aggregate output. Suppose that each economic agent
                                        -25—




produces     and consumes in only one of many decentralized markets, while no

one observes directly nominal aggregates or general price indices. Then,

Lucas (1973) and Barro (1976, 1980) demonstrate that the basic equilibrium

model can rationalize a positive correlation of money, aggregate output and

the price level. In these models a positive monetary disturbance (arising

as a surprise transfer from the government) causes the average household to

overestimate its income position, which can be represented by an increase in

   in the present setup. The "normal" positive response of output to a

monetary disturbance obtains in the models of Barro (1976, 1980) only if the

parameter H, which is analogous to (a/aI0)(aV/3r0) -           (aV/ai0)(/ar0),
is positive. However, under time-separable preferences, monetary disturbances--
                                                                            10
even if imperfectly perceived--will have no impact on current output.             This

conclusion follows from the cross-preference relation, which ensures that

H =   0.



Government Purchases

      Some recent equilibrium analyses (Hall, 1980; Barro 1981) consider the

effects of government purchases on aggregate output and rates of return.

These studies stress the distinction between permanent and temporary changes

in government purchases. Time-separable preferences also have strong impli-

cations for this type of macro disturbance.

      Suppose   that the government demands commodities in the amount
                                                                          Gt in
period     t. Assume   for   the moment that these expenditures are financed by
lump-sum taxes, which are equal for each household. The
                                                        government uses
its purchases of goods to provide some services to the private sector.

These services may appear in households' functions for utility or
                                                                  production.
                                         -26-




With respect to utility, we assume that the effects of Gt appear only in

period t's flow--that is, as ut(Ct, Lt, G). Hence, there is still time-

separability in the utilities derived from goods, which now include public

services as well as private consumption and leisure. Similarly, the

productive-input effect of          is purely contemporaneous. That is, we write

the production function for period t as



                    =
     (18)
                         F(Lt, G;


     The present value of (lump-sum) taxes appears as a negative item in

each household's budget constraint. Neglecting transfers and public debt,

the present value of each household's taxes equals the per capita value

of government purchases, PtGt. The household's intertemporal budget

constraint still has the form,



                            - Y)    =
                                        1,
               t=0


if we include the per capita value of -    p G as part of the household's
                                       t=0
income term, 10. The aggregate income term, 10, now includes the negative

of the present value of government purchases.

     The introduction of the government implies that the form of the

aggregate commodity-market-clearing condition, equation (15), must be

modified to accommodate public purchases of final product. The revised

condition is



                     =                                  +        =
      (19)     V0              T0, r0,       G0, ...)       G0       T0, r0,   G0, ...).
                                      -27-




The omitted terms in equation (19) may include effects of the prospective

time path of government purchases,                    These variables can matter
                                        G1, G2, ...
for future choices of consumption and work, which then can alter the net

amount of funds available to an individual household for expenditure during

the current period.

     Consider a rise in current government purchases, G0, when all future

levels of purchases are held fixed. There is a one-to-one expansion of current
                                                             -d
aggregate demand, which is offset by any influences of G0 on C0 and Y0.
                                                                          -
Since the change in purchases is temporary, there will not be a large effect

on the income term, T0. However, the change in G0 may interact directly

with the household's choices of work effort, production and consumption.

As one possibiliby (see Bailey (1971, Ch. 9) and Barro (1981, pp. 1090-93)),

the public services substitute for some contemporaneous private consumption- -

so that      declines- -and   enhance private production--so that ? expands.

(There   might   also be direct effects of public services on desired work effort.)

If the sum of    the magnitudes of                    -d
                                     the responses of C0 and
                                                               -s.
                                                                 is less than one-

to-one with the change in G0, then an increase in current government purchases

causes current aggregate demand to rise by more than supply. Therefore,

a rise in r0 is typically required in order to clear the commodity market.

The equilibrium is likely to entail higher current work effort and output,

but lower consumption. (These results depend on the precise manner in which

public services enter the utility and production functions.)

     We are not concerned here so much with the responses to a change in

government purchases. Rather, we want to study the differences in results
                                       -28—




when the change in purchases       applies   for only one period--as assumed above- -

instead   of for many   periods.   We can convert our case of a temporary change

to a more or less permanent one by altering the levels of                          and
                                                                    G1, G2, ...,
seeing how these shifts influence the market-clearing condition in equation

 (19). Increases in these future purchases--which entail future taxes--imply

reductions in the aggregate income term,             The future levels of purchases

may also appear directly in the functions for            and V.     As noted before,

these effects involve alterations in planned future levels of work and

consumption. However, with time-separable utility, neither changes in

nor other shifts to future work and consumption can influence the equilibrium

levels of current work and consumption. Therefore, the changes entailed by

converting fran   a   temporary change in purchases to a more or less permanent

change have no influences on current quantities. With time-separable utility,

temporary and permanent changes in government purchases have identical effects

on current quantities of work, production, and consumption.

     This result can    again   be motivated by reference to Robinson Crusoe.

Suppose that the "government" acquires 100 units        of    Crusoe's goods (on a

lump-sum basis)   for some worthwhile purpose. With time-separable utility

and no investment, the response of Crusoe's work effort, etc. does not

depend on his expectations of future governmental activities. His
                                                                            optimi-
zation problem for today is isolated from subsequent events.

     The distinction between temporary and        permanent   government purchases
does matter for the response of the real rate of return, r0. Under the

conditions assumed before, increases in future levels of
                                                                  purchases, G1, G2,
     imply declines in future levels of consumption and leisure.
                                                                           Typically,
these anticipated changes lead to a lower value for the current real rate
                                     -29-




of return, r0, (The full results depend on the manner in which government

purchases enter the utility and production functions.) The effect on
                                                                           r0
of an increase in anticipated future government purchases is analogous to

the effect from a decline in the aggregate income term, T. That is, the

present case is the reverse of the one that was explored in previous

sections, where      increased. We conclude that the positive pressure from

a rise in current government purchases on the rate of return, r0, is reduced

to the extent that future purchases are also expected to increase)' (The

rate of return may not increase at all if the rise in purchases is permanent.)



Distorting Taxes and Public Debt

     Suppose that taxes are levied on effort, rather than being lump-sum.

Then, an increase in government purchases implies more taxea, which motivate

substitutions away from market activity and    toward    "leisure." However, the

output effect of permanent and temporary shifts in government purchases

would still be identical if the government were not permitted to issue

debt. That is, if date t   expenditures   were financed solely by date t

taxes,   then an analogue to our previous argument would demonstrate that

permanent and temporary shifts in government purchases have equal effects

on current work effort, production and    consumption.
     If the government is permitted to borrow or lend on the economy's

credit market, then a potential difference arises between permanent and

temporary shifts in purchases. Suppose, as in Barro (1979), that the govern-

ment uses debt issue to smooth the behavior of (income) tax rates over time.

Then, a permanent change in government purchases necessitates a larger adjust—

ment of current tax rates than does a temporary one. Hence, the effect on
                                 -30-




current output tends to be greater if the change in government purchases is

temporary. Because of the smaller increase in tax rates, the induced substi-

tutions away from market activities will be smaller in the case of a temporary

change.

     The introduction of public debt permits time patterns of tax rates that

are infeasible under the balanced-budget option. When taxes are distorting,

we must include the outstanding stock of public debt in a description of

the "state of the economy." This stock functions as a current state variable

in a manner analogous to "cumulated fatigue," which we discussed before, or

the capital stock, which we discuss later.



III. Intertemporal Production Opportunities

     Previously, production opportunities in each period were separated from

economic actions taken in other periods. The most natural way to connect

different time periods on the production side is to permit economic agents

to accumulate physical stocks of goods (or of human capital or knowledge).

The key point is that the potential for accumulation/decuinulatiori at the

aggregate level permits a representative agent to behave, in equilibrium,

more like an individual who faces a given interest rate on the credit market.

That is, the economy as a whole may respond to a temporary change in income

or the marginal product of labor by altering the stocks of goods carried

over to the future.

     Here we sketch out the simplest possible model of capital accumulation

and draw out some of its implications. To a certain extent, the discussion

is meant to be suggestive rather than definitive. The linkages across time
that are introduced by capital accumulation substantially complicate the

equilibrium analysis. In this paper we do not analyze fully "Robinson

Crusoe's" dynamic choice problem for production and consumption, which would

yield a detailed description of equilibrium quantities.

        Suppose now that the economy faces the production function for period t,



        (20)           =
                           F(Lt, Ki; ct),


where Ktl is the stock of capital available to a household at the start of

period t. The stock, Ki, includes the investment from period t-l, but

excludes any investment during period t. We can think of K as encompassing

either producers' or consumers' stocks of durables. We assume a one-sector

technology with no adjustment costs--that is, K is just the accumulation

of past Y's that have been designated as capital goods. Further, we assume

that capital can be reconverted on a one-for-one basis to consumables, which

can   then be "eaten up." These assumptions imply that the marginal product
of    capital    is always equated to the one-period real rate of return- -
that    is,

        (21)        aF/aK r for all t.


position
        Investment    demand,
                                i   K -   K1.   depends inversely   on   given

               of the schedule (versus Kt) for the marginal product of capital.
                                                                                 the


The technological shift parameter, cz+1, and any elements that affect the
                                             -32-




level of future work, L+ii can influence the position of this marginal-

product schedule. Therefore, these variables can affect investment demand.

For our purposes we write the aggregate investment-demand function as



        (22)
                  -d = -d
                         i(r, -Ki, ...),
where 3I/3r <        0   and 3T/3K           <   0.    Omitted components of equation (22)
                                         1

include technological parameters, t+l' and forces that affect L+1.

        Next, we augment the goods-market equilibrium con4ition, equation (15),

to'incorporate aggregate investment demand. The revised condition is



        (23)             =
                             (ao'    '
                                         r,      ...) +
                                                           t(r0,   K1, ...)


                         =
                                    T,   r,                                    -




We   abstract here from government purchases.

      As   mentioned before, there are                various omitted arguments in the functions

shown   in     equation (23). We omit changes in these variables when considering

some economic disturbances. Then, it                   is straightforward to   calculate effects

on the current rate of return, r0, and on current quantities. This

procedure is suggestive but cannot give the exact change in current out-

put, because we are dealing with a non-trivial model of general equilib-

rium over time. That is, changes in current capital accumulation (arising

from a particular disturbance) will cause variations in the future rates

of return, r1, r2, ..., and future marginal-product schedules, which are
                                        -33-




suppressed in equation (23). In turn, these variables will feed back into

the commodity-market equilibrium condition, and thereby alter current levels

of capital accumulation, etc.

     Consider again the effect of a change in aggregate income, lo, when the

starting capital stock, K1, is held fixed. The effects are now given by


                       E—d  -l,E--s   —d               -i
     (24) —  dr0       1ac0
                   = I—=- -    /1Y0
                               3Y01  —
                                    aC0
                               —1/ i— -              -—>
                                                       3ic       0 (if all goods are superior),
             d10       [1o      ar2j r0        ar0     arj




     (25)
             d10       L!Io   3r0     D10 3r         3r2J       [!r0     r0    3r0




                               ,[s
                                    /
                                      a::d
                   =
                       rave
                       f—:----  I_i - _.i  -
                                             _......2.
                                                            <   0 (if all goods are superior).
                       Lo       [r0 ar 3r0j

                                               -d                  -s
     As before, the rise in I increases C0 and lowers Y0 (assuming superior

goods), which tends to drive up the current rate of return, r0. Because the

increase in this rate of return reduces investment demand, the necessary

increase in r0 (shown in equation (24)) is less than that calculated before,

assuming that the income and substitution effects on                   and    are the same

as previously. In our earlier discussion current work and consumption ended

up unchanged on net. Therefore, with a smaller rise in the interest rate, we
find that current work now declines on net, while current consumption rises.

The fall in work means a reduction in current production (since K1 and the
                                  -34-




form of the aggregate production function in period 0 are fixed). The rise

in current consumption is made possible by a decline in current investment.

The results for current output appear in equation (25), which uses the cross-

preference relation from equation (13).

     We can again explain the findings from the perspective of Robinson Crusoe.

A positive income effect signals the prospect of better times ahead (although

not necessarily higher marginal-product schedules for labor and capital).

Given this expectation, Crusoe has less incentive to work hard and consume

little today in order to accumulate capital. In fact, Crusoe wants to use

up previous stores of goods (capital) in order to raise present consumption

and leisure. Cutbacks in investment effectively enable Crusoe to use future

abundance in order to provide for current consumption and leisure. Therefore,

when we include a variable amount of investment- -which ties different time

periods together--we find that a positive income effect tends to lower current

work, production and investment, while raising current consumption and leisure.

     Notice that our analysis does include an intertemporal-substitution

variable, r0, as a positive--possibly strong--determinant of today's work

effort. Further, the positive aggregate income effect does tend to raise

the equilibrium value of this substitution variable. However, any enhance-

ment in the reward to working today rather than later--as reflected by an

increase in r0- -implies a parallel expansion in the cost of consuming

goods today rather than later. The disturbance being considered- -a pure

positive income effect--does not alter the terms on which people can exchange

toda"s leisure for today's consumption. These terms are dictated by today's

production function. Therefore--given time-separable utility, and the assumption
                                   -35-




that today's consumption and leisure are superior goods--it is impossible for

current consumption and leisure to move in opposite directions in response to

pure income effect. Consumption and leisure also cannot react in opposite

directions to movements in the intertemporal-substitution variable,
                                                                      r0.
Changes in any prospective real wage rate or rate of return also move current

consumption and leisure in the same direction. In the case described above,

where investment can be lowered, we find that a positive aggregate income

effect raises current consumption and leisure. This response means a decline

in today's output and   employment, as well as a reduction of investment. (A
negative income effect would increase today's output, employment, and invest-

ment, but would lower current consumption.)

     We take as a minimal empirical description of business fluctuations the

positive co-movements of aggregate production, employment, investment

and consumption. We cannot generate this typical pattern of business

cycles from pure income effects in our present model. This result follows

from the following properties: 1) time-separable utility, 2) consumption

and leisure in all periods are superior goods, and 3) aggregation is per-

missiblein the usual minner. This observation is significant since some

equilibrium models of business cycles (Lucas (1973), Barro (1976), et. al.)

treat monetary shocks as operating initially through an income effect on

consumer demand)3



Shocks to Investment Demand

    We want to consider shocks to investment demand as a possible source

of business fluctuations. King (1982) shows that monetary surprises can
                                    -36-




alter perceptions about the prospective marginal revenue product of capital,

which then lead to shifts in desired investment. We want to see whether

this type of disturbance--possibly combined with the sorts of income effects

that we examined before--can yield the typical pattern of busines.s cycle

response. In particular, we are looking for co-movements of output, employ-

ment, investment and consumption.

     The current equilibrium condition for the commodity market is given in

equation (23). It is straightforward to introduce a positive, autonomous

shift to investment demand, T.   The appropriate change in the technological

parameter,     would generate this response. We assume that there is no

shift in the current production function--that is,    is unchanged. The

main effects of this disturbance are an increase in the current rate of return,

r0,'increases in current output, work effort and investment, and a decline in

current consumption. In particular, consumption and leisure move in the same

direction--downward in this case--in response to the rise in r0. With time-

separable utility and all goods superior, it is again impossible for consumption

and leisure to respond in opposite directions to changes in the relative prices

of future goods--that is, to a change in r0 (or, more generally, to other

prospective rates of return or real wage rates). Therefore, although this

disturbance can generate positive responses of current production, work effort

and investment, it cannot simultaneously generate a positive reaction of

current consumption.

     One might conjecture that the addition of an aggregate income effect

could provide the requisite boost to current consumption demand. (In King

(1982) monetary surprises create positive income effects as well as boosts to
                                    -37-




the perceived marginal value product of capital.) But,under the maintained

hypothesis that preferences are time-separable, this route turns out to

be unsatisfactory. If the positive aggregate income effect is sufficiently

strong to generate a net increase in current consumption, then it must do so

by more than offsetting the negative influence from the rise in the current

real rate of return, r0. But--because of the cross-preference relation from

equation (13)--the same balance of forces then implies that current leisure

must also increase on net. In this case current work effort and production

decline. Assuming that all goods are superior and that utility is additive

over time, no combination of aggregate income effects and shifts in the

relative prices of future goods (that is, changes in
                                                          r0, r1, ...,
                                                                         or   shifts

in prospective real wage rates) can. move current consumption and leisure in

opposite directions. There is no package of shocks to investment demand and

perceived aggregate income that can lead simultaneously to increases in cur-

rent employment and consumption.14



The   Contemporaneous Real Wage Rate
      If utility is time-separable and all goods are superior, then we can
generate    an increase in today's consumption and work effort--hence, a decline

in today's leisure--only if we generate an upward shift in today's schedule

for the marginal   product of labor)5      In particular, we require an increase
in the current real wage rate, w0, which equals labor's current marginal

product.

      Suppose that we   introduce separate   markets for commodities and labor

services,   but that we stick to the plausible story that individuals are
                                 -38-




buying today's leisure and today's consumption at prices that are observed

simultaneously. (People may not observe the prices of all goods at once,

but they at least know the prices of those goods that they actually buy or

sell.) Then, it will not be possible for monetary surprises or aggregate

disturbances to generate misperceptions about the ratio of current nominal

wages to the prices of consumer goods that are bought currently. In our

world with time-separability, we will find an increase in today's consumption

and a decrease in today's leisure only if the (observed) price of today's

consumption falls relative to the (observed) price of today's leisure. A

procyclical pattern of the actual real wage rate is central to our analysis.

     We should stress that the real wage rate in our theory refers to the

typical person's shadow price for current leisure relative to current con-

sumption. There are at least two difficulties in using reported series on

average wages to measure this concept. First, (efficient) long-term contracts

are consistent with a discrepancy between reported wage rates and the true

shadow value of current time. (See, for example, Barro, 1977.)   Second,

since wage rates vary cross-sectionally, average wage data (for employed

persons) may be misleading when the composition of the employed labor force

varies. Notably, if workers with relatively low productivity tend to be laid

off first, then a spurious element of countercyclical wage movement will be

present in data on average wages (of employed persons). There are also

complications in using over-time versus straight-time wage rates. Since the

shadow value of the marginai unit of time is pertinent to our analysis, it

would be inappropriate simply to use a measure of straight-time wage rates,

which attempt to exclude over-time payments. We look forward to a careful

study of the cyclical behavior of real wage rates, which takes account of

the factors cited above.
                                      -39-




 Shifts   to   Productivity

      In our setup a natural way to generate an increase in today's real
                                                                         wage
 rate, w0, is to postulate a general upward shift to the current production

 function. In particular, we could have a shift to the
                                                             current technological
 parameter, a, which raises the current schedule for
                                                           the marginal product
 of labor.

      If this type of general
                                upward shift to technology applies to future
periods, we would also have a positive
                                             aggregate income effect and a boost
 to the marginal product of capital--effects that were discussed before.

When we add in the upward shift
                                    to the current schedule for the marginal

product of labor, we can resolve our earlier dilemma. It now becomes possible

to observe increases in current
                                  output, employment, investment and consumption.
In particular- -because of the upward shift in the current real
                                                                wage rate- -
current   consumption can rise while current leisure falls.



Sources of Shifts

     Exogenous changes in productivity are central driving variables in the

real-business_cycle theories of Kydland and Prescott (1980) and Long and

Plosser (1980). These analyses use versions of the neoclassical production

function in which there are more than
                                         one capital-stock variable. For the
present purpose, the key feature of this structure is that there are no

current-period actions that can alter the position of the
                                                              marginal-product
schedule for labor. This conclusion
                                        follows because capital stocks are
not adjustable within the period.
                                   -40-




     More general descriptions of intertemporal production opportunities do

not share this characteristic. For example, King (1980).and Merrick (1981)

indicate how variations in theutilization of existing capital goods--in

response to intertemporal relative prices--can alter the position of the

current schedule for labor's marginal product. That is, a higher current

flow of "capital services" raises labor's marginal product if the factors

are complementary. Yet, variable utilization alone is not sufficient to

generate the cyclical co-movements that we are looking for. In the simplest

formulation of the utilization decision, it is impossible to get current

investment and current flows of capital services to move in the same

direction. That, is, this model fails to generate a procyclical pattern

for both investment and capacity utilization. Our hunch is that intertem-

poral   structures that mix variable utilization and "time-to-build"   require-

ments for capital will ultimately deliver the co-movements that we seek.

Conceivably, in this framework, misperceived monetary shocks may generate

a procyclical pattern of investment, capital utilization, employment, output

and consumption. These possibilities will be explored in future research.



Conclusions

        Time-separability of utility means that past work and consumption

do not influence current and future tastes. This type of separation may

be a reasonable approximation over time periods- -such as quarters or

years--that are of primary interest for macroeconomic analysis.

        The assumption that preferences are time-separable is implicit in

much macroeconomic analysis. For example, Frjedman's (1956) linkage of
                                  -4]-




consumption to permanent income derives much of its attractive empirical

content from the fact that past consuinptions are bygones, which are unimportant

for current decisions. This preference condition--made explicit by Hall

(1978)--generates strong testable restrictions that are not implied by other

theories, such as the habit-persistance model, which implicitly incorporates

non-time-separable preferences.

     In our analysis of dynamic labor supply and consumption decisions,

time-separable preferences do not restrict the size of intertemporal-

substitution effects--notably, we can still have a strong response of

labor supply to temporary changes in real wages. The important restrictions

arise as cross-preference conditions- -constraints on the relative responses

of leisure and consumption to relative-price and income effects. There are

also restrictions on the relative responses of today's work or consumption

to prospective wage rates or interest rates from different future (or past)

periods. While these types of cross conditions are testable, we do not

know of empirical evidence that contradicts them.

     When the usual aggregation is permissable, time-separability has some

important implications for equilibrium theories of the business cycle. On

the one hand, we find it difficult to use some existing versions of these

models to generate the typical cyclical pattern of quantities. Specifically,

combinations of income effects and shifts to the perceived profitability of

investment do not yield positive co-movements of output, employment, invest-

ment and consumption. Therefore, we are unable to use misperceived monetary

disturbances or other sources of changed beliefs about the future in order

to generate empirically recognizable business cycles.
                                 -42-




      On the other hand, our analysis pOints to modifications in existing

theories that may yield more satisfactory answers. First, we stress that

variable investment is essential in order to link current choices to

perceptions about the future. Because of time-separable utility, such

a linkage does not arise--in equilibrium--from the side of preferences.

Second, we use the observed positive correlation between cyclical move-

ments of consumption and work--that is, inverse movements in consumption

and leisure--to argue that the real wage rate must move procyclically.

Empirically, we regard the cyclical pattern of real wages as an open

question. At the theoretical level, we are led to stress disturbances

that alter the current schedule for the marginal product of labor. Aside

from autonomous real shocks to productivity, we mention the role of capacity

utilization. changed prospects about future conditions may motivate firms

to work their capital harder. Complementarity between capital services and

labor services then generates an upward shift to the current schedule for

the marginal product of labor. Hence, the current real wage rises. We

suggest that misperceived monetary disturbances might   function   in this

manner. While we regard this route as promising, we have so far been

unsuccessful in combining this story with a procyclical pattern of

investment.
                                         -43-
                                       Footnotes


      1This utility function is strongly separable with respect to a partition

by time periods.

      2Kydland and Prescott (1981) deal with a particular form              of non-time-
separable preferences. In their analysis a distributed lag of past work

appears as a current state variable.

      3The   length of the horizon is unimportant for present purposes.
      4Lucas      (1972) constructs a model     where simple aggregation does not work.

The   distribution of income between young and         old   is important   in Lucas's

setup,    as it   is   generally in overlapping-generations models that neglect
private   intergenerational transfers.

      5We can equivalently deal with a separate labor market. W would then

use the condition that the marginal product of labor equals the real wage

rate, w, in each period.

      6More generally, we would substitute the future market-clearing values

of these interest rates, as perceived by the representative individual. The

prospective values of r1, r2, ...,         will   not change if the average person

does not expect the disturbance to have aggregate consequences in future

periods. This expectation may be reasonable for the context of monetary

surprises, which are not perceived as aggregate shocks. Generally, the

presence of financial futures markets or markets for long-term loans will

affect the information that people have about the future one-period interest

rates, r1, r2, ...        In   the present context variations in these future inter-

est rates are, in any case, inconsequential for current output. This result

follows from equation (13), which implies that changes in any future interest


                                                                (continued)
                                     -44-




rate, r, will alter the current rate, r0, so as to leave current output

unchanged. The calculated effects on the current interest rate in equation

(16) will be inexact for this reason.


     7Long and Plosser (1980). similarly describe the position of a Robinson

Crusoe with time-separable preferences, within a "real business-cycle" model

that incorporates many consumption and capital goods.

     8Shadow prices may be read off thederivatives of Crusoe's maximized

utility function. Note that the announcement of a receipt of goods k >       1


periods in the future would not alter the one-period real rate of
                                                                     return,
(1+r0) =
           (l+y)(au°/3c0)(au'/ac),    in such a setup. In this sense the

calculated effect on the current real interest rate in equation (16) is

inexact in ways th.t are economically important (see fn. 6, above).

     9The income effect from a change in       is covered by equations (16) and

(17). If the change in       raises the prospective real wage rate, w. (by

raising the schedule for the marginal product of labor), we will find an

additional                                   -d.         -
             positive effect on r0 (because C0 rises and Y0 falls). However,

   is again unchanged.


             is traditional in business-cycle analysis, we abstract from the

effects of imperfect information on aggregate real balances and possible

implications for agents' willingness to engage.in market activities. In

particular, a positive monetary disturbance that was under-estimated would

lead economic •agents to over-estimate the future value of money. The nominal

interest rate would be lower than under full information, and real balances

                                                     (continued)
                                   -45-




would be correspondingly higher.    We rule   out   any temporary   real   affects

of such variations in real balances. Essentially, these potential effects

correspond to those that would arise in a fully-perceived, permanent

inflation. These influences are commonly regarded as a minor element

in the business cycle.

    11The current one-period interest rate, r0, depends only on quantities

for periods 0 and 1. These quantities are insensitive to changes in govern-

ment purchases after period 1--that is, to G2, C3, ...        Therefore,      prospective

purchases after date 1 cannot affect r0 in the present model. The current,

one-period rate of return, r0, depends on C0 and G1. Basically, r0 rises

when     increases relative to G1. Changes in C2, G, ...,           affect   r1, r2,
(Note that these rates of return enter among the omitted arguments of the

functions in the market-clearing condition of equation (19).) The effects on

future short rates show up in current long-term interest rates (or in interest-

rate futures), although not in r0. Hence, prospective variations in government

purchases affect the term structure of real interest rates.           (See Benjamin

and Kochin, 1982, in this context.) When investment is added to the model

(below), the prospective path of purchases, C2, C3, ...,       will    also influ-

ence the current short rate,,r0.

       12We do not mean that all aggregate business fluctuations exhibit these

characteristics. For example,    expansions   associated with major wars tend to

show declines in private investment and in at least the durable-goods            compor.:ent

of consumer spending. This pattern is especially evident during World War II.
                                     -46-




       1The inclusion of investment means that temporary and permanent changes

in government purchases no longer have identical effects on current output

(even when we ignore the effects implied by distorting taxes). Current

investment tends to decline more when the change in purchases is temporary.

(This finding is consistent with the tendency of the current interest rate,

      to rise in response to temporary changes in purchases.) In effect,

society (or Robinson Crusoe) can meet emergencies partly by working off the

existing stock of capital--or, at léat, by investing less than otherwise.

This channel reduces people's incentives to work hard and consume little

during periods where government purchases are temporarily high. Because

of the reduced motivation to work hard, the overall effect on current

output now tends to be greater when the change in purchases is permanent,

rather than temporary. The effects of distorting taxation, which were

described earlier, have the opposite implications. Therefore, we

cannot say whether temporary or permanent changes in government purchases

have a greater overall effect on current output.


       14Grossman (1973, p. 1367) pointed out that market-clearing macro-

economic models predict a negative association between consumption and

employment, if the primary disturbances are variations in "autonomous"

expenditures, such as shifts to investment demand. Without restrictions

implied by time-separability, however, King (1982, pp. 12-15) demonstrates

that positive co-movements of consumption, investment and employment may

arise if factors that raise investment demand also increase a representative

economic agent's perceived wealth. The conclusion that no package of shocks

can   lead   to the desired positive co-movements is a consequence of time-

separable preferences.
                                 -47-




     15We neglect shifts in the forms of the representative household's

preferences for consumption and leisure. That is, we rule out shifts in

tastes as significant sources of aggregate business fluctuations.
                                           -43-




                                        Appendix

        Implications of Time-Separability for Demand Functions



     This appendix discusses the properties of consumer demand functions

that are implied by time-separability. More specifically, an individual's

preferences for goods over time have the form,


              T-l
                        t
     (Al)           r
              t=o


where x =
             (x1,       x2., ...   X)'   is a vector of M activities undertaken at

date t. Individuals have a pure rate of time preference, y, with 1' =

which is independent of the ,lével of x. The "momentary utility function,"

Ut, IS increasing in each of its arguments, twice continuously differen-

tiable and strictly concave.

     An intertemporal budget constraint with a T-period horizon (assuming

no bequests) is


              T-l                        T-l
     (A2)
              t=O
                    p (pxt) = 10 +        p(pz),
where Pt =
                        2t'   ••
                                   p)    is a vector of prices, z =
                                                                      (z1,   z2,
is a vector of endowments, and
                                         Pt is a present-value factor, (p0 = 1, p1 =
              =
l/(l+r0),         l/[(l+r0)(l+r1)],       etc.).

    A straightforward means of describing the consumer's demand behavior

is to use conventional comparative-statics
                                                    results, as discussed by
                                                                  -49-


Intrilligator (1971, ci. VII). Treat the consumer's problem as (A3), where

we stack the vectors of date t activities sequentially into larger vectors,

X' =                                      P =                                   T-lT-l and Zr = (z6, Z,
       (xd, xi, •• x1_1),                              (p0,    p1p1,




       (A3)         max U(X), subject to PX <                             I   + PZ.
                     x


       There are a total of N = MT activities. Let H be the NxN Hessian

matrix of second-partial derivatives of U. Then, as shown by Intrilligator,

the comparative-statics results for a change in income and utility-compensated

changes in prices are



                                          -l
       (A4)                  =    -iH          P',




       (A5)         d1           =   I-IT1P'PHX                   +   H1A,


where A is the Lagrange multiplier attached to the constraint, I + PZ -
                                              —l
PX >   0,   and i   = -[PH—1P         ,
                                          1        .                  .

                                                        Economically, A corresponds to the life-time
marginal utility of wealth, and                           t = - 4. Finally,            the total effect of a

price change is given by


                         d                d                   d
       (A6)         -— = .-IU - (XX-Z)'
                                         -50-




     Now, write the compensated price sensitivities of demand as



                                 ax
     (A7)     d1    =       A)          ax.) +


Thus, zeroes in H1 link price sensitivities of demand to income sensi-
tivities.

     Under time-separability, the Hessian matrix H is block-diagonal,

having the following form



                     0             0                  0
               A0
               0                   0                  0
                    rA1
               0     0                                0
                                 r2A2




               o        o          o
                                          ...rT_1,

where At is the (negative-definite) MxM matrix of second derivatives of u

above, and 0 is an MxM matrix of zeroes. Correspondingly, the matrix inverse

is also block diagonal,


                        0          0       ...        0

               0                   0       .    . .   0

               0            0 (-)2A .           . .   0




                                   Q
                                                  (')T-'ç1
                                                             —51—




Thus, with H1 block diagonal, (Al) implies the following condition,

which links demand behavior for good m at date t to changes in the price

of good k (which may or may not be m) at some other date r,


                            d                                d d
                                                             tnt   ___
      (A8)                                       =                          for     all t
                   a(PTPkT)1U


which is the cross-condition described by I-iouthakker, Goldtnan-Uzawa, and

in the main text.

      Some further results can be obtained by utilizing the special form

of       implied by time-separable preferences,

                       d
                   3x                      p
       (A9)                     =                                       for t = 0,     1           T-l,
                   —.-                   -fA p.


     (AlOa)                          I1J
                                                 =   A(.)2AlpvpA'               +




     (AlOb)        3(pp)1U =                                                               for t     s,


                                             2                             2

where ii =
              -[p0A p + T_plAj p + ... +

       Defining    expenditure in period t as e =                                          it follows from these

conditions that

                   T-l              ae
        0      —                         0
                                                     _             I)
        0     U =l                                       1+r0 t



                                                     T-1p2
                   =    -
                            l+r0                     [+)Po'P6 ptA;'p
                                                                               (continued)
                                    -
             = (- T:—) pX[-             p0Ap6][p0A01P1


             = C-



                                               factor in (A8) may be
Consequently, it follows that the proportional
interpreted as follows,



                    -(--l)
                       0
                           (l+r)
     (All)    (X)

                          ai   ai
                                            -53-


                                       References




      New York: McGraw Hill, 1971.

 Barro, Robert J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy,"

      Journal of Monetary Economics, 2 (Jinuary 1976): 1-32.

                     "Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,"

     Journal of Monetary Economics, 3 (March          1977):   101-15.

                     "On the Determination of the Public Debt," Journal of Political

     Economy, 87 (October 1979): 940-71.

                     "A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model,"

     Econometrica, 48 (September 1980): 1393-1417.

                     "Output Effects of Government Purchases," Journal of
     Political   Economy, 81        (December 1981): 1086-1121.
Benjamin,   Daniel and Levis A. Kochin, "War, Prices and Interest Rates:           Gibson's

     Paradox Revisited," unpublished, University of Washington, February 1982.

Friedman, Milton, A Theory of the Consumption
                                                      Function, Princeton, N.J.:

     Princeton University Press, 1957.

Goldman, Steven M, and Hirofumj Uzawa, "A Note on Separability in Demand

     Analysis," Econometrica, 32 (July 1964): 387-98.

Grossman, Herschel I., "Aggregate Demand, Job Search, and Employment,"           Journal
     of Political Economy, 81 (November/Deceml,er 1973): 1353-69.

Hall, Robert E., "   Stochastic       Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent

     Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Econ

     (December 1978), 971-87.
                               *.




               •, "Labor Supply and
                                                     Fluctuations," Carnegie-Rochester
     Conference Series on Public
                                      -54-




Houthakker, Hendrick S., "Additive Preferences," Econometrica, 28 (April 1960):

     244-5 7.


Intrilligator,   Michael, Mathematical Optimization and Economic Theory,

     Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971.

King, Robert G., "Money, Real Wages and the Business Cycle," unpublished

     University of Rochester, October 1980.

_______________     "Investment,   Imperfect Information and Equilibrium Business

     Cycle Theory," unpublished, University of Rochester, February 1982.

_______________ and charles I. Plosser, "The Behavior of Money, Credit and
     Prices in a Real Business Cycle," unpublished, University of Rochester,

     November 1981.

Kydland, Fynn and Edward C. Prescott, "Time-to-Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,"

     unpublished, Carnegie-Mellon University, October 1981, forthcoming

     Econoinetrica.

Long, John B. and Charles I. Plosser, "Real Business Cycles," unpublished,

     University of Rochester, November 1980.

Lucas,   Robert E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,"    Journal of

     Economic Theory, 4 (April 1972): 103-24.
________________ "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
     American Economic Review, 63 (June 1973): 326-34.

_______________ "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of
      Political Economy, 83 (December 1975): 1113-44.

_________________     "Understanding Business Cycles," in Stabilization of the
      Domestic and International Economy, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series

      on Public Policy, 1977: 7-29.
                                -55-




MaCurdy, Thomas E., "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle

     Setting," Journal of Political Economy, 89 (December 1981): 1059-87.

McKenzie, Lionel, "Optimal Economic Growth and Turnpike Theorems," unpublished,

    University of Rochester, December 1981.


Merrick, John E., "The Anticipated Real Interest Rate, Capital Utilization

     and the Cyclical Pattern of Real Wages," unpublished, New York University,

     October 1981.

Strotz, Robert H., "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,"

     Review of Economic Studies, 23 (1956): 165-80.
