NBRR WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATIONARY FINANCE
TJNDER DISCRETION AND RULES

Robert J. Barro

Working

Faier No. 8O

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOrIC RESEARCH
1050 Massac}iusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 0213R
May 1 9R2

I have benefited from research support by the National Science
Foundation. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the
Peterkin Symposium on Foundations of Monetary Policy and Government
Finance, Rice University, April, 1082. The research reported here
is part of the N1BER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper # 889
May, 1982
Inflationary Finance Under Discretion and Rules

Abstract

Inflationary finance involves first, the tax on cash balances from

expected

inflation, and second, a capital levy from unexpected inflation.

From the standpoint
attractive,
hold:

of minimizing distortions) these capital levies are

ex post, to the policymaker. In a full equilibriuni

two conditions

1) the monetary authority optimizes subject to people's expectations

mechanisms, and 2) people form expectations rationally, given their
of

are

knowledge

the policymaker's objectives. The outcomes under discretionary policy
contrasted with those generated under rules. In a purely discretionary

regime the

monetary

authority can make no meaningful commitments about the

future behavior of money and prices. Under an enforced rule, it becomes
possible to make some guarantees. Hence, the links between monetary actions
and inflationary expectations can be internalized. There is a distinction
between fully-contingent rules and rules of simple form. A simple rule allows
the internalization of some connections between policy actions and inflationary
expectations, but discretion permits some desirable flexibility of monetary
growth.

Robert

J. Barro
Economics Dept.
University of Rochester
14627
Rochester, NY
(716) 275-2669

Introduction

Inflationary finance has often been studied in the context of a

once-and-for-a11 choice of the monetary growth rate. See, for example, Bailey
(1956) and Phelps (1973). The nominal interest rate is the tax rate levied on
real cash balances. The effects of this tax on governmental revenues
and excess burden can be analyzed in a manner similar to that for taxes

on labor income, produced commodities, etc. The special characteristics
cf money concern the tendency for monopoly on the supply side, and the
possibility that the marginal cost of production (for real balances)
is near zero.

Cagan (1956, pp. 77, ff.) observed that surprise inflation is also

a source of government revenue. The discussions in Auernheimer (1974)
and Sjaastad (1976) link surprise inflation to unanticipated capital losses
on real cash (or, more generally, on any governmental obligations whose
payment streams are fixed in nominal terms). The revenue obtained through

surprise inflation amounts to an ex post capital levy. As with other
capital levies, this form of tax--when not foreseen- -can raise revenue
at little deadweight loss.

Since people understand the attractions of ex post capital levies,

they will attempt to forecast, ex ante, the government's tendency to

exploit such situations. So, in deciding to hold money or other nominal
liabilities of the government, people will take into account the government's power to engineer ex post "surprises," which depreciate the real value

of these claims. (Default on public debts and high rates of taxation on "old"
capital are similar phenomena.) The expected cost of holding money takes
into consideration the likelihood of these subsequent capital losses.

—2—

Further, in making optimal forecasts of these losses, people essentially

have to model themonetary authority's behavior. Specifically, people
would project the reaction of monetary growth to a set of state variables,

which include the position of the money-demand function. In a full rational

equilibrium, no systematic inflation surprises can occur.
Prices may be higher or lower than predicted because of the realizations
expectations

of some random events, but the government cannot be systematically generating

proceeds from surprise inflation.
Although a regular pattern of inflation surprises cannot arise

in

equilibrium, the government's capacity to create these shocks, ex post,

influences

the position of the equilibrium

for

the growth

rates of money and

prices. If the policymaker could commit himself in advance to resist the ex

post benefits from surprise inflation, then the equilibrium rates of monetary
growth and inflation are likely to be lower. Monetary and price rules provide
such commitments to varying degrees. In contrast, a purely discretionary regime
has no scope for these types of restrictions on subsequent monetary behavior.
This type of distinction between rules and discretion has been stressed by
Kydland and Prescott (1977).

Calvo (1978) studied a model

only

in

which

the government

was

interested

in maximizing its revenue from inflationary finance. In a purely

discretionary

setup, where people have rational expectations, there is

no finite equilibrium solution for monetary growth and inflation. In
the present paper the government's objective is modified to trade off

costs of inflation against the benefits from revenues. A finite equilibrium is then determined under purely discretionary monetary policy.

The

implied growth

state

rates of money and prices depend on some stochastic

variables, which

include the government's valuation of revenues

-3-

(which may vary with the overall level of government spending or with
aggregate business conditions), and the position of the money-demand
function.

The results under discretion are contrasted to those obtainable from
monetary rules.

I consider rules that allow for a full set of state-

contingent responses, as well as those of simple form that do not allow
for full contingencies. The constant-growth-rate rule is of the latter

type. Although state-contingent rules can unambiguously outperform
discretion (abstracting from costs of enforcing the rules), the ranking
of discretion and simple rules is. uncertain. The rules have the benefit
of internalizing all linkages between monetary behavior and inflationary

expectations. However, discretion (and fully-contingent rules) allow
for a flexible response to changes in circumstances, which has some
value in the model under study.

Setup of the Model
It is convenient (for me) to develop the model in a framework of dis-

crete time. The length of the period is denoted by T, which has units of
time, say of years. Since the length of the period plays no economic role
in the present model, I ultimately focus on the results when t is allowed to
approach zero.

The government determines the nominal money stock at the start of period
t

to

be the amount

Mt.

No private issues of money are considered. The

growth rate of money from period t-l to t is

(l/t)log(M/M1) which

has units of per year. The general price level for period t is

so

-4-

that real balances are Mt/Pt. I focus here on holdings of money, although
the approach can
nominal payouts.
(lIT)

be

applied also to government bonds that have prescribed

The inflation rate from period t-l to t is

lo(P/P1)3 which is measured per year.
Let I. denote the information set that each person has during period t.

(The government will have equivalent information when setting the money stock,
This information set includes knowledge of Pt and Mt. Based on

Mt.)

mation,

this infor-

everyone calculates the expected rate of inflation from period t to t+l,

E(iT1jI) =

(1)

. [E(log?÷1FI)

_loP].

Demand for real balances during period t depends inversely on
and

positively on a stochastic scale variable, At.

form, as in

the semi-logarithmic

Cagan (1956),

Mt/Pt =

(2)

I use

A.exp(_a+i).

The logarithm of the scale variable, At, is generated from a random-walk
process,

(3)

where

logA.

a

length,

At and

is

logA_1

white noise.

t.

a

=

+

a,

The variance of

a, is proportional to the period

People know the value, of At at the start of period t--that is,
are

contained

in the information set, I•

Taking logarithmic first differences of equation (2), and using equation
(3) and the definitions of

tT

(4)

=

Note that
the

=

and

leads to the condition,

- a.

+ a(r1 -

(l/t)[E(logPII_1)

-

logP1].

Equation (4) indicates that

inflation rate, iTt, is above (below) the monetary growth rate, ii, to

the extent of the proportionate fall (rise) in real money demanded from

period t-l to t. The change in real money demanded reflects either a change
(multiplied by the proportionate sensitivity
in expected inflation,

ir

of money demand, a), or a proportionate change in the scale variable, a =

log(A/A1).
The government's real revenue from money creation for period t is
(5)

(Mt/Pt) -

(M_Mt_i)/Pt

Rt

(M1/Pi)(P1/Pt).

Substituting for the real-balance terms from equation (2), and using the
condition, I1_l/I'.t = exP(_1rr), leads to the expression,
(6)

=

A.exp(_aIr1)

-

A1exp(_a1r_1Tt).

For given inflationary expectations

between periods t

and t+l,

there is a given amount of real cash that people will hold during period t,
(Mt/Pt) =

A.exp(_a7r+i).

Given this term, governmental revenue will be

higher if the real value of money carried over from the previous period,
Mt i/Pt =

A1.exp(_r_1rr),

can be reduced. Therefore, if

could be

held fixed (and for a given value of the prior expectation, ir), revenue

would be enhanced by choosing monetary growth, ,

in

order to engineer a

-6-

higher

value of

Higher inflation depreciates more real cash, which

allows the policyniaker to provide more new real cash as a replacement.

course, this procedure works best when

Of

is insulated from the deterinina-

and i__that is, when people do not anticipate a repetition of the

tion of

high rate of depreciation in the real value of their money.

The model has to

clarify the interconnections among anticipated inflation rates, ir and

monetary growth, 1i and inflation, it•

This

analysis requires a theory of

expectations, as well as a model of the policymaker's incentives to choose

different rates of monetary expansion. The discussion deals first with the
objectives of the policymaker. The solution to this problem- -which private
agents are
theory

The

assumed to

understand--ultimatelY provides the basis for the

of expectations.

Policymaker's Objective
The government likes more revenues from money creation- -perhaps because

the alternatives are either extra revenue obtained from distorting taxation or
less (valuable) public expenditures. For any period the policymaker values
each mit of real revenue from money issue by the positive amount, e. This
valuation

would be higher

in times when alternative revenue sources require

greater welfare losses at the margin. Possibly, e would be especially high
during wartime, in other periods where government expenditures have risen

sharply from previous levels, or in recessions. In this model changes in the
logarithm of the e parameter are regarded as unpredictable--that is, I use
the random-walk specification,
(7)

loO = loge1

+

where

is white noise, and independent of a in equation (3).

The vari-

ance of c,, c, is proportional to the period length, T. People know the value

of et at the start of period t--that ,

and

are included in the infor-

mation set,

The policyinaker is also concerned with costs from inflation. The usual
liquidity costs, which are associated with the quantity of real money

demanded during period t, involve the expected inflation rate between periods

t and t+l, ir1. The actual inflation rate between periods t-l and t, w, is
assumed to entail separate costs from the standpoint of the policyinaker. There

might be costs of changing prices, L Se, as well as losses from

unexpected

inflation. The costs of inflation, as perceived by the policymaker,
are written as the function, $(1r, ir1).

These costs have units of

commodities per year. The total costs incurred over period t, which
has length r, are equal to
Overall, the government's objective concerns the net costs of inflation
for each period, Z,, as calculated from

(8)

Z.

1T+1) - OtRt

'+) - o[Aexp(_ctir1)

-

where the formula for Rt has been substituted from equation (6). The cost
function satisfies the properties, /9ir. > 0 and
tion placed on revenue,

> 0. The valua-

is subtracted from the costs ascribed to actual

and expected inflation. In general the policymaker would seek to minimize
the expected sum of net costs--that is, of the Zr's__where each period's cost

is expressed in present-value terms. The expectations of the Zr's would be
evaluated as of some appropriate starting date.

The Choice of Monetary Growth under Discretion
The analysis of discretionary policy follows the general line of argu-

ment presented in Barro and Gordon (1981). The policymaker selects the

monetary growth rate, p, for each period. Under discretion, there are no
possibilities for prior constraints or commitments that would restrict the
subsequent choices of monetary growth rates.
At date t the expectation of inflation that was formed last period, ir,

cannot be altered. Suppose for the moment that current and future inflationary

expectations, TT1,

t+2'

...,

are also treated as givens by the policymaker

during period t. The choice of Pthen determines
given the exogenous disturbance, a. The value for

from equation (4),

also determines the

real revenue for period t, Rt, from equation (6) (given the values of At and

At1). Therefore, we can compute the full effect of

on the contemporaneous

net cost, Z, in equation (8). With the various

held fixed (and future

restricted by current actions), there are no effects in this model of

the choice of p on future Z.4's. Therefore, the optimizing policymaker
would choose

in order to minimize the contemporaneous net cost, Z.

More generally, the iT's will be related to expectations of future
p .'s. Hence, the 11e .'s can be held fixed above only if the choice of
t+1
t+1

has

no implications for expectations of the 1+1' In the present con-

text each

will emerge from a minimization problem that starts from

date t+i. The choice of

and the resulting value for

do nothing to

-9-

alter the objective characteristics of this problem for any future period.
Therefore, it is reasonable to look for an equilibrium solution to the model
where the

are invariant with the selection of i. (Note that there

is nothing to learn about in this model--in particular, people already know

held

the government's objective and "technology.") With the

varies. (In other

when

it is reasonable also to hold fixed the

fixed,

words there will be a sensible equilibrium that satisfies this condition.)
follows from the

For a discretionary policymaker, the choice of
e
first-order condition, (3Z
e
t /i)
t1lT, IN
t

-

= 0,

as

t+l,

-

(9)

0.

=

This calculation uses the conditions, (rr/ji) 11e

t+l

,re

and (ir'÷1/u )

e

=

o:

t'

(The period length ,

t+l

t,

1 (from equation (4)L,

appears multiplicatively in

both terms in equation (9) and has been cancelled out.) Rewriting equation (9)
yields the condition,

=

(10)

Afexp(_a1T_7rt.T)

The monetary growth rate, '

is

Ot(M1/Pti).exp(_1rt.r).

chosen so as to equate the marginal cost of

(actual) inflation to the marginal benefit from additional revenue. The
latter quantity equals the valuation per unit of revenue, O, times the
marginal effect of

on revenue, R. With

and

held fixed, it

follows from equations (5) and (6) that aR/P =

Notice

that--because

is held fixed when

changes--the marginal

cost of expected inflation does not enter into the first-order

-10-

condition. The discretionary policymaker also does not consider any effects
of monetary behavior- -via influences on expected inflation--on the real

money demanded for periods t-l or t.
In order to obtain some closed-form results, I specialize the cost

function to

=

(ii)

(k1/b).exp(bT)

+

(k2/b).exp(b?r1);

k1, 1c, b > 0.

The exponents, b, could differ in the two cost terms without affecting most

of the results. Equation (11) implies positive and increasing marginal costs
are also entered in separable

for actual and expected inflation. (r and

form in this example.) With this specification of costs, equation (10) implies

k1.exp(b1T) =

(12)

GtAi.exp(_rtT).

Rearranging terms and taking logarithms of both sides yields

=

(b+T)rr +

(13)

=

where recall that

log(O1A1/k1)

log(O/O1).

the implied choice for

+

Given the formula for rr in equation (13),

(given rr1, ir and at) can be determined from

equation (4).

Rational Expectations

Equations (4) and (13) determine actual rates of inflation and monetary
growth,

and u, as functions of exogenous variables and the expected

inflation rates, 1T and 1t.1• In order to close the model, these expectations must be determined.

I use a rational expectations condition,

11—

=

and

E(Trt+iIt)

=

E(rIi).

The information set,

observations of all variables for date t, including M, ''

includes

0

and At.

People also use knowledge of the model's structure in order to calculate

these expectations. Most importantly, everyone understands that the policymaker chooses

in each period in order to minimize costs_Z from equation

as

(8)--while treating ir and

givens. Hence, they know that equation

(13) holds. In a full equilibrium, people's inflationary expectations,

and

ir,

will be consistent with

well-informed

projections of the policy-

maker's future choices of monetary growth. Although the policymaker is not
forced to accord with these expectations (which will appear as givens to the
policymaker during each period), the first-order condition in equation (10) will

in

guide the choices to this result

equilibrium. That is, the poliymaker will

not be motivated in equilibrium to deviate systematically from people's prior

expectations.
People form the expectation, ir, based on the information available in

period t-l. The variables,

and At_i, are known at this date. Therefore,

taking expectations of equation (13), conditional on the information set

the expected inflation rate must satisfy

(14)

=

(i/b+a+r).log(O1A1/k1),

where I have used the condition, E(JI

=

0.

The formula for rr can

be

substituted back into equation (13) in order to calculate the actual inflation
rate,

The form of equation (14) can be updated by one period to determine
the anticipated rate of inflation between periods t

results for ir, ir1 and
determine

can

be

the monetary growth rate,

and t+i.

Then, the

substituted into equation (4) in order to

12—

is

The period length, t,

As T

parameters, b and ct.

(15)

(16)

(17)

0, the full solution to the model is as follows:

=

(l/b+c).log(e1A1/k1)

=

(l/b+a).log(O1A_1/k1)

=

(l/b+ct).log(OA/k1)

=

(l/b+).{log(O_1A1/k1)

ir÷1

(18)

now assumed to be negligible relative to the

=

where recall that

log(OIe)

+

and a =

(l/b)c,

-

act/T

+ baT],1

log(A/A_1).

The solution for monetary growth and inflation is an equilibrium in the
as

following sense. First, at a point in time, the policyinaker treats
given and regards 7T+l as generated from the expectations mechanism in

equation (17)--in particular, ,r1 is invariant
Given

and

setting for

to

and the relation of

with the choice of
from equation (4), the

in equation (18) satisfies the policymaker's first-order

condition for minimizing Z, as specified in equation (13).

Second, the

expectations mechanisms in equations (16) and (17) are rational--that is,
=

E(rlI1)

and

=

E(+1jIt),

given that monetary growth for each

period follows the form of equation (18).

Notice from equation (10) that the marginal cost of inflation,

must be positive in equilibrium. Therefore, if k1 =

0--so

/ir,

that no costs

are attached by the policymaker to actual inflation, 7r__then no finite

equilibrium values for

and

are determined in equations (15) and (18).

This case corresponds to the one explored by Calvo (1978), where the discretionary policymaker considers only the maximization of revenue, R.

-13--

Within a discretionary setup where the policymaker attempts to minimize

net costs in each period, Z, the results provide a positive theory of mone-

tary growth and inflation. As long as

> 0, inflation and monetary growth

depend on the two variables that move around in the model, 0 and A. A higher
level for °t-1. (given the value of

=

log(O/e1))

means a greater value

placed on revenues. Hence, in an equilibrium where the first-order condition
from equation (13) is satisfied, the values of Tt and

are higher.2

Similarly, a higher level for real money demand, At_i (given a =

log(A/A1))

encourages the revenue objective relative to the cost of inflation (if the

cost parameter, k1, is held constant3). Therefore,

and

At_i. A higher value for the cost parameter, k1, reduces
Although

rise with
and

expectations are rational, surprises do occur because of

the stochastic terms in the model. The amount of unexpected inflation
follows from equations (15) and (16) as

(l/b)c.
When the valuation of revenue rises unexpectedly--that is,
> 0--inflation

=

log(e/O1)

is unexpectedly high. This result obtains because the policy-

maker is motivated by the rise in 0 to incur a higher marginal cost of

inflation, which means a higher value for ir. The positive value for

means also a: rise in the expected inflation rate--that is, -iT >

0

from equations (16) and (17). Because of the reduction in real money demanded,
we need a downward shift in

in order to satisfy equation (4) (hence, the

term, _ac/; in the expression for in equation (18)). Expected future
rates of monetary expansion rise with

—14-

A surprise shift in the level of real money demanded, at =
does not generate unexpected inflation (although it does produce unanticipated
monetary growth). Given Ai a higher iraiue for at means a higher level of
At. Revenue rises from equation (6) in accordance with the term, (Mt/Pt) =

A.exp(_a1r+i). However,

with

treated as invariant with the choice of

a shift in this term leaves unaltered the value of

that satisfies the

policymaker's first-order condition. The term, ai does influence the
relation between monetary growth and inflation in equation (4). This
element raises

A positive value for a

for a given value of

raises anticipated future rates of monetary growth, which means
for a given value of
increase in rye1. This element lowers

also
an

in equation (4).

On

net, a leads to an (unexpected) expansion of

5
The
horizons.

and

model determines the variance of the inflation rate over various

Using equation (15) and

the

random—walk specifications for log(O)

log(A) (from equations (3) and (7)),

the

variance of the inflation

rate is

(20)

VAR(TrtlIO) = (l/b+ct)2(t-1)(o2+a2)

+

(l/b)2a2,

where 1a is the information available in period zero. The variance of the
inflation rate depends on the variances of the two innovation terms,
The

forecast variancefor

and

increases linearly with the distance in time,

t. The variance for the log of any future price level, log(P) can also be
determined as a function of a2 2a and

-15-

Discretion versus Rules
Constant State Variables

the discretionary regime the policymaker holds fixed current and
future inflationary expectations' when deciding on period t's rate of
In

monetary growth. Since these expectations are, in fact, related to
monetary

behavior, the discretionary policymaker is unable to internalize

some

effects of his actions. Recall the form of the

from

equation

(8),

-

t'*(T,

The

objective function

Ot[Atexp(_air+1)

-

discretionary policy-maker has no way to consider the effects of monetary

behavior on inflationary expectations, which influence

costs, *(ir, '+l' and

revenues, through the terms, exp(_c1n+1) and exp(-ctir).

The difference between discretion and policy rules--or commitments--can

best be clarified by initially suppressing the variations over time in the
= e, and
state variables, O and A. Assume now that
At = A, so that
=
=
at 0 holds for all t. The discretionary solutions now dictate constant
rates of monetary growth and inflation. The results follow from equations
(15)——(18) as

p=

(21)

Suppose

that the

(l/b+)log(oA/k1).

policy-maker could restrict himself in advance to

a particular value for future

monetary growth. That is, the policy-maker

-16-

rules out the possibility of altering his subsequent behavior, even if

such alterations would appear advantageous, ex post. In this case there
would be a linkage between the policymaker's choice of (constant) monetary growth, .i, and the values of inflationary expectations. Namely,

1T

would hold for all periods t. Rather than treating expectations

=

s givens at any
growth

subject

point

in time,

the

policymaker would now choose monetary

to the condition that ir

i holds

for all t.7 Because

the state variables are constant, it also follows here (from equation (4))
that it

= i, and (from

equation (6)) that R/t =

The policymaker's objective still entails minimization of net costs-which are now the same

for

all periods (see, however, n. 7 above)--

e) —

z =

OR

(22)

=

Given that ,1e

=

r(k1/b)

.exp(bir) + r(k2/b) .exp(blTe) - t8lA.exp(_aiTe).

= i holds,

the optimizing value for the monetary growth

rate, denoted by , satisfies
+

This condition

the first-order condition,

9A(l_a1*) .exp(_*).

k) .exp(blz*)

can be rewritten as

=

+k
log( 12

)

+ log(l_ctu*).

-17-

If

is much less than one (which means that p

revenue-maximizing rate), then log(l_cj*)z for 1.1*

can

then

ct.

well below the purely

The approximate solution

be written as

u l.10g(6A) jf * is

(23)

is

much less than one.

Since people anticipate this monetary behavior under a rule, their expectaaccord with

tions,
71*

= (e)

and

with

the actual inflation rate.-that is,

=

Compare the choice of monetary growth under a rule,

with

the value

of from equation (21), which arises under discretion. The growth rates of
money and prices tend to be higher under discretion for two reasons.8
First, by neglecting the interplay between monetary behavior and (future)

inflationary expectations, the discretionary policymaker ignores the costs

of expected Inflation. Therefore, the cost parameter k2 is absent from
equation (21), but is present in equation (23). Second, the discretionary
policymaker neglects the negative effect of higher anticipated inflation-associated with higher expected rates of monetary expansion--on real money

demanded. This factor enters into the rules solution of equation (23)
through the parameter, 2c&. For the discretionary solution in equation (21),
a appears instead of 2a.

Viewed alternatively, suppose that ii' were conjectured to be the equilib-

rium rate of monetary growth

under

discretion. This rate of monetary expansion

18-

minimizes net costs in equation (22), given that e and ir move one-to-one with
i.

But,

jf ii

(at

all dates) were set by the formula in equation (23), the

discretionary policymaker--who is not bound to set i.i = U*__WOuld not find

this rate of monetary growth to be advantageous. Rather, a (surprisingly)
higher value for monetary growth, which depreciates more of the initial real
9

balances (in each period), would be preferred.
added

The increase in costs due to

inflation would be more than outweighed by the gains from additional

revenue. Of course, agents would not then maintain their inflationary

expectations at the

value indicated in equation (23). The full equilibrium

under the assumption of an

unrestricted policymaker is the

outcome that is specified in equation

discretionary

(2l).

Net costs, Z, are lower under the monetary rule__1* in equation (23)--thafl
under discretion--'i in equation (21). It is unclear whether revenues are higher

under rules or discretion. Since monetary growth is higher under discretion
(n. 8 above), revenues will also surely be higher under discretion if the rate
i

from equation (21) is below the purely revenue-maximizing rate, which is

1/a in this model. Using equation (21), this condition holds if (OA/k1) <

expj(b+a)IaI.

(Because the discretionary policymaker does not internalize

the full consequences of his monetary behavior, it is conceivable that he
would choose a monetary growth rate that exceeds the revenue-maximizing rate.)

Changes in the State Variables
Given constant state variables, e and A, discretion and rules generate
constant values for monetary growth, which are u and

respectively.

When

0 and A move randomly over time, the discretionary choice of monetary growth

-19-

also moves randomly, as shown in equation (18). What does a monetary rule
dictate when the state variables change? Suppose that we interpret a rule
as a commitment to a prescribed functional relation between

tinent state variables__Or, At, '

a'

and the per-

etc. Then, we could in principle

solve for the rule that minimizes the expected sum of net costs--that is,

the Zr's__in present-value terms. The expectations would be evaluated as of
some starting date (see below). Although I have not figured out how to
determine the best contingent rule of this type in the present model, it is
clear that such a rule would outperform discretion- -in particular, it would

be possible to deliver a lower level of Z, contingent on any configuration
for the state variables.11 Basically, the contingent rule differs from
discretion only because it allows the policymaker to internalize the relation

between monetary behavior and inflationary expectations. The consideration
of this linkage can only allow for better preformance, regardless of whether

o and A are constants or variables. (Note also that discretion is one form
of "rule" that is admissable to a policymaker who can choose among all possible contingent forms of action.)

Alternatively, it might be argued that only simple commitments can be

adequately monitored and enforced. (The fact that I have not figured out the
optimal contingent rule in the present model may or may not be evidence in

this context.) Rules with a Lull set of contingencies may be infeasible.
Then, the operational choice would be between discretion and simple rules.
Discretion has the advantage of responding "flexibly" to movements in the

state variables. (This flexibility may be valuable in a model, such as
the present one, where it would be desirable to alter monetary behavior

in response to new information.) However, the nature of the response and

-20-

the choice of average monetary growth under discretion are "wrong,t' because

they fail to internalize the connection between monetary behavior and

inflationary expectations. That is, the discretionary policymaker lacks the
valuable option of making binding promises (long-term contracts with the

public) about his future actions. A simple rule exercises this option, but
misses the flexibility of response to changes in the state variables.

To illustrate, suppose that logO again moves as the random walk,

(24)

logO =

loge

+
1

A applies for all t. Suppose

For simplicity, continue to assume that At =

that the only admissable form of rule is a constant-growth-rate rule. At
some starting date, 0, the policymaker makes a once-and-for-all, binding

selection of the monetary growth rate, .
have--for all periods after period

of

Since At is constant, we also

= ire=

. Further,

time is constant in all periods after period 0 at the amount, R/T =

= Aexp(-a).
(25)

Net costs for any

Z=

t(k1+k2)

b

period

t >

1

A'

revenue per unit

are therefore given by

A

A

A
.exp(bii)
- tBuA.exp(_cw).

The expected net costs for any period t > 1, as calculated at date 0, are

(26)

E(ZIIo)

A
= T(k1+k2) •exp(bM) b

A

A

T1tA.expc_cp).E(OtII0),

where I is the information available at date zero.
in equation (24) is normally distributed with zero mean

Suppose that
and variance,

=

a•r.

The parameter, c2 represents the variance over a

period of unit length. Then, conditioned on 1, log(e) is normally distributed
with mean log(e0) and variance 02•Tt. (Note that t is measured in periods

and T in years per period, so that Tt is measured in years.) The expectation

of

is then

(27)

E(elI0) =

where I have used the standard formula for the mean of a log-normal variate

(Aitchison and Brown, 1957, Ch. 2). Note that a random walk for log(O)
means a drift in

at rate

per year.

Suppose that we neglect matters for period 0 (as we did above in n. 6), which

would otherwise bring in the initial state of inflationary expectation,

e 12
if0.

(The policymaker may

be

able to "cheat once" by picking

n.) Assume

that the policymaker cares about the sum of expected present values of net

costs from period 1 onward. That is,

V

(28)

t= 1E(Zt

is chosen to minimize the quantity,

ho) .exp(-r.rt)

=

- rTt) - TAO0.exp{- -

t=1

where r is an exogenous, constant real discount rate, expressed per unit of
time. I assume that r >

which generates a finite sum on the right

side of equation (28). (That is, the discounting outweighs the drift in
As T - 0, the sum can be evaluated as

(29)

Assuming that

V = (k1+k2)

rb

A

•exp(bii)

-

A

A

itAO0exp(-au)/(r.-

is much less than one (that is, that

1

2

)

is well below

—22—

the purely revenue-maximizing rate), the value

of

that minimizes V is

given by

(30)

(b+2a)1°

A comparison of equation (30) with equation (23)

indicates

that the

new feature is the variance term, a2. If a2 is higher, relative to r,

the value of the monetary growth rate,

is increased. Essentially,

the policymaker recognizes that the mean of

advances over time in

accordance with the value of a2. Given the assumed inability to match

to et at

each date, the policymaker compensates partially by picking

a higher value for
is

at the start. Of course, as time passes, the rate

likely to depart farther and

farther from the rate that would have

been chosen on a fully contingent basis. There might eventually be,
sufficient pressure to generate a breakdown in the constant-growth-rate

rule. But, in order to analyze this situation, we would have to specify
precisely the conditions that motivate a departure of monetary growth from

the value .

although

We

would then have a rule that allows

for limited contingencies,

not for a full set of these contingencies.

It is possible to compare the outcomes from a constant-growth-rate

rule, as specified in equation (30), with those generated under discretion, as

shown in equation (21). It is now uncertain which method of operation delivers
the lower sum of expected present values of net costs (say, from period 1

-23-

onward). The expected costs can be calculated explicitly for the two cases,

although the results are hard to interpret. Generally the relative sizes
of the two expected costs depend on the parameter values, c, b, A, k1, k2,

and r. For example, a high value for k2 tends to favor the simple rule,
because discretion does not internalize the responses associated with this

parameter. However, a higher value for 2 favors discretion, because the
flexibility of adjustment becomes more significant as a2 rises.

Concluding Remarks
The interaction between monetary behavior and inflationary expectations

determines the time path of inflation. In order to understand this interaction
and the mechanisms by which expectations are generated, we have to model the

money-supply process. In the present analysis monetary behavior reflects the
governmentts desire for inflationary finance, subject to some concern about

the costs of inflation. The outcomes depend heavily on the characteristics
of monetary institutions. Specifically, there are important distinctions
between discretion and rules. In a purely discretionary regime the monetary
authority can make no meaningful commitments about the future behavior of

money and prices. Under an enforced rule--such as a serious gold standard
or statutes that restrain monetary growth--it becomes possible to make these
conunitments, which amount to long-term contracts with holders of the govern-

ment's liabilities. Thereby, the policymaker can internalize some linkages
between monetary actions and inflationary expectations--some of these connections are missing under discretion.

The analysis distinguishes fully-contingent rules from commitments of a

simple form, such as a constant-growth-rate-rule for the money supply. Abstracting

-24-

from costs of erecting and enforcing the rules, discretionary monetary policy

is always inferior to a fully-contingent rule. The comparison with limited
rules is ambiguous. The rules allow the internalization of some links between
policy actions and inflationary expectations, but discretion permits some
desirable "flexibility" of monetary growth.

Generally, monetary institutions are important in two respects. First,
the characteristics of these institutions--such as discretion versus rules-matter for predicting the actual course of monetary growth and inflation.
That is, institutional features matter at the level of positive analysis.

Secondly, it may be that economists' normative analysis of governmental
policy is usefully directed toward changes in institutions, rather than to

day-to-day operating procedures within a given regime. Whether this is so
depends on a positive theory of institutional choice, which is not well developed.

One specific issue needs more attention. The contrast between discretion
and rules amounts to the distinction between no promises and fully-binding

promises. There seems to be a middle ground where policymakers can build up
a reputation--that is, credibility--which is based on past actions. We want
to know when these reputational forces will substitute satisfactorily for
formal rules of law--that is, for fully articulated monetary or price rules.

Reputation seems to work well in many types of private exchanges, as well

as in some areas of governmental policy. We want to know when reputation
will generate satisfactory outcomes in the context of monetary growth and
inflation.

-25-

Footnotes

'As t

-0

the resulting revenue per unit of time, Rt/T, can

(Rt/T)=() {etlAtlIaogetlAtl] + b[]
21f

a =

= 0,

be written

[}J

ut(Mt/Pt).

then the eqi..libriuni amount of revenue per unit of time

(n. 1, above) rises with

if and only

<

l/c--that

is, if and only if

the monetary growth rate is below the revenue-maximizing value for the context of a once-and-for-all choice of ji.

ecular

growth, which leads to a steady increase in real money demand,

would tend to be accompanied by a parallel rise in the cost parameter, k1.
These changes leave

and

unaltered over time.

4As r ÷ 0 the variance of e/r approaches infinity. - In other words jumps

in the money stock are required in order to maintain equality between money

supply and demand at all points in time. However, the policymaker acts in
this model to avoid jumps in the price level--see equation (15).
5The term, a/T, appears in equation (18). The variance of this term

approaches infinity as T 4- 0.

Hence, jumps in the money stock can occur,

as discussed in n. 4 above.

6The variance of the monetary growth rate, p,

is

infinite. However,

the variance of the log of the future money stock, log(M), is finite.
71n some initial period where the rule is implemented, say date 0,

expectations need not be realized. That is,

p may apply. Under

reasonable assumptions, this element has a negligible impact on the
policymaker's once-and-for-all choice of the monetary growth rate.

-26-

8Equations (21) and (23) imply
k +k
p
2)

- p = (-)log(

k1

4(b+c)(b+2ct)

p > p* follows unambiguously if log(OA/k1+k2) >

0--that

is, if p > 0 in

equation (23).

9This preference does not require any difference of opinion between
the policyinaker and the typical member of the private sector. The valua-

tion of revenues, O, reflects some externality (for example, from distorting
taxation). The inflation surprise lowers the welfare loss from this existing
distortion.

10There may be other equilibria where people condition subsequent infla-

tionary expectations, rr1, ..., on the history of monetary growth, including

(This conditioning arises in these cases although

affects no objective

state variables that appear from date t+l onward.) These types of reputationa].
equilibria are fragile because they always allow the policymaker to "cheat"

in the short run. (Recall from n. 9 above that this cheating may be
socially optimal, ex post.) An important issue is the potential for the
policyinaker to reinstate a reputation for low inflation--this process cannot

be too easy, or else cheating would always arise (and the equilibrium would

then be the discretionary one from equation (21)). Some discussion of these
matters appears in Barro and Gordon (1981, Section 6).
11Rules would also deliver a variance for the inflation rate that

differs from the one generated under discretion in equation (20).

In a

larger model the forecast variance for the price level might enter into the

cost function, Z in equation (8), or in the money-demand function.

-27-

12

Under reasonable assumptions, this element would not have a significant
impact on the policymaicer's once-and-for-all choice of monetary growth rate.

We would also have to consider whether the implementation of the monetary
rule were anticipated at earlier dates--that is, it may be inappropriate
to treat

as an arbitrary parameter.

—28—

References

Aitchison, J. and J.A.C. Brown, The Lognormal Distribution, Cambridge,

Cambridge University Press, 1957.
Auernheimer, L., "The Honest Government's Guide to the Revenue from the
Creation of Money," Journal of Political Economy, 82, May/June 1974,
598-606.

Bailey, M.J., "The Welfare Cost of Inflationary Finance," Journal of

PoliticalEconomy, 64, April 1956, 93-110.
Barro, R.J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2, January 1976, 1-32.

___________ and D. Gordon, "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a
Natural-Rate Model," University of Rochester, November 1981.
Cagan, P., "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in M. Friedman, ed.,
Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money, chicago, University of Chicago
Press, 1956.

Calvo, G., "Optimal Seigniorage from Money Creation," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 4, August 1978, 503-17.

Kydland, F.E. and E.C. Prescott, "Rules Rather Than Discretion: the Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy, 85, June 1977, 473-91.

Lucas, R.E., "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
American Economic Review, 63, June 1973, 326-34.
Phelps, E.S., "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance," Swedish Journal of
Economics, 75, March 1973, 67-82.
Sjaastad, L., "Why Stable Inflations Fail," in M. Parkin and George Zi, eds.,
Inflation in the World Economy, Manchester, Manchester University Press, 1976.

Taylor, J., "Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic Macroeconomic
Models with Rational Expectations," Econometrica, 45, September 1977,
1377-86.

