NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN AMERICAN AND BRITISH STATURE
SINCE THE MID-EIGHTEENTH CENTURY:
A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE USEFULNESS OF
DATA ON HEIGHT FOR THE ANALYSIS OF SECULAR TRENDS IN
NUTRITION, LABOR PRODUCTIVITY, AND LABOR WELFARE*

Robert W. Fogel, Stanley L. Engerman, Roderick Floud,
Richard H. Steckel, T. James Trussell, Kenneth W. Wachter,
Kenneth Sokoloff, Georgia Villaflor, Robert A. Margo, and
Gerald Friedman

Working Paper No. 890

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
May 1 982

*This is a progress report on "Long-term Trends in Nutrition, Labor
Productivity, and Labor Welfare," a project sponsored by the
National Bureau of Economic Research and the Center for Population
Economics of the University of Chicago. Parts of the research
reported here have been supported by grants from the National
Science Foundation, the Social Science Research Council of London,
the British Academy, the Exxon Educational Foundation, Harvard
University, Ohio State University, Stanford University, the
University of California at Berkeley, and the University of
Rochester. The findings are tentative and subject to change.
Statements made in this report do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research or any of the other
cooperating institutions or funding agencies. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research in Development of the
American Economy.

NBER Working Paper #890
May 1982

Changes in American and British Stature
Since the Mid—Eighteenth Century:
A Preliminary Report on the Usefulness of
Data on Height for the Analysis of Secular Trends in
Nutrition, Labor Productivity, and Labor Welfare
Abstract

This paper is a progress report on the usefulness of data on physical
height for the analysis of long-term changes in the level of nutrition and

health on economic, social, and demographic behavior. It is based on a set
of samples covering the U.S. and several other nations over the years from

1750 to the present. The preliminary results indicate that native-born
Americans reached modern levels of height and nutrition by the time of the
American Revolution, but there were long periods of declining nutrition and
height during the 19th century.

Similar cycling has been established for

England. A variety of factors, including crop mix, urbanization, occupation,
intensity of labor, and immigration affected the level of height and nutrition,

although the relative importance of these factors has changed over time. There
is evidence that nutrition affected labor productivity. In one of the samples
individuals who were one standard deviation above the mean

height (holding weight

per inch of height constant) were about 8% more productive than individuals

one standard deviation below the mean height. Another finding is that death

did not choose people at random. Analysis of data for Trinidad indicates that
the annual death rate for the shortest quintile of males was more than twice as
great as for the tallest quintile of males.
Robert W. Fogel
Stanley L. Engerman
Roderick Floud
Richard H. Steckel
T. James Trussell
Kenneth W. Wachter
Kenneth Sokoloff
Georgia Villaflor
Robert A. Margo
Gerald Friedman

Robert W. Fogel
University of Chicago
Center for Population Economics
1101 East 58th Street

Chicago, IL 60637
(312) 962—7709

Changes in American and British Stature
Since the Mid-Eighteenth Century:
A Preliminary Report on the Usefulness of
Data on Height for the Analysis of Secular Trends in
Nutrition, Labor Productivity, and Labor Welfare
1. Nutrition and

Human Capital

It is now well established that investment in human capital, especially
through education, has made an important contribution to the

increase of

labor

productivity and per capita income during the twentieth century (Schultz,
Abrainovjtz, Denison, Becker, Griliches, Jorgenson and Griliches, Kuznets, Nelson

and Phelps, Fishlow, Hanson). Although not as fully researched, several

economists as early asIrving

Fisher have also

called attention to

improved nutrition, public sanitation, and improved health as significant forms
of investment in human capital (Weisbrod, Mushkin, Kuznets, Fuchs, Perlman,
Barlow, Grossman, Meeker 1972 and 1974, Higgs, Fogel and Engerman 1974, Cain).
Nevertheless, until quite recently, the general tendency of economists was to
treat improvements in nutrition and health more as background influences than as
main factors in the explanation of the long-term growth of per capita income in
the U.S. and in other industrialized nations.

Several recent developments have called new attention to the possibility
that improvements in nutrition and health may have been far more central to the
process of economic growth than is usually presumed--not only for

and

the eighteenth

nineteenth centuries, but for the twentieth century as well. One is the

debate over the explanation of the decline in mortality since 1800 in Great
Britain, the United States, and other industrialized nations (Blaug; Coale and
Hoover, Easterlin 1977, Eversley, Flinn, Habakkuk, Higgs, McKeown and Brown,
McKeown 1976 and 1978, Meeker 1972, Razell 1974 and 1977, Schofield, van Bathe,

van de Walle, Wrigley). Another is the emergence of development economics,
which has also turned attention to the economics of nutrition and health. It
was rapidly recognized that improvements in nutrition and health were central to

the alleviation of poverty in underdeveloped nations. This finding stimulated the
Copyright

1982 by Robert W. Fogel. Not to be cited or quoted without approval.

—2—
growth of a subfield in the economics ol food and nutrition (see the review
articles by Taylor and Johnston), which is concerned with such issues as the
impact of systems of food production and distribution on food consumption
within families; the links between malnutrition and income distribution; the
effect of malnutrition on the supply of labor; the effect of food subsidies,
not only on demand and supply in the market for food, but also on demand and
supply in non-food markets; and optimal governmental strategies for improving
nutrition and health.
A third development is the emergence of a new emphasis on the effect of

improved nutrition on labor productivity. This line of analysis has been
stimulated by a series of advances in the fields of nutrition, development

economics, labor economics, and economic history. During the post-World War II
period, nutritionists developed estimates of caloric and nutrient requirements
for various occupations and labor tasks (FAO 1957 and 1962, Durnin and Passmore,

Davidson eta). Investigations of the effect of malnutrition, and of its
elimination, on labor productivity have been performed both in laboratory studies
of human

subjects

(Keys et) and in observational studies of laborers in actual

work situations (Wyndham et a!, Kraut, Lehmann et al, Lowenstein, FAO 1962,

Belvady, Areskog et jJ. These reveal that malnutrition results in a reduction
in the number of days at work as well as in substantial declines (as much as

50 percent) in work capacity while at work. Such findings have led economists
to explore the theoretical implications of including consumption as an argtunent

of firm and aggregate production functions (Leibenstein, Correa and Cummins,

Mirrlees, Stiglitz, Bliss and Stern). The paper by Bliss and Stern, the most
comprehensive examination of the question to date, includes a section on the
possibility of econometric measurement of the contribution of nutrition to

production. One of the major obstacles, as they point out, is the difficulty

-3—
of obtaining an adequate index of the level of nutrition.

2. Objectives, Procedures, and Sources of Data
This paper is a progress report on a collaborative project aimed at
investigating the usefulness of data on physical height for the analysis of
long-term changes in the level of nutrition and health on economic, social

and demographic behavior. The project, which was initiated in 1978, is now

in

mid-course. The findings reported here cover research completed through

the end of 1981. Section 2 of the paper summarizes the principal research
objectives, the principal samples on which the project is based and the
procedures employed in the analysis of the data contained in these samples.
Section

3 presents the principal findings through 1981. Section 4 discusses

some possible implications of these findings for the understanding of long-term

changes in economic and demographic behavior. Appendix A summarizes previous
research by anthropologists, physiologist, biologists, nutritionists, and
others on the relationship between human growth and socioeconomic conditions.
Appendix B deals with various tests of the samples listed in Table 1 and with
the procedures that have been employed for the detection and correction of
biases

that

might distort our estimates

2.1 Detailed

In

secular trends in heights.

Objectives

pursuit of the general goal of this project, the following detailed

objectives have been

in

of

formulated: (1)

to

establish and compare secular trends

the level of nutrition in the United States, and in the main nations from

which the U.S. population was drawn, over the period from the mid-eighteenth
century to the present; (2) to measure secular changes in the differences in
nutritional levels between various socioeconomic classes; (3) to assess the
validity of various real wage indexes now employed as measures of the improve-

-4ment in the economic welfare of laboring classes; (4) to assess the impact of improved
nutrition on labor productivity; and

(5)

to assess the impact of nutrition on

demographic rates.

2.2

Procedures

This project relies on measures of

height as the principal. index of the level of

nutrition. Both laboratory experiments on animal populations and observational studies
of human populations have led physiologists and nutritionists to the conclusion that
anthropometric measurements are reliable indexes of the extent of malnutrition among

the socioeconomic classes of particular populations.1 Measures of height and weight
at given ages, the age at which growth

of

stature terminates,

attained final heights,

and especially the rate of change in height or weight during the growing ages

"reflect accurately the state of a nation's public health and the average nutritional
status of its citizens" (Eveleth and Tanner). Consequently, these measures are now
widely used by the World Health Organization and other agencies to assess the
nutritional status of the populations of underdeveloped nations.
Use of anthropometric measures as measures of nutrition rest on a well-defined

pattern of human

growth

between childhood and maturity. The average annual increase

in height (velocity) is greatest during infancy, falls sharply up to age 3, and then

more slowly through the remaining pre-adolescent years. During adolescence velocity
rises sharply to a peak which is approximately one-half of the velocity during infancy,

then falls sharply and reaches zero at maturity. In girls the adolescent growth sput
begins about two years earlier, and the magnitude of the spurt is slightly smaller

than in boys. Girls and boys are about the same height prior to the spurt and the
difference in adult size between men and women is largely due to differences in the
adolescent spurt.

This growth pattern reflects the interaction of genetic, environmental,

1See Appendix A which summarizes the findings of the principal studies. For
more extensive descriptions see Tanner 1978 and 1981. The relationship between height,
per capita income, and the distribution of income is analysed by Steckel (1982) for a
cross section of 163 present-day populations for which the required data are available.
evidence on the relationship between
anthropometrjc measures,
nutrition, and health.

-5and socioeconomic factors during the period of growth.

According to Eveleth and

Tanner:

Such interaction may be complex. The genotypes which produce the same
adult heights under optimal environmental circumstances may produce
different heights under circumstances of privation. Thus two children who
would be the same height in a well-off community may not only be smaller
under poor economic conditions, but one may be significantly smaller than
the other. . . . If a particular environmental stimulus is lacking at a time
when it is essential for the child (times known as 'sensitive periods'),
then the child's development may be shunted, as it were, from one line to
another.
The relative importance of environmental and genetic factors in explaining
individual variations in height is still a matter of some debate. For most wellfed contemporary populations, however, systematic genetic influences appear to

have very little impact on the mean heights. For example, the mean heights of
well-fed West Europeans, North American whites and North American blacks are nearly

idential. There are, of course, some ethnic groups in which mean final heights of
well-fed persons today differ significantly from the West European or North American

standard. tn these cases the deviation from the European standard appers to be due

to genetic factors. But such ethnic groups have represented a miniscule proportion
of the U.S. and European populations. Consequently, they are irrelevant to an
explanation of the observed secular trends in mean final heights in the U.S. and in
the Various European nations since 1750; nor can they account for the differences at
various points of time between the means in the final heights of the U.S. population
and the principal populations from which it was drawn.2 In this connection, it
should be noted that today the mean final heights of well-fed males in the main
African nations from which the U.S. black population is derived also fall within
the narrow band designated as the West European standard (Eveleth and Tanner;
Appendix A).

2The belief that heterosis (hybrid vigor) would make Americans substantially
taller than the ethnic groups from which they were drawn has not been sustained by
previous anthropometric research. See Cavalli-Sforza and Bodmer for a theoretical
argument as to why the effect of heterosis in human populations is small. ()ir
investigations have failed to yield consistent signs on dummy variables for either
males or females born of mixed unions. The magnitude of the positive coefficients
for adults, not all of which are
statistically significant, fall in the range of 0.17
to 0.66 inches. The average of all the coefficients so far estimated for adults
(N = 9) is 0.19 inches.

-6-

Physiologists, anthropologists, and nutritionists have charted the effect

of nutritional deficiencies on the human growth profile. Short periods of
malnutrition or prolonged periods of moderate malnutrition merely delay the

adolescent growth spurt. Severe, prolonged malnutrition may completely erode

typical growth-spurt pattern and. cause substantial permanent stunting. If
malnutrition is prolonged and moderate, growth will continue beyond the age at
the

which the growth of well-fed adolescents ceases. Hence, the average age at
which the growth spurt peaks, the average age at which growth terminates, the

mean height
indicators

secular

during adolescent ages, and

of

mean

the mean final height are all important

nutritional status. Any one

of

them can

be

used to trace

trends in nutrition. The more of these measures that are available,

the more precise the determination of the severity and duration of periods of
malnutrition.

Time series on height may be more reliable indicators of long-term changes
in the welfare of the laboring classes than are the currently available indexes
of real, wages. Critics of the real wage indexes that have been computed for
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, in both the U.S. and Great Britain,
have noted the problems that beset the existing time series of nominal wages
as well as the price deflators. The nominal, wages for particular localities
and particular occupations often remain relatively fixed over many years, sometimes even during periods of sharp fluctuations in the level of prices, so that

the trend in real wages depends heavily on the choice of price indexes. Price
deflators are generally lacking in information on the cost of shelter, which
in

the more rapidly growing cities, may have accounted for more than

of

the income of laborers. Efforts to turn wage indexes of particular

occupations
indexes

and particular

a quarter

localities into general regional or national wage

have produced nominal wage indexes whose movements are dominated for

long periods of time by

changes in a few occupations or localities and

by

—7—

discontinuities in underlying series. Von Tunzelmann's recent examination of
the real wage series for England revealed that different reasonable ways of
combining the individual, series of nominal wage rates and the choice of different

price deflators could imply either a rise of 250 percent in the national average

of real wages between 1750 and 1850 or no rise at all. Data on height by
occupation are more complete in their geographic scope than the wage data,
especially for the lower-wage occupations, and do not need to be deflated by
price indexes.

In addition to these problems of constructing an accurate and representative
index of real wages, the usefulness of the series currently available is limited
by a failure to distinguish between the experiences of different socioeconomic

or geographically defined subpopulations. The height-by-age data have the
significant advantage of allowing one to isolate a particular class of the
population and observe how the movement of its nutritional experience (which
was perhaps the major component of the standard of living for the economy during
the early stages of development) diverged from that of other classes. Although
an accurate

not

real wage series would certainly reflect aspects of material welfare

invovied with nutrition, it should also be recognized that height captures

the effects of conditions, such as the level and intensity of work, not typically

encompassed by real wage data. Even when real wage indexes of high quality are
available, height-by-age data constitute a valuable additional source of
information on a population's standard of living, and their attractiveness is
further enhanced for the U.S. during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
by the poor quality of

the existing alternative indicators.

3Suppose, for example, that real-wage and nutritional indexes, cleaned
of measurement error, diverged. Such divergence would point to aspects of the
standard of living not adequately captured by a real wage index, such as changes
in the number of days worked, in the intensity of labor, or in environmental
conditions not speedily reflected in prices.

—8-

Several alternative approaches are being pursued for the investigation of

the effect of nutrition on labor productivity and labor supply. One is to
relate the number of days of illness to final height. Published data on
morbidity rates by city size and other characteristics are available for the

last several decades of the nineteenth century. These can be related to the
data on height through regression analysis, with cities or counties as the units

of observation. We have also identified several bodies of data (see item 9 of
Table 1) that permit micro-level analysis of the relationship between height

and productivity using wage rates as the measure of productivity. These sources
provide information not only on the height, age, sex, and wage rates of each

individual, but also report education, occupation, and family wealth. A third
approach involves the use of mean height as a variable in production functions
estimated for both agriculture and manufacturing, with counties as the units

of observation. A closely related approach involves the computation of indexes
of total factor productivity for both agriculture and manufacturing industries;
height will then be used as a variable in explaining the variations in these

indexes for specific industries across counties. The last two procedures will
be attempted first for production in 1860, making use of the height data derived
from the Civil War samples and of input and output data for large samples of
farms and manufacturing firms collected by previous investigators and already
on computer tapes.4

4Although income affects height and. height affects productivity, and
productivity affects income, the relationship is not necessarily simultaneous.
Final height will generally be determined not by the present income of the
individual whose height enters into the analysis of productivity, but by the incomes
of the parents of that individual during his growing years and the incomes of his
great-grand-parents during his parents' growing years. The intergenerational effect
will be stronger, the more rapidly incomes are changing over time and the more
tight the control for occupations,

social class, etc.

- 9, —
2.3

The Principal New Samples

As shown by Table 1, the project is based on a set of thirteen samples of
data containing information on height-by-age and various socioeconomic variables,

and which cover the period from 1750 through 1937 for the United States, Trinidad,
Great Britain, and Sweden. Cooperative arrangements will be undertaken to obtain
comparable data for other nations from which the U.S. population was drawn,

including Germany and France. The data in these samples will be linked with data
available in both manuscript and published sources. Such linking will increase
the range of variables that can be brought into the analysis and the complexity of
the interrelationships between height, nutrition, and economic and social behavior
that we seek to investigate.

Table 1 also shows the, progress of the work toward the retrieval of the

data and its transcription into machine-readable form.

The number of observa-

tions currently in such form exceeds or is close to the original targets for
samples 1, 2, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 13.

5 and 12 and is at an early stage or

Retrieval

is in midstream for samples

yet to begin for samples 3, 4, 8, and 9.

When the total number of observations in a given source was sufficiently

small, all of the surviving data were collected. For larger bodies of data,
samples were drawn by random techniques. For example, in the case of the
sample

designated as "Union army, whites (item 1

procedure

of Table 1), a cluster sampling

was employed. A number was first assigned to each of the approximately

25,000 white companies in the Union army. A random number generator was used
to draw about 1,000 companies from the total. The records of about 75 percent
of the selected companies have been found; the remainder were destroyed by
accident or lost before reaching the National Archives.

Similar procedures have

20,000

Colonial muster rolls,

7.

8.

30,000

Constwlse manifest,, 1810-1863

1906-1907

laII River Survey,

1750-1703
3,01)0

100,000

6.

army, 1790-1910

Regular

5.

IJ.S.

UnIon army,

1.

5,001)

5,000

Confederate army

%.

rejects

5,00(1

2. Union army, blacks

I.

Table
1

0

14,000

51,000

43,000

Oth!r U.S. Samples (5-9)

0

0

10,000

53,000

(1-4)

of Observations
Currently on Tare
Plumber

PRINCIPAL SAHPI.lS

-

CivU!.5mle,

PlumberoF flbservaUons
Originally Planned

40,1)01)

Samples

Ilulout army, white

Title of

11111

- 10

as

I (except

I

I,

I
antI/or

height by age and sex by
varIous socioeconomic
characteristics for
working children of school
age

Villailor

Steckel

Villofior

Engerman/logel

Engerman/Fogel

engerman/Eogel/Margo

i3ngermnn/iogel/tIargo

get,yleval

Analysis

Investigators
Responsible (or

except no mortality ingerman/Sokoloff/

information

same as

height,

age, color, sex
dates and points embarkation
and arrival; covers all ages
of both males and females

as

rejection

same

(or

lusFoimation) pius reason

sante

mortality

plus complexion,
status

I,

same as I

rrevlolls

same

cause of death, various
ocloeconomic characteristics;
covers mainly ages 18-45

htigbt, age, mortality,

Inc iuded

Categories
or Information
Plalut

1150-1910

Marine Society, boys.

1815-1831

13. Swedish conscript rolls,
1750-1910

12. Military recruitment records
1150-1910

11.

10. Trinidad,

9. Cost of living surveys,
1934-1937

Title of Samples

of Observations

30,000

110,000

70,000

30,000

10,000

2

•

30,000

31,000

50,000

12)

25,000

0

Number of Observations
Currently on Tape

British Sa.ples (11 and

Originally Planned

tiumber

SAMPLIIS

1 (cont)

11 —

TlI PRINCIPAL

Table

—

Engerman/Eriedman

Goldin

service, and various
socioeconomic characteristics for mates.

Sandberg/Steckel

same as 11, except for
Floud
father's occupation; mainly
for males aged 16-15

height by age, years of

4
Investigators
Responsible for
Retrieval and/or
Analysis

height, age, and various
Floud
socIoeconomic characteristics including father's occupation, literacy and vaccination;
ages mainly 12-18

height, age, color, births,
deaths, and various other
socioeconomic variables for
all ages and both sexes

wealth

various socioeconomic
characteristics including
occupation, wages. days
ill, education and family

heIght for all family
members by age, sex, and

Included

Main Categories
of Information

3

— 12 —

been, or are being, worked out for the samples designated as "Union army, blacks,"
"Union army rejects," 'regular U.S. army," and "British military

recruitment

records"

(items 2, 4, 5, and 12 of Table l). In the cases of the "colonial muster rolls,"

7 and

and "Trinidad" (items
on

height and

have

age

samples has been

10 of Table 1) all surviving records with information

been included. The problem in the case of the colonial

to ensure that the search for surviving

been exhaustive.

records has

In the case of the "coastwise manifests" (item 6 of Table 1), all the surviving
records for Savannah were included and a judgment sample (of about 16,000

observations)

was chosen from the Mobile and New Orleans record sets.

determine

We will not be able to

of

sample (item 3,

Table 1)

our sampling procedure for the "Confederate army"

'.mtil we colete the survey of southern archives and

determine the volume and condition of

surviving records.

The use of these samples to infer secular trends in
mean adolescent heights
and in the mean final heights of

particular subgroups of the U.S. and other

populations presents a number of statistical problems, some of which are novel.
Much effort during the past four years has been devoted to the assessment of the
selection biases inherent in the data sources and to the development of robust
procedures capable, not only of detecting them, but also of making the appropriate

adjustments. Tests of the procedures so far

effective. The

nature

them, and results

developed

indicate that they are quite

of the biases, the procedures that have been devised with

of tests are

discussed in Appendix B and in the sources cited

there.

30f the 10,000 observations on tape
in item 2, about 2,000 are from a
random sample and 8,000 are from a judgment sample. We expect to expand the
random sample to 5,000 observations, although for many issues the characterof the random and judgment
samples are sufficiently close to yield
similar conclusions.

istics

- 13

-

3. Preliminary Findings

Although the major portion of the work over the past three years has been
devoted to solving problems of data retrieval, data management, and the development
of appropriate statistical procedures, preliminary analyses of the data have already
yielded striking findings regarding secular trends in heights, in nutrition and

health, and in the welfare implications of these trends. The secular pattern of
native-born U.S. whites prior to 1910 appears to be substantially different from

that of most European populations. Similarly, the experience of U.S. blacks
diverged from that of blacks born in the Caribbean or in Africa.

3.1 The Early Achievement of Modern Stature
and Improved Nutrition in the U.S.
By the time of the American Revolution, native-born whites appear to have

achieved nearly modern final heights. The analysis of a sample of recruits from
the Revolutionary army(1775-l783) indicates that the final height of native-born

white males age 25-35 averaged 68.2 inches. This figure is not only 1 to 4 inches
greater than the final height of European males reported for several nations

during the late seventeenthand early eighteenth centuries, but is virtually
identical with final heights in the Union army during the Civil War and in the

U.S. army during World War II (see Table 2).6 Extending the analysis to a sample
of recruits during the French and Indian War (1756-1763) indicates that final

heights were increasing during the middle of the eighteenth century. After

he evidence on adult heights in Eurone during the eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries have not generally been analyzed for secular trends and in
some cases have not yet been adequately analysed for truncation bias. The
principal studies of European heights during this period are cited in Appendix A.
Only the series for Norway (Kiil) and the sample of Swedish heights recently retrieved
and analysed by Sandberg and Steckel provide continuous series that reach back to
the first half of the eighteenth century.

- 14

-

Table 2
Mean Final Heights of U.S. Native-Born White
Males in Three Wars

Age
Category

Sample
size

Sample
mean

Standard
error

(inches)

(inches)

American Revolution

24-35

968

68.2

0.08

Civil War
Gould sample
Baxter sample

25-30
23-34

123,472
54,931

68.2
68.2

0.01

World War II

20-24

119,443

68.2

0.01

-—

Note: Computed from data in colonial muster rolls, Gould, Baxter and
Karpinos. The Revolutionary, Gould, and Baxter samples are based on
inductees. The World War II sample includes rejectees. Maximum mean
height in the World War II sample falls in the 20-24 age category. The
data in Baxter's stiary do not permit the calculation of the standard
error of the mean. Data presented by Karpinos indicate that inductees
were about 0.09 inches taller than examinees. Data presented by Baxter
indicate that inductees were 0.03 inches taller than examinees.
None
of these averages are corrected for truncation bias, but the preliminary
analyses indicate that such corrections would not reduce the figures
shown by more than 0.2 inches.

- 15 -

controlling

for place of birth, place of residence, and occupation, cohorts born

between 1740 and 1765 were 0.4 inches taller (t =

2.4) than those born between

1715 and 1739. Since cohorts born before 1740 still attained final heights that
averaged above 67.5 inches, it appears likely that improvements in nutrition began
early and were quite rapid in America.

This inference

discovered by

is supported

by data on food consumption

in Massachusetts

McMahon. Wills deposited in Middlesex county between 1654 and 1830

indicate a sharp rise in the average amount

of meat

allotted to widows annually

for their consumption. Between c.l675 and c.1750 the average allotment increased
from about 80 to about 165 pounds per annum. Over the next 75 years allotments
rose more gradually, reaching 200 pounds at the end of the firstquarter of the
nineteenth century. Both the evidence on stature and on food allotments suggest
that Americans achieved an average level of meat consumption by the middle of the
eighteenth century that was not achieved in Europe until well into the twentieth
century (cf. U.S.D.A.).

3.2 Cycles in Height
The estimated mean

final

heights of males for the three wars reported in

Table 2 do not necessarily imply a perfectly flat secular trend between c.l778

and c.l943. Contrary to the popular impression that there have been continuous
secular improvements in nutrition and increases in height, the evidence thus
far analysed in this project indicates that there may actually have been cycles
in height of both native-born whites and blacks residing (but not necessarily
born) in the United States.

Analysis of information contained in the coastwise manifests indicates

the

final heights of slaves born in the early l790s was about a half inch less

than those

born

that

born in the late 1770s (see Figure

1). The

final heights of cohorts

after 1790 increased for about 20 years, so that cohorts born after 1815

were slightly taller than cohorts born during the late l770s and l780s.

4)

•rI

•rl

-

-

1770

Source:

-—----

------

Figure
1

-fR*1+H-1

-

—-

-

---

1810

-- --------- ---

----- ----------------

-------

--

L8oo

16

-

1820

-

Time Profile of Height of Slave Men Aged 23-49

-

-

-------

1790

manifeotu.

1760
Slave

-

1830

181,0

Yenr of

Birth

— 17 —

Thereafter

final heights remained fairly steady at about 67.3 inches for

cohorts born through the early 1830s. The data in the manifests now available
is too sparse to carry the analysis of this time-trend beyond cohorts born in

the early 1830s. But the data on blacks taken from the Union Army muster rolls,
which mesh quite well with the results from slave manifests for overlapping
cohorts,

have

indicate that cohorts born in the late 1830s and early l840s may

experienced a decline in final heights that was even sharper than that

experienced for cohorts born between 1780 and 1795.

The time trend in the final height of northern, native-born whites is
somewhat

different

front that of U.S. slaves. The rising trend observed for

cohorts born before the Revolution levels off and appears to have remained
fairly steady for cohorts born between the Revolution and the end of the

1790s. The regular army data needed to continue the trend from 1800 to 1819
have not yet been processed, but the preliminary analysis of a subsample
(N = 773) of Union army records bearing on this period, which covers only the

last

few years of the teens, suggests that cohorts born during the first two

decades may have experienced increasing final heights. It also appears that
their upward trend leveled during the 1820s and then declined (see Figure 2).
Over a period of 15 years the decline in the final heights of native-born whites
appears to have been about one inch.

7Analysis of trends in heights of adolescent slaves confirm the general
revealed by adult heights, except that the amplitude of the cycles in
adolescent heights are even greater than in final heights (cf. Steckel 1979a).
Taken together the evidence on adolescents and adults suggests that there were
periods of deterioration in nutrition and health of slaves that substantially
retarded their rate of development during adolescence, but that this loss in
tempo was partly compensated by a longer period of growth that permitted some
"catching up."

pattern

- 18

—

Figure 2
AN INDEX OF THE TREND IN THE MEAN FINAL HEIGHTS OF U.S. NATIVE BORN

WHITES, BY BIRTH COHORT, 1819- 1836

(estimated from data on recruits into the Union Army who were
between ages 25 and 44 at the time of measurement)

69.3;
oLa

I'
I

Lu
61.;

•

••

•

•

61.3 .

67.9

67.5

66.? •

1

p—

11161711 i91lo 2223 42$ 3723
Source:

Fogel et al 1979.

291*3031 3233 34213534 3Z,31 361*40

- 19

-

There is also evidence of a cycle in stature between the Civil War and
World War II. When data in Karpinos and in U.S.D.H.E.W. (1965) are arranged
by birth cohorts, it is possible to calculate the growth rate of mean final

height for cohorts born between c.1906 and c.l931. Table 3shors that final
height increased at a rate of 1.2 inches per generation between the cohorts
born c.1906 and c.l9Zl; between the c.l92l and c.1931 cohorts, the rate was

2.7 inches per generation. Obviously, even the 1.2 inch rate could not have
extended back to the Civil War. That would require the final height of c.1863
to have been about two inches below the level indicated by the Gould and

Baxter samples. Indeed, since the final height of the c.1906 cohort is about
a half inch below the final height shown in the Civil War data, it seems that
sometime between c.1863 and c.1926 (1906 +

20),

final height declined.

Preliminary analysis of the British data has been focused on the trend
in heights in London of adolescent boys from poor families over the period

from 1770 to 1870. This analysis reveals that the mean height of boys aged
14-16 from families of laboring classes was relatively steady from c.1775
to c.l790 and then declined for two decades, the lowest point coming about

1810. The extent of the decline was about 1.5 inches. From c.lSlO to
c.1838 mean heights increased quite rapidly, at a rate of 2 inches per decade

so that the maximum previous mean was exceeded by 1820. After c.1838 heights again
appear to have declined, but the new rate. of decline was only about 0.2 inches
over a period of 20 years, after standardizing for socioeconomic characteristics.
The exact timing of the sharp rise in height following the close of the

Napoleonic wars is still under investigation. Although future work on
statistical issues might lead to an expansion or compression of the period of
rapid increases in heights, it is clear that poor adolescent boys in London
were about 4 inches taller after 1838 than their counterparts had been before

1790. Indeed, the adolescent poor of London in the late eighteenth century were

- 20

-

Table

3

TWENTIETH-CENTURY GROWTH RATES IN MEAN FINAL HEIGHT OF U. S. MALES
(estimated from cohorts measured in c.1943 and c.1961)

Part A: Mean Final Heights Arranged by Cohorts
Age category when
measured

Sample size

Midpoint of the interval

Mean height, at time

of

in which cohort was born

measurement

From U.S.D.H.E.W. (1965)
1.

25-34

10,281

1931

69.11

2.

35-44

11,373

1921

68.11

From Karpinos
3.

20-24

141,803

1921

68.15

4.

25-29

99,786

1916

68.06

5.

30-34

96,704

1911

67.81

6.

35—38

53,624

1906.5

67.58

Part

B: Growth Rates Per Generation Between Cohorts

Interval over which growth rate is calculated,
of cohort
by

birth

Growth rates (in. inches

per

30 years)

1921-1931

2.7

1906.5—1921

1.2

Note: Data from longitudinal studies of stature indicate that shrinkage does
not usually begin before age 50 (Tanner, privately communicated). If taller
individuals were more likely to survive to a given age, the estimated growth
rates would be biased downward, but the size of the bias would be small. If,
for example, those who died between ages 30 and 40 were one inch shorter on
average than those who survived to age 40, then (using the applicable life
table in Preston, Keyfitz, and Schoen) one would have to reduce the height
of the c.l921 cohort by 0.03 inches before computing the 1921-1931 growth rate.
This change would increase the 1921-1931 growth rate from 2.70 to 2.77 inches
per generation. Cf. sections 3.4 and 4, below.

- 21

-

so short that only two of 81 ethnic groups for which modern height data are available,
record lower adolescent heights. These are the Lumi and Bundi of New Guinea--two
exceedingly impoverished populations. Even after the period of rapid increase,
poor London boys were still quite short by modern British standards; at age 14,
they were about 5 inches shorter than British boys of the same age today- -a gap that

is due partly to the slow rate of physical maturation and partly to the low final
height of the nineteenth-century boys.

3.3 The Influence of Economic and Social
Factors on Height
Multivariate regression analysis has been applied to several of the samples
of data listed in Table 1 in order to relate final heights to such economic
characteristics as occupation, migration experience, urban birth or residence,
race, and place of birth. At the present time, with a. few exceptions, the analyses
have been limited to the information about each individual contained in the
records on height. However, work i&. now underway to link information on the
individuals

in

individuals

and their families in

and tax lists,

the original data sources with information on the same
the manuscript schedules of censuses, in probate

and other records. For example, the individuals included in the

sample from the muster rolls of the Union Army are now being linked with

information on their households contained in

the

manuscript schedules of the

1850, 1860 and 1870 censuses and with the pension recordson these individuals

and their heirs, usually filed late in their life or shortly after their death.
In

this

not

way it

is

possible to obtain relevant information on the individuals,

only at the age of en1isttent, ut also during their growing years and in

their later life. Such linking also allows the analysis of the effect of intergenerational factors (such as the ethnicity, wealth and social status of parents and

grandtarents) on the development of children and grandchildren. Where such
interrelationships cannot be established through direct linking at

- 22 -

the

household level, it is possible to use cross-sectional regression techniques,

with counties or sinii.lar geographic divisions as the unit of observation, to anslyz
-

the

nexus between height and relevant social and economic variables.
The regressions so far performed on the muster rolls of the French and Indian

War, the Revolutionary War, the regular army during the early national period, and
the Civil War show that in all four periods (1756-1763, 1775-1783, 1815-1820, and
1861-1865), persons of foreign birth were about an inch or more shorter than those

native birth. There was a significant shift over time in the impact of urbanrural residence on the final heights of the native born. Beginning with final
of

heights virtually identical with native-born persons of urban

persons

birth, native-born

of rural birth gained an advantage of 0,8 inches by the time of the

Revolution, and this gap continued down to the time of the Civil War.8 There were
also significant shifts over time in the relationship between occupations and

stature. From only minor discrepancies in final heights between farmers and

other occupational groups during the colonial period, significant differences had
emerged by the time of the Civil War. Blue collar recruits are nearly 0.8 inches

shorter than farmers, after
four

adjusting for urban/rural and nativity

status.

In all

time periods, the cross-sectional regressions yielded statistically significant

coefficients on region of birth, race, and migratory experience.

8

.

Among the native born serving during the French and Inth.an War, there
evidence of a statistically significant relationship between urban
or residence
and stature. In the Revolutionary sample, the results are sensitive to the age
group over which the regressions are estimated. If the regression is estimated over
recruits aged 24-35, the urban birth coefficient is not significantly (in a
statistical sense) different from zero. The urban residence (for native born) coefficient is -0.9 and of marginal statistical significance Ct = 1.71). If one
estimates the equation over recruits aged 24-45, the urban
coefficient is
significant at the 90% level, and the urban r9sidence coefficient remains of iiarginal
statistical. significance. The negative coefficient on a native birth in an urban area
only becomes statistically significant and robust in the 1815-20 sample, when it is
-0.5 with a t-statistic of -4.12.

birth

birth

is no

- 23

-

Because ex-slaves in the Union army were geographically concentrated, the
sample already in hand is large enough to experiment with cross-sectional

analysis at the county level. The analysis of final heights was performed
on a sample of 913 ex-slaves who were between ages 12 and 17 at the time of

the 1850 census. On average, ex-slaves were about an inch shorter than nativeborn whites. Moreover, slaves from the deep-South states that specialized in
cotton and rice were shorter than those from border states engaged in tobacco

and general farming. These state differentials appear to be explained by the
positive correlation of height with per capita corn production,9 a negative
correlation with the median size of the slave plantation, and a negative
correlation with urbanization.

In the case of the London boys there is much information on their socioeconomic characteristics before they entered the Marine Society10 which may
be relevant in explaining variations in heights, but analysis of this information
is retarded by the limited range of differences in the occupational categories,
by variations in the minimum height standard, and by the rapid pace of change.
Two characteristics which do appear as significant determinants of height so
far are addresses outside of London (which are associated with taller boys)
and the designation "destitute" (which is associated with shortness).

9Since corn was mainly
proxy for meat per capita.

a

feed crop, corn per capita may be viewed as a

10The Marine Society, the source of the height data on the London boys,
was a charitable organization which took in indigent or otherwise poor boys
and prepared them for careers in the merchant marine or the Royal Navy.

- 24 -

3.4 The

Influence of Height on
Social and Economic Behavior

One of

the bodies of data recently analysed bears on the impact of height

on the productivity of manual
treated

Some commanders of the Union Army

laborers.

runaway slaves as contraband of war, and

some of the usual information

found in

the

in addition to recording

muster rolls, they also included

information on the value of the slaves. One
in records for Mississippi, has

so,

recently

such

contraband list, discovered

been ana1yzed. The mean

height

of

523 adult males in this sample was 67.4 inches, with a standard deviation

of 2.8 inches--almost identical with the corresponding figures for Mississippi

recruits

obtained in the main sample of black companies (see line 2 of Table 1) .

11fhese records were discovered by Armstead Robinson. The estimates of
valueappear to have been made by bona-fide slave appraisers.
12The contraband sample is exceptional not only because of the information
on value, but also because it is a rare instance, for the early and midnineteenth century, when data are available for both height and weight. The
Mississippi slaves had a mean weight of 2.3 pounds per inch of height, when
measured at mean height. Corresponding figures for samples of adults aged
30-34 are 2.2 pounds per inch for whites in theUnion Army, 2.3 pounds per
inch for white registrants in Worid War II, and 2.3 pounds per inch for
black registrants in World War II. These weight-for-height figures indicate
that Mississippi slaves were slightly heavier, for given stature, than the
whites in the Union Army, but about the same as registrants for selective
service in World War II. The Union Army figure was computed
linear regression to the data in Gould, pp.426-428; the World War II figures
are from Karpinos, p.32.

by fitting a

- 25 -

Regression analysis revealed that the value of slaves was
associated with both height and
height

weight.

positively

A slave of average weight for his

who was one standard deviation taller than the mean height was worth

7.7 percent more than a slave who was one standard deviation shorter than
the mean height. Some part

of

this increment in value may

be

due to the

fact that tall slaves were, on average, stronger, healthier, and

capable

of

more intense labor than short slaves. But two other factors, which could
not be entered into the regression because of the absence of information on
them in the contraband sample, are probably also reflected in the differential

in value associated with stature. It is probable that healthy slaves had a
longer life expectation than unhealthy ones. It is also possible that slaves
in the more highly skilled jobs were taller than those engaged in field work.
Thus the increase in productivity implied by the height differential in value
could have taken several forms: one is greater intensity of labor per day
at a given task and for a fixed expectation of life and labor; a second is
unchanged intensity of daily labor at a given task with an increased expectation of life and labor; a third is unchanged intensity of daily labor and
life expectation, but employment in occupations requiring greater skill than
ordinary field work.
Analysis of the data in the Trinidad sample (see item 10 of Table 1)

bears on these possibilities. Height was a factor in the selection of
slaves for particular occupations in Trinidad. Among adult males craftsmen
were on average a half inch taller, and

drivers

(the foremen of field gangs)

were an inch taller than fieldhands, while domestics were an inch shorter

than fieldhands. Since slaves were not usually chosen for craft occupations
until their twenties, and since regression analysis revealed no relationship
between the occupation of the parents and the height of tue children, it

- 26 -

appears that the final height of children was not affected by their position,
but

that owners or overseers used height as a criterion for determining

which slaves would be assigned to particular occupations.
Perhaps

the most important result to emerge from the study of the

Trinidad data thus far is

slaves

that death did not choose slaves at random. Short

at every age during the life cycle were more likely to die than tall

slaves. After standardizing for age, the annual death rate for the shortest
quintii.e of males (47 per 1000) over a twenty month period extending from

1813 to 1815 was more than twice as great as that of the tallest quintile

of males (21 per thousand). Among females

the

the standarized death rates for

lowest and highest quintiles of height were 43 and 29 per thousand,

which suggests that female death rates were less sensitive to nutritional

circumstances than were males. One

implication

of this finding is that the

combination of the exceedingly high death rates in Trinidad and the large
impact of height on the probability of dying makes the observed height-by-age
profile rise more rapidly than would have been so in a less severe
environment

in

which a larger proportion of short slaves would have survived

to adult ages. Alternative simulations suggest that a 50 percent reduction
in the death rate with other factors held constant, might have reduced the
observed final heights of males by about.an inch.

4. Some Economic and Demographic Issues
Raised by the: Preliminary Findings
The apparent downward shift in the.U.S.- height profile for the. native-born

whites during the last several decades of the antebellum era does not imply

that the profile of every subpopulation declined. The decline might have

been heavily concentrated within the urban population. The rate of urbanization

- 27
accelerated

sharply after

-

1820, and conditions of life in the larger cities apparently

deteriorated. There is evidence in several northeastern cities of an upward

trend

in the mortality rates (Yasuba).

On the other hand, the decline might

been a consequence of an increased flow of immigrants; experiments on

have

animals indicate that malnutrition in one generation effects the
subsequent

size of

generations (Chandra). The patterns observed in the height-by-age

data are consistent with evidence that the period between 1820 and

1860 was

marked by an increase in the inequality of the income distribution, with the
heights and wages of common laborers falling relative to those of other groups
(Lindert and Williamson).

The two cycles in height discovered for U.S. slaves probably have somewhat

different explanations. Since the coastwise manifests did not distinguish
between foreign- and native-born slaves, and given the three-inch differential
between the height of U.S. slaves of African-born slaves in Trinidad indicated
by the data, an increase from 15 to 30 percent in the proportion of the African-

slaves listed in the manifests could account for about

born

three-quarters of the

decline in slave heights. Since the years between the end of the Revolution
and the close of the international slave trade witnessed a sharp increase in
first

slave

imports, such an explanation is plausible. Some part of the second

height decline (of slaves born in the late l830s and the 1840s) might be due to
ethnic mix, but it is unlikely that the share so attributed could exceed

one-quarter of the estimated decline. The Trinidad data indicate that first
generation of native-born males in non-sugar production were about 1.5 inches
taller than the African-born males, which suggests that about half the height

gap was made up in one generation. Moreover, it is probable that close to
half of the persons descended from Africans imported into the U.S. between

- 28

—

1783 and 1808 and bàii between 1835 and 1845 were not children but grand—
children or great-grandchildren of Africans. It seems likely, therefore,
that most of the second decline was due to a rise in the intensity of labor,
a decline in meat consumption, a rise in morbidity (cf. Steckel 197gb), or some
combination of these factors.

The changing levels of nutrition and health over time implied by the
height data have substantial implications for the study. of the U.S. mortality

experience. The evidently high level of nutrition in America at the time of
the Revolution may well provide a partial explanation of the high fertility
rates and low mortality rates, relative to Europe, which characterized the
early U.S. demographic experience.13As the consumption of food is a major
component of the standard of living in such preindustrial societies, the
advantage in height also provides strong evidence of the superior material

13
Recent summaries of evidence bearing on the link between nutrition,
fecundity (reproductive capacity) and fertility (actual reproduction) are
Bongaarts (1980) and Menkin, Trussefl. and Watkins (19&L)
Both papers stress

that moderate chronic malnutrition has only "a minor effect on fecundity" and

that the effect on fertility "is very small." However, famine and severe

chronic malnutrition can substantially reduce
how
much of the reduction associated with famine and severe chronic malnutrition
is due to a decline in fecundity (although amenorrhea and reduction in sperm

fertility. It is not clear

motility and longevity are involved) and how much is due to such indirect
factors as loss of libido, increased separation of spouses (because of search
for work or food) and, especially for societies during the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, because of increases in deaths which lead to a premature
ending of childbearing or to increased birth intervals (because widowhood
reduces sexual intercourse).

— 29 -

conditions enjoyed by the average American during the period. However, despite

the

close correlation between changes in heights and in mortality over the

period 1730-1865 (see N.B.E.R.), a substantial portion of the pre-1850 decline
in national mortality rates appears to be explained by other factors besides

changes in nutrition. The late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries
were characterized by the narrowing of interregional

rates

differences in mortality

between New England and the South. Crude mortality rates in Massachusetts

appear to have remained in the 15 to 25 per thousand range throughout this period,
while the rates for whites in the South declined from about 50 per thousand

to about 25 per thousand (Vinovskis, Fogel etal). The higher mean final
height found for the South than for the North during this period tends to dispel
the notion that the soutriern mortality rates were linked to lower levels of

nutrition in that area. It now seems more likely that superior nutritional
circumstances may have operated to close the gap between regional death rates
by counteracting factors that tended to increase mortality

in the South (dise

pool, climate, etc.). Fragmentary evidence suggests that southerners were heavy
consumers of meat in the late colonial and early national eras (cf. Sokoloff and
Villafior 1q72.;

L.. C. Gray).14

Nevertheless, it is possible that some part of the height advantage of
the South was due to the "Trinidad effect." Although death rates were far less
severe in the South between 1750 and 1860 than in Trinidad c.l8l3, the higher
probability of death for shorter persons would have tended to inflate southern

14

In 1901, the earliest year for which systematic surveys of food consumption
by region are available, the per capita consumption of beef and pork was about 4
percent greater in the South than in the North. The food survey is from U.S.
Bureau of Labor, pp. 647-648. The North is an
average of the NA and NC regions and
the South is an average of the SA and SC
regions, using the regional populations
as

weights.

- 30
heights

-

relative to northern heights, over and above the direct nutritional effect.

Consequently there not only appears to be a direct nutritional effect but (holding

nutrition constant) a mortality effect, and an interaction effect. The magnitudes
15

of these separate effects are yet to be determined.

We are currently preparing to study the relationship between mortality
and nutrition in the United States (or height as an index of nutrition) more

directly. Utilizing genealogical and military data from the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, we are beginning to link estimated mortality rates at a

county level with mean final heights for the geographic regions. We will also,
as previously indicated, introduce measures of nutritional status into production

functions for both the agricultural and manufacturing sectors. The results may
not be unambiguous, since the intensification of labor that enhanced productivity
and accompanied the growth of the manufacturing sector could have led to an increase
in the per capita energy output relative to the consumption of calories and nutrients
among adolescent laborers, and this may have produced a decline in stature.

15
The "Trinidad effect" might also have contributed to the decline in white
heights after the nhid-1820s shown in Figure 2, since persons from the earlier
birth cohorts who survived to be mustered into the Union army would be taller
than those from later birth cohorts, even if the mean height of each cohort at
a specified age (such as 30) was the same. Given the
prevailing mortality schedubes,
however, and the age span involved (25-45), the "Trinidad effect" could account
for only about one-tenth of the drop after the mid-1820s shown in Figure 2, and
it could not explain the preceding rise in heights.

— 31 —

It

cannot be assumed, therefore, that a decrease in the final heights

of native-born whites after 1825 necessarily implies a reduction in per capita

food consumption. It might seem unlikely that the stature of whites, who were
free and experienced most of their growth by age 20, would be much influenced

by changes in labor organization. During the nineteenth century, however,
especially before 1850, boys commonly entered the labor force before age 16
and the peak of their adolescent growth spurt generally was not reached until

age 16. Consequently, a decline in height could have resulted because there was
an increase in the per capita energy output of these young workers without a
corresponding increase in the per capita consumption of calories and nutrients.
British invesigations of child labor in factories during the nineteenth century

tend to support this hypothesis. Children of a given socioeconomic class who
worked in factories were substantially shorter at each age than children of the
same class who were not so employed (Great Britain 1833; British Association).
Still, it is possible that the food consumption of the urban laboring classes

did decline between 1825 and 1860. This possibility cannot be ruled out either
because of the slight downward trend in food prices or because of the upward trend

in some of the currently available indexes of real wages. Part

of

the. problem with

the wage indexes, as previously noted, is that the series on money wages may confound
urban

with

rural wage rates and is not adequately standardized for locational and

occupational mix.

Another

part of the problem is that the current measures of

consumer prices do not include data on the cost of shelter, which may have accounted
for a quarter or more of the total expenditures of urban laborers during this

period. There is considerable evidence that the rapid growth of the urban
population between 1820 and 1860 led to severe shortages in urban

housing,

- 32

-

and hence probably to a sharp rise in the price of shelter. The decline in
the availability of wood and the shift from wood to coal as a fuel source may

also have contributed to the rising cost of shelter. Consequently, it is
entirely possible that an index of consumer prices that included the cost of
shelter would show that the real wages of urban laborers declined between

1825 and 1860. Moreover, if the income and price elasticities of the demand
for shelter by urban laborers (at the relatively meager incomes of the time)
were sufficiently low, sharp rises in the cost of shelter could have led to
decreases in the amount of food consumed, particularly in the consumption of
such relatively expensive foods as meats and fish, even in the face of constant
or declining food prices.

In the English case, we have been able to make a comparison between
a series on heights and a widely used series on real wages for London artisans.
Although Von Tunzelmann has demonstrated that nation-wide indexes of real wages
are unreliable because of the implicit shifts in the weights brought about by
the splicing together of diverse series, there is still the question of whether

indexes for particular localities and classes of labor are reliable. Also at
issue is the assumption that trends in the real wages of artisans mirror those

of common laborers. Tucker's series on the real wage of London artisans benefits
from the restriction of its geographic scope to one locality. When one compares
the mean height of boys aged 14-16 from families of common laborers in the
London area, over the years between 1775 and 1865, with Tucker's series, a

certain degree of conformity is evident (see Figure 3). The heights of the boys
will reflect their cumulative nutritional experience over their lifetimes, and
especially the experience of the years iimnediately preceding and during the growth

spurt. Accordingly, the height series is related to the wage series lagged five
16

years, although longer lags (10 and 13 years) provide similar results.

16Each observation is an average of 10 years centered at the indicated date.

54

56

5$

s7$o

$715

'rl
C)

,f-4

3

33

-

I
11*0
I

I

1
S

1100

I

$105

aio

I

Ills
YEAR

YEAR,

$110

I

The Mean Ileight of Boys Aged 14-16 From Families
of London Laborers Compared with Tucker's Index
of the Real Wage of London Artisans 1770-1865

FIGURE

-

$15

i

g3o

s

1*35

4o

of

$50

I.

real wages

Tucker's index

I

in

U,

0

C44

$160

40

50

60

Ins.

I

$70

Iftight Measured

inches

Mean-

- 34

-

The two series generally move together during both rising and declining
phases, except for the last two decades. The results suggest that for most
of the century, the real wages of artisans and of the poorest sections of

the London working class tended to move together in London. On the other
hand, the elasticity of height with respect to Tucker's wage index is not
constant, and the preliminary regression analysis of the relationship between
the height of boys in the Marine Society and the occupations of their parents
suggests that the difference in height by occupational strata within the

laboring classes changed over time. These findings raise the possibility
of a changing relationship between the wages of conunon laborers and of artisans

even prior to 1840, and illustrates the problem of generalizing from the
experience of one group of a population (or the average) to those of other
groups.

54

56

1110

$715,

33

-

1790

IllS

I$5

$100
$110

Ills

us

(130

L J_J

YEAR

YEAR,

$$1O

of London Laborers Compared with Tucker's Index
of the Real Wage of London Artisans 1770-1865

The Mean height of Boys Aged 14-16 From Families

—J—L_L[

4)

•r-I

•rI

0

4)

V.'

FIGURE 3

-

1*35

$140

J.

Tucker's index
of real wages

7'

($50

•

I$5s

'-4

4)

0

4-4

4)

('3

($0

40

go

GD

.1

$170

Ill's.

iii

in inches

Hean- Height Measured

- 36 -

Figure A.1
Estimates of Heights of Males &ges 8 — 18
U.S.SIaes,Trinidad Slaves, Massachusetts Whites and British Whites,
Nineteenth Century

70
65

60
55

50
45

40
35

30
25

20
15

10

5
8

9

IC

II

12

13

14

15

Age

16

17

18

4

SOURCE:

I;2

>

E
U

>'

12

13

Tanner and Eveleth

BOYS

Age, years

11

14

Asiai,c HengIionv.w.fl.QlvI

A— -——A

10

Ahicn

9

S

S

S
S

15

S

S

DCI

'AS

t

—A

A— —*

•—• Iuvopesn(London

A....
I

16

11

o

-A

18

•:;

i

'.5

—

..

A_..ufQpean1LondQnp

.

S

S
%

'\\

\\\
S.

S\%A

.

'4

O

9

12

13

GIRLS

Age, years

1011

14

%
15

a— —Afrhcn .fig.nW1Ishsngton.DC?\
.
1—
£—.—- Asstic Howigkenç.weII.ott)

2

.30

>

i40

0

5
U

,A

44e'

7—

E6

>1
—'S

$_

B-

9-

10-

PROFILES OF HEIGHT VELOCITIES DERIVED FROM CROSS SECTIONS FOR
THREE CONTEt4PORARy POPULATIONS

.I
S

S

-

Figure A.2

- 37

16

9

1718

- 38
but

-

the British study reported that children employed in factories were

shorter and lighter at each age than those that were not) and Quetelet suggested

that the distribution of heights at each age was described by the normal curve.
Various studies between 1829 and 1875 showed variation in the age at which growth
of stature terminated, and as-socIated this-variation with socIoeconomic
factors (Villerme'; Quetelet, Dunant,

Gould,

Champouillon, Baxter).

The existence of the adolescent height and weight spurts was noted by

Roberts and more completely described by Bowditch in the late 1870s. Boas in
1892 and 1930, and then Davenport, Shuttleworth (1937, 1939), and Tanner (1962)
demonstrated that both in cross-sectional and longitudinal growth studies the
standard deviation of height at each age rose during the adolescent spurt,
reached a maximum

at

the peak of the spurt, and then declined. Boas (1892)

and Tanner (1959) also noticed that, although the distribution of height at
each age was approximately normal before and after the growth spurt, it was
slightly right-skewed as growth accelerated and slightly left-skewed as it

decelerated. During the past half century there have been numerous investigations
of the relationships between such measures of maturity as the height spurt,
skeletal age, age of menarche, dental age, and muscle growth (Shuttleworth;
Stoltz and Stoltz; Tanner 1962; Frisch and Revelle; Frisch 1974 and 1975; Tanner,
Whitehouse, Marubini, and Resele).

5.2. Secular Growth
Students of human growth during the nineteenth century debated the
question of secular shifts in the height-by-age profile but did not necessarily
presume

that

these shifts were upward. There was concern both in England

on the continent with the possibility that stature

and

might have declined CBoudin;

British Association; Floud 1978). Beginning in the late l920s, and continuing
at an accelerating pace down to the end of the 1960s, various investigators

- 39 -

called

attention to evidence suggesting that substantial upward shifts in the

height-by-age profile had occurred over the 50 to 100 years following the third
quarter of the nineteenth century (H. Gray; Boas 1935; Kill; Morant; Boyne and
Letich; Hathaway and Foard; Tanner 1966; Ljung, Bergsten-Brucefors and Lindgren;
Greu.lich 1976; van Wieringen; Gandevia).

While these studies have established a world-wide pattern in industrialized
countries during the past 100 years toward earlier maturation and greater final

heights, several important questions remain open. One is whether the secular
trend in heights has been (more or less) monotonic or cyclical. Some studies
indicate that while famines, epidemics, wars, and severe business cycles have
briefly interrupted or briefly reversed the pattern of secular growth (Tanner
1962; Udjus; van Wieringen), such episodes did not fundamentally alter the

generally upward thrust of secular growth. On the other hand, Trotter and
Glesser, using measurements of white and black cadavers, found evidence suggesting that the long-term pattern of change in U.S. stature might have been cyclical,

with substantial periods of no-growth or decline. Another question is
when

the secular growth trend began. Norwegian military data stretching back to

1740 indicate little change in conscript heights prior to 1830 and only about a
half-inch increase over the next 50 years (Kiil), but a sample of Swedish

military

data indicates that adult Swedish heights increased between 1720

and 1760, stabilized for about 3 decades, and then increased again after

1790 (Sandberg and Steckel). Dutch data suggest that from about 1860 to
about 1900 secular growth was experienced mainly by conscripts from lower
classes but that after 1900 conscripts from upper classes were drawn into
the process (van Wieringen).

5.3 Socioeconomic and Other Factors Influencing the Pattern of Growth
Observational studies of human populations and laboratory experiments
with monkeys have demonstrated the impact of nutrition on the shape and position
of the height-by-age profile (see Tanner 1962, Eveleth and Tanner, Tanner 1978,

- 40 and the sources cited in these). The height profiles of well-fed males
(females) in a given population are higher at all ages than of poorly-fed males
(females) from the saiiie populations. Moderate chronic malnutrition will delay -

the growth spurt and extend the growing period but will have only a small effect
on terminal heights. Severe chronic malnutrition leads to permanent and substantial stunting. Severe but brief episodes of malnutrition, as in wartime
famines, delay growth but are generally followed by rapid recovery and do not

affect final height. Laboratory experiments on monkeys indicate that growth is
affected by both caloric and protein deficiencies but that the effects of
protein deficiencies on growth may be more severe than caloric deficiences alone.

(Fleagle, Samonds and Hegsted; Elias and Samonds). Minor diseases have little
effect on the growth profiles of well-nourished children but may have transient

effects on the profiles of poorly-nourished children. Major diseases, as with
severe brief famines, delay growth, but recovery leads to catching-up and, with

the exception of disOrders of the growth process itself, do not cause
permanent stunting.

Twentieth-century studies show that urban

of

growth than rural ones and

residents have more

rapid tempos

achieve greater final heights (Eveleth and Tanner;

Tanner 1978). Quetlet found the same effect among the French in the 1830s but
Roberts reported that in Great Britain in the 1870s rural boys aged 8 to 13 were

1.5 to 3.0 centimeters taller than urban boys. It

thus appears that there may

have been significant changes over time and place in the effects of particular
socioeconomic variables on the tempo of growth7
17

In many

more developed nations, height differences by occupation are

narrower today than in the nineteenth century, but Sweden is the only nation
so

far

in which they have disappeared

(Tanner 1981).

- 41

-

There are differences in the height profiles by' race, both in tempo and
final heights, but the relative importance of genetic and environmental factors

is still a matter of dispute (Greulich 1958, 1975; Eveleth and Tanner). Well-fed
Nigerians have growth profiles quite similar to Europeans. Well-fed U.S. whites

and

blacks have the same

final

heights but blacks exhibit a more rapid tempo of

growth, with earlier peaking of the adolescent growth

spurt

and earlier menarche

than whites. Asians from high socioeconomic classes generally have a more rapid
tempo of growth than Europeans or U.S. whites, but have lower final heights. In
recent

years the difference in final heights between Japan and Europeans or

Americans has diminished.
Both tempo and

final heights are correlated with occupation, although

in twentieth-century U.S. and European populations the differences in final

heights appear to be relatively small. Tempo also appears to be affected by
birth order and number of sibs. Other factors affecting the height profile
include psychosocial stress (apparently operating through the rate of hormone
secretion); and climate, which may, over evolutionary time, have affected body
proportions, but which appears to have little effect on tempo or final heights.
The rate of growth appears to vary over the seasons of the year.

- 42

6.

Appendix B

Statistical
Much

of

our

-

-

Issues

work during the past four years has been devoted to

assessing the quality of the data in the samples listed in Table 1 (pp. tO-41)

and in working out procedures for the detection and correction of biases

that might distort our estimates of secular trends in height. Many of these
problems relate to the fact that the oldest and

most numerous bodies of

information were collected by military organizations. Use of military data
raises questions about. the extent to which soldiers and sailors were

representative of the underlying populations from which they were drawn.

The problem is different in volunteer armies and in conscript armies.
Volunteer armies, especially in peacetime, are selective in their admission

criteria and often have minimum height requirements. Consequently, even if
information on rejectees exists, there is the question of the extent to which

applicants are self-screened. In conscript armies virtually every male in
the eligible age, including those who offer substitutes or are otherwise
excused,

are examined and

measured.

procedures for the detection and

Our

correction

of b±as turn on a

combination of theoretical considerations, empirical information, and
simulation

fact

techniques. Much of the power of these techniques turns on the

that the distribution of final heights is well described by a normal

distribution. The standard deviation of this distribution is rather tightly
bounded

for European, North American, and Afro-American populations. Regardless

of the ethnicity or the socioeconomic conditions of the population, the standard
deviations appear

to

fall in the range of 2.6*0.6 inches8The distribution of height

18This is the case in large samples of complete populations. Of course
for smaller sarnples the range of the standard deviatIbn Is larger. For further
and the sources cited in then.
evidence, see Kemsley, Zarpinos,

- 43
at

-

each age during growing years is not normal, but is nearly so. Moreover,

the standard deviation of height foL.ws a pattern during the adolescent growth
spurt that is quite similar to the velocity profile. It rises as the growth
spurt approaches, reaches a peak at the peak of the growth spurt, and then

declines back to the level just before the onset of the spurt.

6.1. Sample-Selection Biases
Use of military records to measure secular trends in height poses a

variety of sample—selection biases. The most important of these is the problem
of left-tail truncation which is characteristic of both the U.S. and British

armies during peacetime. Truncation and other censoring problems are

discussed in section 6.3. Here we consider two other questions: the selfselection bias of volunteers; and whether persons rejected for reasons
other than height are nevertheless shorter than those accepted.

There is clearly evidence of self-selection bias in volunteer armies.

Persons of foreign birth and from cities are overrepresented. Native-born
individuals living in rural areas are underrepresented. Similarly, artisans
and non-farm laborers are overrepresented while farmers and those in white

collar occupations are underrepresented. Since there are significant differences
in height among these groups, it is necessary to standardize for these

characteristics in estimating the trend in aggregate heights. Necessary weights

are available from the federal censuses and other sources. Of course, much of
the interest turns on secular trends in the heights of particular groups which,
even if underrepresented, are nevertheless present in sufficient numbers to
permit analysis.

There is, of course, the issue of whether volunteers in
particular subgroups (e.g., blue—collar urban laborers aged 20-25) are

representative of the class from which they are drawn. Our approach to this

- 44

question

-

is to compare the characteristics of the volunteers in the peacetime

army with individuals of the same subgroups in wartime armies subject to
conscription (World War II), or in which a very high proportion of those of

military age were examined (the Civil War),or in scientifically designed

random samples (the U.S.D.H.E.W. sample of 1960-1962). Most of our work to date has
focused on the Civil War records of the Union army. The Civil War involved
a larger proportion of persons of military age than any

other

war in American

history. Thus about 95 percent of white males aged 18-25 in the Union States
were examined;, and about 75 percent of the examinees were inducted9 The
results of our investigation so far indicate, that with respect to height

volunteers from particular subgroups are representative of the subgroups from
which they are drawn, although we are still at an early stage of this

investigation. If subsequent research should indicate biases so far undetected,
that work will also provide the desired correction factors.

There is still the question of whether persons actually inducted into
the army, but rejected for reasons other than height, were shorter than those

accepted. The World War II data analysed by Karpinos show that 41 percent
of all those called for examination were rejected and that rejectees were an

average of 0.22 inches shorter than those inducted. Consequently, the failure
to take account of rejectees would bias the estimated mean final height of

the overall population upward by 0.09 inches. While a bias of this magnitude
is statistically significant because of the large sample size, it is too small
to have a significant effect on most of the points at issue in this study.

The data presented by Baxter

indicate

that the bias arising from the non-

measurement of persons rejected because of disease in the Union army introduces

19Esttmated from
(eneral

data

in Gould, Baxter, and U.S. Provost-Marshall-

- 45 -

an upward bias in the estimated final height of the overall population of
0.03 inches. Although we are planning to draw a sample
the Union army

records

of

rejectees from

(see Table 1, item 4) to further analyze their

characteristics, the expense of corresponding samples for other military
organizations does not now seem warranted.

6.2. Measurement Biases
These are a series of issues regarding the reliability of measures

pertaining to the height-byage schedule. Some pertain to the accuracy
of the age information, some to the accuracy of the height information.
Issues regarding age include age-heaping, whether ages are reported to the
nearest birthday or the last birthday, and whether ages were arbitrarily

assigned on the basis of height. Issues regarding height include heaping
on even heights, whether heights were rounded to the nearest inch (or
fraction of an inch) rather than to the last full inch (or fraction), and
whether individuals were measured with or without shoes.

Accuracy in age has little bearing on the determination of the secular
trend in final heights, since it is of little importance whether a.

person

classified as 30 is actually 28 or 32. Such heaping is of some importance
during the growing years. There is evidence of age heaping at ages 10 and 20,
and at the minimum age for recruitment into military organizations. While
such heaping will add perturbation to the height—velocity profile, itusually will

not affect the determination of the age at which the profile peaks. A more
serious issue arises in the case of the coastwise manifests, where it has
been suggested that ages were arbitrarily assigned on the basis of height.

that

If
the

were true, however, the standard deviation of height would not have

characteristic pattern of increasing and then decreasing as the peak of

the growth spurt is approached and passed (cf. section 5.1 above). That

- 46

pattern

-

is present in the manifests (Trussell and Steckel).

Heaping on even inches is evident even when the measurement is conducted by
qualified personnel (as in the U.S.D.H.E.W. sample of 1960-1962).

In military

organizations with minimum height requirements, there is further evidence of

heaping at the inch just above the cutoff. Simulation models inicate that evennumber heaping does not introduce systematic bias. Although it may affect the
accuracy of estimates of mean height, even with large amounts of heaping (in the
range of 15 to 30 percent) the error will be in the neighborhood of a tenth of an

inch. With respect to rounding, from the earliest date for which military records
are available, the standard order was to round to the nearest inch or fraction. A
study of actual practice in World War II revealed a slight tendency to round down-

ward, which introduced an average error of 0.2 inches (Karpinos). There is no
reason to assume that this tendency has changed over time. Our analysis of the
data in the Union army records indicates that the bias may be due mainly to a
tendency to round the heights of tall persons who should have been measured at

fractional inches downward to the nearest inch. In any case, the magnitude of this
error will not seriously distort secular trends, nor should it significantly affect
the cross-sectional analysis of the relationship between height and economic or
demographic factors.

In the case of the coastwise manifests and the colonial muster rolls (items
6 and 7 of Table 1) the question arises as to whether individuals were measured

with or without shoes. To resolve this question, we have turned to data on recruits
into the Union army or the regular army where individuals are known to have been

measured without shoes. The Gould report contains a sample of black recruits born
in the slave states who were aged 25 and over (N=13,653). The mean height in this
sample, 67.2 inches, is virtually identical with the mean height (67.1 inches)

computed for the same category in the coastwise manifests. Similarly, recruits

- 47

into

-

the regular U.S army born between 1771 and 1790 averaged 68.3 inches (=61l),

whic! exceeds the mean height in the Revolutionary sample by 0.
inches. When the collection of data from the regular army is extended back to 1790,
the test can be repeated not merely with birth cohorts adjacent to thos2 in the

Revolutionary army but with cohorts that overlap those of the Revolutionarr army.°

6.3. Methods of Estimating Mean Height
from Truncated Distributions
For many of our files, the possibility of obtaining useful information from
the height-by--age data depends on solving the problem of selection bias duo to

truncation or shortfall in the height distribution, particularly for iocr heights.
Various distortions of the true underlying distribution of heights in the population
contributing soldiers and sailors are to be expected in military height distributions,
including heaping on whole or even numbers of inches, oversampling in the center of
the distribution, and sometimes undersampling of high heights. While some distortions
are apparent in all our bodies of data, the problem of undersampling of small heights
is particulary acute for the regular armed forces of Britain and the United States.
These organizations set minimum height limits at different times, varying with military
needs, sometimes shifting frequently, and sometimes ranging as high as 67 inches.
Minimum height standards were flexibly enforced, so that very sharp cutoffs are not

usually apparent in the data. It appears that in some cases 30% or 40% of the small
heights in the underlying distribution may be missing. Such undersampling could
vitiate the information content of the data, unless reliable statistical procedures
are employed to correct for the problem.

20The Baxter sample was limited to military units where men were measured without shoes. Baxter (pp.14-iS) conjectured that the recruits in some of the units in
the Gould sample were measured with shoes. However, for the ages shown in Table 2
above, the Baxter and Gould samples yield mean heights that differ from each other by
less than a tenth of an inch. This finding indicates that the proportion of the men
in the Union army that may have been measured with shoes was too small to affect the
analysis.

- 48

-

An important aspect of the project has been the development of statistical

estimators that perform reliably in the presence of undersampling of small heights.

These estimators must also cope with the other distortions that we suspect in the

observed distributions. The multiple distortions make our problem more complicated
than most undersampling problems treated in the statistical literature (cf., e.g.,
Cohen 1950, Harter and Moore 1966, Poirier 1978), although some ideas in the

literature may be capable of extension. Our problem occurs at two levels. The
first is the estimation of average height of an underlying distribution for men

old enough to attain their terminal heights. A gaussian distribution for terminal
heights is well-established for contemporary data and consistent with preliminary
examination of our files, and the assumption of normality for the underlying

distribution puts our problem into a well-defined parametric framework. There is
also the problem of how to estimate the mean of a distribution of height at a given

age during the ages of growth. Modern data indicate that the underlying
distributions during adolescence are at first skewed to the right, as early maturers
attain peak growth velocity, and then skewed to the left, when only late maturers
still await their growth spurts.

Our two principal methods for correcting left-tail censoring, the quantile
bend method (QQ) and the maximum likelihood method (RSMLE) are described in

Wachter and in Nachter and Trussell. The extension of the RSMLE method to

regression analysis is reported in Trussell and Wachter. These methods have been tested
extensively both by Monte Carlo techniques and by simulation techniques on actual

distributions of heights. The tests have shown that both methods are generally
reliable.

One of the tests, for example, was performed on a sample of the heights

of London school children for 1965. The data consist of complete (i.e. non-truncated)

distributions at each age during the growth spurt. Sample sizes varied from

- 49

801 to 2,493;

the

-

absolute value of the coefficient of skewness (y1) varied

from 0.031 to -0.201. Our procedure was to use our estimators to estimate the

true mean of the distribution under conditions of increasing truncation. The
truncation was allowed to range from 0 to 80 percent of the distribution

(truncating from the lower end). The particular point at issue was whether
techniques devised to cope with truncation of normal distributions would be
reliable on distributions of height at growing ages, which are positively skewed
during the rising portion of the growth spurt and negatively skewed during the

declining portion. This effect was first discovered by Boas in 1892, but it
was documented by Tanner using London County Council data for 1955. The degree
of skewing is statistically significant but small enough so that the
distribution is treated as normal in the estimation of the centiles that demarcate

the bounds for normal adolescent development. Nevertheless, it was necessary to
determine whether even such moderate skewing would mislead our estimators in
situations in which such skewing is combined with truncation, as is the case in
the Marine Society data which were used in Figure 3.

The estimators achieved nearly perfect results before truncation, demonstrating
that skewing was too small to require the abandonment of the normal approximation
in this case (a conclusion previously reached by Tanner, Whitehouse, and Takaishi).
The estimators generally continued to behave quite well even with truncation of

up to 50 percent of the original distribution. The RSMLE estimator performed very
well with both continuous and grouped data. Up to a
50 percent level of truncation it consistently produced estimates close to the
true mean, although there was a tendency to over-correct, i.e., to produce

estimates below the true mean. The accuracy of the RSMLE estimator decreased with
truncation above the modal value. The QQ estimator was generally correct even with

truncation above 50 percent, although in one instance it was thrown off for
reasons we are still investigating. In this instance, however, the RSMLE continued

- 50 -

to

do well.

6.4 The "basketball" problem
It has

been

argued that one cannot assume, merely from the fact that a

military distribution appears to be closely approximated by a. normal or truncated

(censored) normal distribution, that theniean of the distribution may be
taken as a reasonable estimate of the mean final hei.ght of males in civilian life.

The issue raised here goes beyond biases of the type already considered.
Persons rejected for reasons other than height, as we have seen, are only
slightly shorter than those accepted (less than a tenth of an inch in the
Civil War case); and the self-selection biases served to favor particular
socioeconomic subgroups rather than to distort the height distributions of
these subgroups.

What is at issue in the "basketball" problem is the possibility that
the sampling criteria of the military organizations might produce distributions
of height which, while they are normal, have a much higher mean height than

that of the general population of adult males. In this connection, it is
argued

of

its

that one cannot use

the normality of a given distribution as evidence

representativeness. It is further suggested that if procedures such

as those that we have developed were applied to the height distribution of
players in the National Basketball Association, we would discover that this
distribution was also normal, so that careless application of our procedures
could lead to the erroneous conclusion that the mean height of American males
was 78 inches.

— 51

Clearly, one cannot use the mere normality of a military distribution
as evidence that it represents the overall adult civilian distribution-among other reasons, because the height distribution of each of the major
socioeconomic subgroups in the population is also normal, although their
21

means are significantly different. The power of the QQ plots lies in what
they tell us about height distributions that depart from normality. The
distortions in such distributions are clues which, when carefully analysed,
suggest the nature of the selection or self-selection criteria that produced
the distortions.

The usefulness of our procedures is well-illustrated by applying them
to the distribution of heights in the National Basketball Association.

Figure 8.1 shows the QQ plot for the N.B.A. If the distribution of heights
was normal, the plot should form a straight line, with the mean of the
distribution given by the intersection of the plot with the zero ordinate.
As can be seen in Part A of Figure 8.1 ,

the

plot of the N.B.A. distribution is

quite irregular, unlike the Civil War distribution of heights in Part C.
Upon inspection, it appears that the N.B.A. distribution might actually

consist of at least two, and possibly three, straight-line segments. In
other words, the plot in Part A suggests that the N.B.A. distribution of
heights might actually be the result of a composite of three normal

distributions. Indeed, when separate distributions are computed for
guards, centers, and forwards, we obtain 3 single-peaked distributions
that appear to be censored normals, with means at 74.4, 80.2 and 83.4 inches

(see Part B of Figure B.l). Thus it appears that the managers of teams

21

Theoretically, if the heights of each of the subgroups of a population
are normally distributed, but have different means, the overall population
cannot be normally distributed and have the same standard deviation as the
sub-populations. Nevertheless, the normal distribution gives a good fit to
the overall distribution in such data sets as the Union army, as well as to
each of the major subgroups, and the standard deviations are generally quite
similar.

'4 -

-

0

U

C,

-4

C,

3

C,

L

4-.

•1)

'I

-2

\

——

-

-I

I

.\

I
0

__--_——

1

I

t)istrilmt icIi

e)rnro-itt

Part

N.ILA.

2

I,

i\flp ii c.it iOn

3

I

Of-

-3

I

t he
QQ

-2

I

R.1

0

I
1

\nrrni I Scores

-1

I

C

'Iisketha 11"

Oil

Cc n

2

( ii a r d s

I

3

-3

lfli

0

i tcs

Ages 25—30,
Niti ye-born

1

(Gould Sample)

C

Distribut ion

Part
War

-1

(:II I

-2

Prob I em

rt. rd

t crc

f)istribut ions

I' P0 it

NJ3.A.

El

the

Pdrt

r ;occdtirc to

Hnre

2

1

0•1

U—

'-I

'ZI

3-

C)

'-S.

0

(I)

3-

0I-..

3

-

—

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

- 53

in

-

the N.B.A. have target heights for each position. Target heights will yield

normal distributions even if the underlying population from which the sample is
being drawn is highly skewed (as is the extreme right-hand tail of the distribution of adult heights).

It follows that when working with military data one should take into account

the sampling strategy of particular military units. In the case of the U.S.
army, official orders that established the standard for recruiting in different

units have been published. In the British case, the standards are described in
unpublished orders. The most common procedure was to have a minimum height
requirement, which shifted up or down, depending on the demand for, and supply

of, recruits. Some units, such as the cavalry and the navy, had both minimum
and maximu requirements. Only a few parade companies had target heights.

- 54

-

7. REFERENCES
Abraniovitz, M. 1962. "Economic Growth in the U.S.," American Economic Review
52, 762-782, September.

Adelman, I. 1963. "Econometric Analysis of Population Growth," American
Economic Review 53, 314-339, June.
Appleby, A. 1975. "Nutrition and Disease: The Case of London, 1550-1750,"
Journal of Interdisciplinary History 8, 1-22, Si.mimer.

_____

1978.

"Disease, Diet, and History." Journal of Interdisciplinary History,
8, 725-735, Spring.

Areaskog, N.H., Selinus, R. and Vahiquist, D. 1969. "Physical Work Capacity and
Nutritional Status in Ethiopian Male Children and Young Adults," American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, April, 471-479.

Barlow, R. 1967. "The Economic Effects of Malaria Eradication," American Economic
Review 57, 130-148, May.
Baxter, J. H. 1875. Statistics, Medical and Anthropological, of the Provost
Marshal General's Bureau, Derived from Records of the Examination for
Military Service in the Armies of the United States During the Late War
of the Rebellion of Over a Million Recruits, Drafted Men, Substitutes,
and Enrolled Men. U.S. War Deparnent, 2 vol., illus. Washington, D.C.
Becker, G. S. 1964. Human Capital, New York.
Belvady, B. 1966. "Nutrition and Efficiency in Agricultural Laborers,"
Indian Journal of Medical Research, October, 971-976.

Blaug, M. 1964. "The Poor Law Report Reexamined,"
24, June, 229-245.

Journal

of Economic History,

Bliss, C. and Stern, N. 1978. "Productivity, Wages and Nutrition," Part I The Theory, Journal of Development Economics, 5, December, 331-362.

_____

1978.

"Productivity, Wages, and Nutrition," Part II - Some Observations,
Journal of Development Economics, 5, December, 363-398.

Boas, F. 1892. "The Growth of Children," Science, 19:256-257; 281-282; 20:351-332.

_____ 1930.
_____

1935.

"Observations on the Growth of Children," Science, 72:44-48,

"Studies in Growth III," Human Biology,7:303-318.

Bongaarts, J., 1980. "Does Malnutrition Affect Fecundity? A Summary of the
Evidence," Science, 208, 564-569.
Boudin, M. 1963. "Etudes ethnologiques sur la taille et le pords de l'homme
chez divers peuples" in Recueil de Memoires de Medecine, de Chirugie et
de Pharmacie Militaires, vols. IX and X.
Bowditch, H.P. 1877. "The Growth of Children," Mass. State Bd. of Health,
Ann. Rpt. 8:275-324, illus.

— 55

—

of

Old Americans at Harvard and at Eastern
Women's Colleges, Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA,

Bowles, G.T., 1932. New Types

Boyne, A. W. and Letich, I., 1954. "Secular Changes in the Height of British
Adults," Nutr. Abs. and Rev. 24,255-269, illus.

British Association for the Advancement of Science, port of the 53rd Meeting,
London, 1884.
Cain, L. P., 1977. "Economic History of Urban Location and Sanitation" in Paul
Uselding, ed., Research in Economic History, Vol. II, Greenwich, 337—389.
Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., and Bodiner, W.F., 1971. The Genetics of Human
W.H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

Ponulations

sur le developpement de la taille et de la
constitution dans la population civile et dans l'armed en France.
Recueil de me!n. de med., etc., 3 ser., t. xxii,239—264.

Chanipouillon, M., 1869. Etude

Chandra, R. K., 1975. "Antibody Formation in First and Second Generation Offspring
of Nutritionally Deprived Rats," Science, 190, 289-290.
Coale, A.J. and Hoover, E.M., 1958. Pojulation, Growth, and Economic Development
in Low Income Countries. Princeton.
Cohen, A.C., 1950. "Estimating the mean and variance of normal populations from
singly truncated and doubly truncated samples," Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 21, 557-569.

_____, and

J. Woodward, 1953. "Tables of Pearson-Lee-Fisher Function of Singly
Truncated Normal Distributions," Biometrics, 9, 489-497,

Condran, G.A., and Criimnins-Gardner, E., 1978. "Public Health Measures and
Mortality in U.S. Cities in the Late 19th Century," Human Ecology, 6, 27-54.

Cone, Thomas E. Jr., 1961. "Secular Acceleration of Height and Biologic
Maturation in Children During the Past Century," Journal of Pediatrics,
59, November.
Coolidge, R. H., 1856. Statistical Report on the Sickness and Mortlaity of the
Army of the United States Compiled From the Records of the SurgeonGeneral's Office From January 1839 to January 1855. U.S. Army Med. Dept.,
Washington, D.C.
Correa, H. and Cummins, G, 1970. "Contribution of Nutrition to Economic Growth,"
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 23, 560-565, May.
Curtin, P.D., 1969. The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census, Wisconsin.
Davenport, C. B., 1931. "Individual Versus Mass Studies in Child Growth."
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 70, 381-389.

David,

P.A., and Tenin, P., 1979. "Explaining the Relative Efficiency of Slave
Agriculture in the Antebelli.mi South: Comment, American Economic Review,
69, 213-218, March.

David, P .A. et al, 1976. Reckoning With Salvery, New York.

- 56 Davidson, S. etal., 1975. Ibman Nutrition and Dietetics, 6th ed., Edinburgh.
Denison, E.F., 1962. The Sources of Economic Growth in the U.S., New York.
Dublin, L.I., Lotka, A.J., Spiegelman, M., Length of Life, New York, Rev. Ed.
Dunant, M., 1867. De la taille inoyenne des habitants du canton de Geneve,
8 vo., Geneve.

Durnin, J,

and

Passinore, R., 1967. Energy, Work and Leisure, London.

Easterlin, R. A., 1977. "Population Issues in American Economic History: Survey
and Critique in R. .E. Galiman, ed., Recent Development inthe Study of
Business and Economic History: Essays in Memory of Herman E. Krooss.
Greenwich, 131-158.
Easterlin, R.A., 1972. "The American Population" in L.E. Davis etal,
American Economic Growth, New York, 121-183.

_____

1976.

"Population Change and

Farm Settlement in the

Journal of Economic History, 36, 45-83.

Northern United

"Population Issues in American History: A Survey and
Research in Economic History, Supplement 1.

_____ 1977.

States,"

Critique,"

Condran, G. A., 1974. "Farms and Farm Families in Old and
Northern States in 1860," in Tamara K. Hareven and Mans
eds., Family and Population in Nineteenth-Century America.

____ Alter, G., and

New Areas: The

Vinovskis,
22-84, Princeton, 1978.

Elias,

M.F., and Samonds, F.W., 1977. "Protein and Calorie Malnutrition in Infant
Cebus Monkeys, Growth and Behavioral Development During Deprivation and
Rehabilitation." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 30, 355-66.

Eveleth, P.3., and Tanner, J.M., 1976. Worldwide Variation in Hmian Growth,
London: Cambridge University Press.
Eversley, D.E.C., 1965. "Population, Economy, and Society," in D. V. Glass and
D.E.C. Eversley, ecis., Population in History, 23-69, London.
Fisher, I., 1909. Report on National Vitality, Washington.
Fishlow, A., 1966. "Levels of 19th Century American Investment in Education,"
Journal of Economic History, 26, December, 418-436
Fleagle, J. G., Samonds, K. N., and Hegsted, D. M., 1975. "Physical Growth of
Cebus Monkeys, Cebus àlbifnons, During Protein or Calorie Deficiency,"
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 28, 246-53.
Flinn, M., 1970. British Population Growth, 1700-1850, London.

Floud, R., 1978. "The Standard of Living in Britain 1750-1900: Thoughts on
the Use of Age-Height Data," Mimeo, Birkbeck College.

- 57 Fogel, R. W., and Engerinan, S. L., 1974. Time on the Cross, 2 vols, Boston.
_____

1977. "Explaining the Relative Efficiency of Slave Agriculture in the
Antebellum South," American Economic Review, 67, March, 275-296.

_____ 1980.

"Explaining the Relative Efficiency of Salve Agriculture in the
Antebellum South: Reply." American Economic Review Forthcoming, December.

_____

1979. "Recent Findings on Slave Demography and Family Structure,"
Sociology and Social Research, April.
et al, 1978. "The Economics of Mortality in North America, 1650-1910:
A Description of a Research Project," Historical Methods, 11, Spring, 75-108.

Fogel, R. W.
_____ 1979.

"The Economic and Demographic Significance of Secular Changes in
Human Stature: The U.S. 1750-1960," miineo.

Food and Agricultural Organization of United Nations, 1957. "Calorie Requirement
SAO Nutrition Studies, no. 13."

_____

1962.

Basic

"Nutrition and Working Efficiency,"
Study, 5.

Freedom from Hunger Campaign.

Frederikson, H., 1960. "Malaria Control and Population Pressure in Ceylon,"
Public Health Reports, vol. 75, 865-868.

_____ 1961.

"Determinants and Consequences of Mortality Trends in Ceylon,"
Public Health Reports, vol. 76, 659-663.

Freudenberger, H., and Cummins, G., 1976. "Health, Work, and Leisure Before
the Industrial Revolution," Explorations in Economic History, 13,
January 1-12.
Frisch, R. E., 1974. "A Method of Prediction of Age of Menarche from Height
and Weight at Age 9 through 13 years." Pediatrics, 53, 384-90.

_____

1975.

"Demographic Implications of the Biological Determinants of
Female Fecundity," Social Biology, 22, Spring, 17-22.

_____ 1978a.
_____

"Population, Food Intake and Fertility," Science, 199, 22—30.

1978b. (Reply to Trussell), Science, 200, June 30, 1509—1512.

_____ and Revelle, R., 1969. "Height and Weight at the Time of Peak Growth,"
Human Biology, XLI, 536-559.
Frisancho, A.R., 1978.. "Nutritional Influences on Human Growth and Maturation,"
Yearbook of Physical Anthropology, 21, 174-191.

Fuchs, V.R., 1974. Who Shall Live?: Health, Economics, and

Social

Choice, New York.

Gandevia, B., 1977. "A Comparison of the Heights of Boys Transported to Australia
From England, Scotland and Ireland, c. 1840, with Later British and
Australian Developments." Australian Paediatric Journal, 13, 91-97.
Goodrich, C., and Davison, S., "The Wage-Earner in the Westward Movement,"
Political Science Quarterly, L, 151—185.

Gould, 8. A. 1869. Investigations in the Military and Anthropological Statistics
of American Soldiers. U.S. San. Comn. Men,, 655pp,, illus, Riverside
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gray, H., 1927. "Increase in Stature of American Boys in the Last 50 Years,"
JAMA 88, 908.
Gray, L.C., 1933. History of Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860.
Washtington, D.C.

Gray, R. H., 1974. "The Decline of Mortality in Ceylon and the Dnographic
Effects of Malaria Control," Population Studies, 28, July 205-229.
Great Britain 1833. "Report of the Factory Commissioners of 1833,"
Parliamentary Papers xx, 1.
Greulich, W. W., 1958. "Growth of Children of the Same Race Under Different
Environmental Conditions," Science, 127, 515-516, illus.

_____

1976. "Some Secular Changes in the Growth of American-born and Native
Japanese Children," American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 45, 553-68.

Griliches, Z., 1970. "Notes on the Role of Education in Production Functions
and Growth Accounting," in Conference on Research on Income and Wealth,
Education, Income and Capital. New York, 71-115.

Grossman, M., 1972. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
Investigation. New York.

Habbakuk, H. J., 1971. ulation Growth and Economic Development Since 1730,
Leicester.

Hansen, W.L., 1963. "Total and Private Rate of Return to Investment in Schooling,"
Journal of Political Economy, 81, April, 128-141.
Haskell, T.L., 1979. "Explaining the Relative Efficiency of Slave Agriculture
in the Antebellum South: A Reply to R.W.Fogel and S.L.Engerman,"
American Economic Review, 69, March, 206-207,

Harter, ILL., and •A.-HMoore, 1966. "Iterative Maxinumi Likelihood Estimation
of the Parameters of Normal Populations From Singly and Doubly Censored
Samples," Biometrika, 53, 205—213.
Hathaway, M.L. and Foard, E.D., 1960. "Heights and Weights of Adults in the
United States," Home Economics Research Report No.10. U.S.Department
of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.

Heiberg, J.F., 1858. n laegetjenesten ved Sessionerne Forestilling fra
Generaicherurgen af 12 te Juli 1865 til Armee Departementet
Christiania, Oslo, Malling, l4pp.
_____,

1859.

Tabellarisk Oversigt over Laegernes Indberetninger til
Genera.Ichirurgen oni Tjenestedyktighedsforholdene blandt de i 1836 fdte
Mandskaber, som undersøgtes ved Sessionerne i 1856, 1857 og 1858, samt
ved Rekrutsamlingerne 1859. Christiania, Malling, 28pp.

Higgs, R.W., 1973. "Mortality in Rural America 1870-1920: Estimates and Conjectures."
Explorations in Economic History, 10, Winter 177-195.

59 -

"Growth in Afro-Caribbean Slave Populations," American
Journal of Physical Anthropology.

Higman, B.W., 1979.

Hobsbawm, E.J., 1968. Industry and Empire,

New York.

F.L., 1896. Race Traits and Tendencies of the American Negro, Published

Hofnan,

by

American

Economic Association, Macmillan

Co., New York, XI, Nos. 1, 2, and 3.

Jaffee, A.J., and Lourie, W. I., Jr., 1942. "An Abridged Life Table for the
White Population of the U.S.-1830," Human Biology, 1942, 352-371.
Johnson, N.I., and S. Katz, 1970.
Houghton Mifflin, Boston.

Continuous Univariate Distributions,

Johnston, B.E., 1977. "Food, Health, and Population in Development," Journal
of Economic Literature, 15, Septnber, 879-907.
Jorgenson, D. and Griliches, Z., 1967. "The Explanation of Productivity Change,"
Review of Economic Studies, 34, July, 249-284.

Karpinos, B.D., 1958. "Height and Weight of Selective Service Registrants
Processed for Military Service During World War II," Human Biology,
40, 292-321.
Kemsley,

W.F.F., 1950-51. "Weight and Height of a Population in 1943,"

Annals of

Eugenics, 15, 161-183.

Keyfitz, N., and Flieger, W., 1971. Population:
San Francisco, N. H. Frenan.

Fact and Methods of Dnography.

Keys, A. etal., 1950. The Biology of Human Starvation. 2 vols., Minneapolis.
Kiil,

Kraut,

V., 1939.

"Stature and Growth of Norwegian Men During the Last 200 Years,"
Skrifte Norske Videnskap Akademie, no 6, 175.

H., 1972. "Food

Intake as A Factor of Production," in Alimentation a
Travail, by G. Debry and R. Bleyer, eds., Paris.

Kulikoff, A., 1976. "Tobacco and Slaves: Population, Economy, and Society in
Eighteenth-Century Prince Georges County, Maryland," unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation Brandeis Univ.
Kuznets, S., 1966. Modern Economic Growth. New Haven.

Landes, D.S., 1969. The Unbound Promethus. Cambridge,
Lander, W.L. 1963. "Europe's Initial Population Explosion," American Historical
Review, 69, October, 1-17.

Lee, R., 1978. "Models of Pre-Industrial Dynamics with Applications to England,"
in C. Tilly, ed., Historical Studies of Changing
Princeton, 155-207,

Fertility,

"Short-Run Fluctuations in Vital Rates, Price, and Weather," in E, A.
Wrigley and R. Schofield, Population Trends in Pre-Modern 'England,

_____ 1980.

Cambridge, Chp. 8.

- 60

-

Leet, D. R., 1976. "The Determinants of the Fertility Transition in Antebellum
0hio," Journal Economic History, 36, 359-378.
Lehman, G., Miller, E. A., and Spilzer, H., 1950. "Der Zalorienbedarf Bei
Gewerblicher Arbert," Arbeits Physiologie, 14, 166-235.
Leibenstein, H., 1957

Economic Backwardness and Economic Growth. New York.

Lindert, P. H., and Williamson, J.G., 1976. "Three Centuries of American Inequality,"
in P. Uselding, ed., Research in Economic History, Vol. 1, Greenwich, 69-123.
Ljung, B.O., Bergsten-Brucefors, A. Lindgren, G., 1974. "The Secular Trend in
Physical Growth in Sweden," Annals of Human Biology, 1, 245-56.
Lowenstein, F.W., 1968. "Nutrition and Working Efficiency," Special Paper No. 3
(FAO, WHO, and Organization of African Unity, Scientific, Technical, and
Research Commission).

J.,

Menkin, J., Trussell,
and Watkins, S., 1981.. "The Nutrition Fertility Link:
An Evaluation of the Evidence," Journal of Interdisciplinary HistOry, 11,

Marglin, S.A., 1974. "What Do Bosses Do? Part I, The Origins and Functions of
Hierarchy in Capitalist Production," Review of Radical Political Economy,
6, 60—112.

_____

1975. "What Do Bosses Do? Part II," Review of Radical Political Economy,
7, 20-37.

Margo, R. A., and Steckel, R. H., 1979. "The Determinants of Adult Height in the
Antebellum United States: Evidence From Coastwise Manifests and Civil War
Muster Rolls," Social Science History Meeting, November 1979.

McKeown, T., 1976. The Modern Rise of Population. London.

_____

1978.

"Fertility, Mortality, and Causes of Death," Population Studies,
32, November, 535—542.

McKeown, T., and Brown, R.G., 1955.. "Medical Evidence in Relation to English
Population Changes in the 18th Century," Population Studies, 9, 119-141.

McKeown, T., Brown, R.G., and Record, R.G., 1972. "Interpretation of the Modern
Rise of Population in Europe," Population Studies, 26, November, 345-382.
McKeown, T., Record, R.G.., and Turner, R.D., 1975. "Interpretation of the Decline
of Mortality in England and Wales During the 20th Century," Population
Studies, 29, November, 391-422.
McMahon,

S.F., 1980. "Provisions Laid

Up for The Family,"

Harvard Mimeo.

Meegama, S.A., 1967. "Malaria Eradication and Its Effect on Mortality Levels,"
Population

Studies, 21 November, 207-231.

Meeker, E., 1972. "The Improving Health of the U.S, 1850-1915," Explorations
in Economic History, 9, Summer, 353-373.
_____,

1974. "The Social Rate of Return on Investment in Public Health, 1880—
1910," Journal of Economic History, 34, June, 392-419.

_____

1976. "Mortality Trends of Southern Blacks, 1850-1910: Some. Preliminary
Findings," Explorations in Economic History, 13-42.

- 61

-

Metzer, J., 1979. "The Records of U.S. Colored Troops As A Historical Source:
An
Mirrlees,

Exploratory Examination," mimeo February 1979.

J.A., 1976. "A Pure Theory of Underdeveloped Economies," in L. A.

Reynolds, ed., Agriculture in Development Theory, New Haven.

-

Morant,

G.M., 1950. "Secular Changes in the Heights of
Roy. Soc. London, Proc., Sec. B 137, 443-452.

British People,"

Mosley, W.H., 1978. Nutrition and Human Reproduction. New York Plenum Press.

Mushkin, S., 1962. "Health As An Investment," Journal of Political Economy,
70, October, Supplement, 129-157.
National &ireau of Economic Research, 1980. "Report on the Program of the
National Bureau of Economic Research on Long-Term Factors in American
Economic Development," mimeo.
Nelson, R.R., and Phelps, E.S., 1966. "Investment in Humans, Technological
Diffusion and Economic Growth," American Economic Review, 56, May 69-75.
Newman, P., 1970. "Malaria Control and Population Growth," Journal of
Developmental. Studies, 6, 133-158.

_____, 1965. Malaria Eradication and Population
to Ceylon and British Guinea. Ann Arbor.

Growth, With Special Reference

Penman, M., 1966. "Health and Economic Development: Some Problems Methods, and
Conclusions," Reviewed in a perusal of the literature, Comparative Studies
in Society and History, 8 July, 433-448.
Poinier, D. J., 1978. "The Use of the Box-Cox Transformation in Limited
Dependent Variable Models," JASA, 73, 284-287.
Potter, J., 1965. "The Growth of Population in America, 1700-1860," in David
G. Glass and D.E.C.Eversley, eds., Population in History, Chicago.
Preston, S.H., 1976. Mortality Patterns in National Populations, New York.

Preston, SH., Keyfitz, N., and Schoen, R., 1972. Causes of Death: Life Tables for
National Populations, Seminar Press, New York.
Quetelet, A., 1835. "Sur l'hoimne et le developpement de ses facultes, ou;
Essai de physique social," Bachelier, Paris.

P.E., 1974. "An Interpretation of the Modern Rise of Population in
Europe--A Critique," Population Studies, 28, March, 5-17.

Razzell,

Roberts,

C., 1876. "The Physical Requirements of
-the Statistical Society, 39, 681-733.

of

Rosenkrantz, B.C., 1972. Public Health and The
Massachusetts,

1842-1936. Harvard Univ.

Factory Children," Journal

State: Changing Views
Press, Cambridge,

in

Sandberg, L.G. and Steckel, R.H., 1980. "Soldier, Soldier, What Made You
Grow So Tall," Economy and History 23, 91—105.
Sanderson, W.C., 1977a, "New Estimates of Fertility and Fertility Control for
White Women in the United States, 1800—1920," mimeo Stanford Univ.

____ 197Th.

"New Interpretations of the Decline in the Fertility
Women in the United States, 1800-1920," niineo Stanford Univ.

of White

- 62 -

Relative Efficiency of Slave
Agriculture: Comment." American Economic Review, 69, March, 208-212.

Schaefer, D.F., and Sclimitz, M.D., 1979. "The

Schofield, R., 1977. Review of T. McKeown, "The
Population Studies, 31, March, 179-181.

Modern Rise

of Population,"

Schultz, T.W., 1972. Human Resources. New York.

F.A., 1945. "A Post-Mortem on the Labor-Safety-Valve Theory,"
Agricultural History, 19, 31-37.

Shannon,

F.K., 1937. "Sexual Maturation and the Physical Growth of Girls
Age Six to Nineteen," Monograph of the Social Research of Child
Development 2, No. 5.

Shuttleworth,

_____

1939. "The Physical and Mental Growth of Girls and Boys Age Six to
Nineteen in Relation to Age at Maximum Growth," Monograph of the
Social Research of Child Development 4, No. 3.

Slicher van Bathe, B.H.F., 1963. The Agrarian History of Western Europe in
A.D. 500-1850. London.
Sokoloff, K. L., and Villafor, G.C., 1979. "The Early Achievement of Modern

Stature in America," Social Science History Association Meeting, November.

_____

1979.

"Colonial and Revolutionary Muster Rolls:

Nutrition

Some New Evidence on
and Migration in Early America," N.BIE.R. Working Paper No. 374

July.

_____,

1978. "Some New Evidence on Nutrition, Migration, and
in Colonial Revolutionary America, December.

Military

Participation

Soltow, L., 1975. Men and Wealth in the United States 1850-1870, New Haven.

Steckel, R.H., 1977. "The Economics of U.S. Slaves and Southern White Fertility,"
Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago.

_____

l979a. "Slave Height from Coastwise Manifests," Explorations in Economic
History, 16, October, 363-380.

_____

l979b. "Slave Mortality: Analysis of Evidence from
Social Science History, 3,, —114.

_____

1982.

"Height and

Per

Plantation

Records,"

Capita Income," mimeo.

Stiglitz, J.E., 1976. "The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labor,

and the

Distribution of Income in L..C.'s OxforcLEcanmmjePa,,ers,28, July, 185-207.
Stolz, H.R., and Stolz, UI., 1951. Somatic Development of Adolescent Boys.
A Study of the Growth of Boys During the Second Decade of Life, New York
Macmillan.

Tanner, J.M.,

1959. "Boas's Contributions to Knowledge o Human Growth and
American Anthropologist, 61, No.3, Part 2.

_____

1962.

Growth at Adolescence, 2nd

ed. Oxford: Blackwell

Foz,n,"

Scientific Pib1ns,

- 63

-

_____ 1966.

1.

"The Secular Trend Towards Earlier Physical Maturation,"
Soc. Gineesk, 44, 524

1978. Fetus Into Man: Physical Growth from Conception to Maturity,
Cambridge, Harvard Univ. Press.

_____

____ 1981.

Historical- Stud-ies of Hunian—Growth, Cambridge, England,
Cambridge Univ. Press.

_____ and Eveleth, P.B., 1975. "Variability Between Populations in Growth and
Development at Puberty," in S.R. Berenberg, ed., Puberty, Biologic, and
and Psychosocial Components, Leiden Stenfert Kroese Publishers.

_____ Whitehou.se, R.H., Marubini, E., and Resele, L., 1976. "The Adolescent
Growth Spurt of Boys and Girls of the Harpenden Growth Study,"
Annals of Human Biology, 3, 109—26.

_____ Whitehouse, R.H., Takaishi, M., 1966. "Standards From Birth to Maturity

for Height, Weight, Height Velocity and Weight Velocity; British Children,
1963, Arch, Dis. in Child," 41, 454-71; 613-35.

Thompson, E.P., 1963. The Making

of

the English Working Class. Harmondsworth.

Trotter, M., and Gleser, G.C., 1951. "Trends in Stature of American Whites and
Negroes Born Between 1840 and 1924," Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 9, 427.
Trussell, J., 1978. "Menarche and Fatness: Re-Examination of the Critical Body
Composition Hypothesis," Science, 200, June 30, 1506—1509.

Trussell, J. and Steckel, R., 1978. "The Age of Slaves at Menarche and Their
First Birth," Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 8, 477-505.
Trussell, J. and Wachter, K., 1982. "Estimating the Covariance of Height in
Truncated Samples," mimeo.
Udjus,

L.G.,

1964.

Anthropometircal Changes in

Norwegian Men in the Twentieth

Century. Universitetsforlaget, Oslo.
U.S. Bureau- of Labor, 1903. Eighteenth Annual Report of the Commissioner
of Labor, Washington, D.C.

U. S. &ireau of the Census, 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States,
Colonial Times to 1970, Washington, D.C.

Meat Supply .and Surplus, Buiau of
Statistics, Bulletin No-. 55, by George K. Holmes.

U. S. Deparnent of Agriculture, 1907.

-

U. S. Provost-Marshall-General, 1866. "Final Report 1863-1866," U.S. House
of Representatives, Exec. Doc. No. 1, 39th Cong. 1st Sess,, (1251, 1252).
Van de Walle, B., 1977. "Accounting for population Growth," Science, August 12,
652-653.

Van Wieringen, J.C., 1978. "Secular Growth Changes," Human Growth, vol. 1,
eds., Falkner, F. and Tanner, J. M., New York: Plenum.
Von Tunzeimann, G.N., 1979. "Trends in Real Wages, 1750-1850, Revisited,"
Economic History Review, 32, 33-49, February.

- 64

-

Villerme,

L.R., 1829. "Memoire sur la taille de l'homme en France," Ann. Hyg.
Publigue, Paris 1, 351.

Vinovskis, M.A., 1972. "Mortality Rates and Trends in Massachusetts. Before 1860,"
Journal of Economic History, V. XXXII, No. 1, March 184213,

_____ 1976. "Socioeconomic Detezinants of Interstate Fertility Differentials
in the U.S. in 1830 and 1860," Journal of Interdisciplinary Histoy
3, 375—396.

Warden, G.B., 1976. "Inequality and Instability in Eighteenth-Century Boston:
A Reappraisal," Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 6, 385-620.

W.ichter, K.W., 1981 "Graphical Estimation of Military Heights," Historical Methods,
14, 31-42.
Wachter, K.W.,, and Trussell, J., 1982. "Estimating Historical Heights," Journal
of the American Statistical Association, forthcoming.

Weisbrod, B., 1961. Economicsof Public Health. Philadelphia
Williamson, J.G.., 1976. "American Prices and Urban Inequality Since 1820,"
Jounral of Economic History, 36, No.2, June, 303—333,
Wright, G.., 1979. "The Efficiency of Slavery: Another Interpretation,"
American Economic Review, 69, March, 219-226.

Wrigley, E., 1969. Population and History. New York,
Wyndham,

C.H., et al, 1962. "The Influence

of

Weight and Capacity for Exercise
Ergonomics, 5, July, 435-444.

on Body

Yasuba,

Y., 1962. i±th: Rate.
1800-1860. Baltimore.

o.. the White

a Stable Diet and Regular

Work

in African Mine ru"

Population in The Unitad States,

