                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MONEY STOCK CONTROL WITH RESERVE AND INTEREST
           RATE INSTRUMENTS UNDER RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS


                       Bennett T. McCallum

                          James G. Hoebn




                      Working Paper No. 893




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            May 1982




The authors are indebted to Marvin Goodfriend, Robert Shiller, and
Kenneth Singleton for helpful discussions and to the National
Science Foundation (SES 19—15353) for financial support. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #893
                                                       May 1982




            Money Stock Control with Reserve and Interest Rate
                  Instruments Under Rational Expectations



                                Abstract


     This paper conducts a theoretical comparison of the potential
                                                                     effectiveness,
in terms of money stock controllability, of interest rate and reserve instruments.

Whereas previous studies have been basically static, the present analysis is

carried Out in the context of a dynamic macroeconomic model with rational

expectations. Particular attention is paid to the distinction between contem-

poraneous and lagged reserve accounting (CRA and LRA). The criterion employed

is the expectation of squared deviations of the (log of the) money stock from

target values that are reset each period. Analysis in the basic model suggests

the following substantive conclusions. (1) With a reserve instrument, monetary

control will be more effective under CRA than LRA. (2) With a reserve instrument

and LRA, control will be poorer than with an interest rate instrument. (3) For

a wide range of parameter values, control will be better with a reserve

instrument and CRA than with an interest rate instrument.



                                           Bennett T. McCallum
                                           Graduate School of Industrial Administration
                                           Carnegie—Mellon University
                                           Pittsburgh, PA 15213
                                           (412) 578—2347

                                           James G. Hoehn
                                           Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
                                           400 South Akard Street
                                           Dallas, TX 75222
 I. Introduction

        The purpose of this paper is to conduct a theoretical comparison of the

 potential effectiveness, in terms of money stock controllability, of interest

 rate and reserve instruments. Several studies with a similar objective have

 previously been conducted, some of the more notable including Pierce and Thomson

 (1972), Friedman (1975) (1977), Le Roy (1979), and Axilrod and Lindsey (1981))

 These previous studies have all, however, been conducted in models that are

 essentially static and therefore neglect the distinction between real and nominal

 rates of interest. Our analysis, by contrast, is dynamic and presumes rational

expectations throughout. In the present paper we employ as a policy criterion

 the unconditional expectation of the squared deviation of the (log of the) money

stock from "target" values that are reset period by period in light of complete

aggregate data from previous periods. Given this criterion, some of our con-

clusions are similar to those obtained in static models. Our approach permits

the derivation of some new results, however, and provides a firmer understanding

of the static-model conclusions. In addition, our discussion indicates how the

analysis can be extended to cases in which the static-model results may not

provide useful approximations.


       Given the extent of professional and popular discussion of the basic

"instrument choice" problem, it might seem surprising that no such analysis has

previously been conducted. There is, hcever, a straightforward explanation for

the absence of previous studies until very recently it appeared that the values

of all nominal magnitudes (including the money stock) are indeterminate in a

rational expectations context if the monetary authority uses an interest rate as

its operating instrument.2 it has been shn in NcCallum (1980a), hever, that

this indeterminancy does not prevail if an interest rate instrument is used but

is set period by period in a manner that is designed to have some desired effect

on the expected quantity of money in the upcoming period --   that   is, if at least
S

    some weight is given to a money stock target.3 Thus, it is in fact possible

    to conduct an analytical comparison of the type desired, even in a model entirely

    free of private sector money illusion and expectational irrationality.

              In the context of the interest rate vs. reserve instrument comparison, there

    is a related choice to be made by the monetary authority that is of considerable

    significance. In particular, given that banks are required to hold reserves

    against their monetary liabilities, it is crucial to distinguish between a system

    featuring contemporaneous reserve accounting, which makes current monetary liabil-

    ities relevant for the determination of current required reserves, and one with

    lagged reserve accounting, which makes liabilities from a previous period relevant

    for current reserve requirements. This distinction is crucial because, with a

    reserve instrument, potential monetary control is likely to be poorer4 under

    lagged reserve accounting ("LRA") than under contemporaneous reserve accounting

    ("CRA"). In fact, the combination of a reserve instrument with LRA tends to

    produce the poorest results, in terms of potential monetary control, of any of

    the four combinations defined by the two instruments and two accounting schemes.

    It is nevertheless the case that a reserve instrument with CRA will provide the

    best monetary control in our model for a large subset of plausible parameter

    values.

              The relevance of these results for recent monetary experience in the

    United States is readily apparent. Since the Federal Reserve switched from CRA

    to LEA in 1968, any subsequent attempts to use a reserve instrument will have

    yielded poorer monetary control than would have been possible under CRA (or with

    an interest rate instrument). It would therefore be highly inappropriate to draw

    direct conclusions about the potential effectiveness of a reserve instrument on

    the basis of U.S. experience since the October 6, 1979, initiation of a period

    with increased emphasis on reserves.5

                                             -2-
       The analytical framework within which we shall demonstrate these results

is a log-linear macroeconomic model similar to the IS-LM-phillips Curve setups

used by Sargent and Wallace (1975), Sargent (1979), and McCalluni (l980a), with

the addition of a relationship describing portfolio behavior of the banking

system. Results are also obtained for a modification in which the Sargent-

Wallace supply function, which permits prices to adjust freely within each

period, is replaced with one that has prices set in advance. In both versions

the model is highly simplified, of course, and is open to various criticisms.6

The most basic of these is that the behavioral relations are not obtained from

an analysis of optimizing behavior by individual agents, but are simply posited

as plausible and orthodox relationships. As a result, the assumption that para-

meter values in the behavioral relations will be the same under various policy

regimes is not well justified.    Thus, even with the incorporation of rational

expectations, our analysis goes only part of the way tard the goal of a policy-

invariant model.

       It should be said at the outset that our emphasis on the controllability of

money does not imply disagreement with the argument -- made by Kareken, Muench

and Wallace (1973), Friedman (1975) (1977), and others --   that   it is in principle

inefficient for the monetary authority to rely on the "intermediate target"

procedure. Perhaps it would be better simply to focus upon ultimate target or

"goal" variables such as unemployment and/or inflation rates, rather than upon a

money stock target, if reliable models describing the effects of potential instru-

ments upon such goal variables were available. In fact, hcever, it appears that

such models are not available. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve System of the

United States is significantly concerned with intermediate money-stock targets,

and is charged to be so concerned by the U.S. Congress. Consequently, much
professional and practical analysis presumes the use of monetary targets. Given

this situation, our object is to advance professional understanding of the al-

ternative control techniques potentially available.

         The outline of the paper is as folls. In Section II we describe the

model and in Section III obtain the main analytical results for   the   cases with

contemporaneous reserve accounting. In Section IV comparable results for lagged

reserve accounting are derived, and in Section V qualifications and     ideas   for

future   study are described. A brief conclusion and an appendix are also provided.




                                        -4-
  II. Analytical Framework

           Let us begin by briefly describing the relationships that represent

 aggregate demand and supply behavior in our model economy, before turning to

 consideration of the banking sector. As in McCallum (l9SOa), we adopt slightly

 modified versions of the IS, LM, and aggregate supply (Phillips curve) relation-

 ships used by Sargent and Wallace (1975). Let                     and m denote logarithms
                                                         y,
 of aggregate output, the price level, and the money stock (respectively) and let

       be the nominal interest rate. Also, let                       be stochastic distur-
                                                       u, Vt and
 bances. Then we have:



 (1)             y =   b   + b1[r -                —       +
                                          (Eip+1               v                 b1 < 0



 (2)             m     Pt = c     + c1r + c2y +                                 c1 < 0 < c2



 (3)                 = a   +
                               a1(p
                                      —
                                          Eip) +   a2y1 +
                                                               u                a1 > 0

                                                                                1 > a2 > 0.



In (1), demand for consumption plus investment is negatively related to the real

rate of interest. Here and elsewhere the operator Ei denotes the expectation

of the indicated variable within the model and conditional upon values of all

variables realized in periods prior to t. The precise specification of the real

interest rate variable follows Sargent (1979) and is discussed in McCallum (1980a,
        8
pp.4-5)

         Equation (2) is a demand function for         money, the asset used by the economy's

agents as a medium of exchange. The demand for real balances is taken to be

positively dependent upon the transaction "scale" variable
                                                                     y and negatively
dependent upon the nominal rate of interest.



                                            —5—
        Finally, equation (3) is an aggregate supply function of the natural

rate variety, rationalized by Lucas (1973) and utilized by numerous authors.

Since some critics find the extent of price level flexibility provided by (3)

to be excessive, we shall also consider in Section III an alternative specifica-

tion that makes prices "sticky" within each period -- and which leads to a simpli-

fication of the instrument comparison expressions.

        The stochastic disturbances in equations (l)-(3), u, v, and fl'             are
assumed to be generated by mutually independent white noise processes. Each

disturbance, moreover, is taken to be independent of (as well as uncorrelated

with) past values of all disturbances and variables.

        We now turn to the banking sector. The standard specification in the

literature cited in the introduction relates the money stock positively to the

nominal market rate of interest and to some reserve aggregate.9 Let ht denote

the log of the relevant reserve aggregate --        e.g.,   total reserves, non-borrowed

reserves, or the monetary base. Then a stochastic version of the standard

relationship might be written as



               m =        + v1r +         +                                         "2 > 0
(4)                  V0             v2h                                       v1,


where     is a temporally inependent, white noise disturbance that is also in-

dependent of     v, and             Relations of this type have been referred to as

"money supply" functions by some writers and as "reserve demand" functions by

others. The first of these terms is not generally appropriate, however, since

such functions play no part in determining the value of m when an interest rate

instrument is being employed, Consequently, we shall use the reserve-demand

terminology in what follows)0


                                              -6-
       There are also several substantive points concerning equation (4) that

require discussion. First, since m and h pertain to values for the same time

period, the equation can be applicable only if CRA is in effect. If, on the

other hand, LRA is operative, required reserves will be related to some past

value of rn. To keep matters as simple as possible, let us suppose that our

"periods" are of the same duration as the lag in reserve accounting. Then under

LRA we might have11



(4')         m1 =      + v1r + v2h +



where, in order to maintain comparability with (4), we suppose that the parameters

on the right-hand side --   including   the variance of   --   are precisely the same as

under CPA. As that assumption is important in what follcqs, it is here that the

aforementioned absence of individual optimization analysis is most serious.

       Another issue that needs to be addressed is whether there is, in fact, a

reserve aggregate that can be manipulated as an instrument. Our view, basically,

is that a variable can appropriately be treated as an instrument -- presuming

that it can be affected by the Fed --    if it can be observed "instantaneously".
The idea, of course, is that if a variable can be observed instantaneously it

can be "continuously" monitored and therefore kept on its chosen path by appli-

cation of the requisite open-market stimulus. One conclusion, then, is that any

variable that can be measured from the Fed's own balance sheet is in principle a

feasible instrument: given today's computational and communicational facilities

it is technically possible for the Fed to compile daily balance sheets. And in

the context of a model with a twoweek (or one-week) time period, daily obser-

vations on a variable make it effectively observable "instantaneously". Obviously

this argument does not identify which specific variables are actually available

                                           -7-
as instruments in the U.S. economy      -- that will   depend on current regulations

and institutions)2 But it seems to provide adequate refutation of the occa-

sionally-voiced notion that no reserve aggregate can be used as an instrument.'3

       Of course we recognize that under current arrangements precise control

of reserve aggregates cannot be accomplished even with contemporaneous observa-

bility. One reason is that open-market operations cease before the discount

wind closes on the last day of each statement period -- on each Wednesday

afternoon. Also it i-s uncle;r that adequate balance sheet data. is compiled daily.

Such practices are not, hcwever, immutable. In a study of the potential for

monetary control under alternative regimes, it seems inappropriate to presume

that the Fed would fail to take feasible steps that would make potential in-

struments controllable. Our aim is not to predict what policy makers will do,

but to understand the effects of what they could do under alternative, feasible
                14
arrangements.

       Given the point of view just expressed, we shall not specify which of the

frequently-discussed reserve measures --       total   reserves, non-borred reserves,

or the monetary base --    is   referred to by our reserve variable, ht.'5 As there

is comparatively little dispute about which actual interest rate should be em-

phasized, we shall occasionally refer to r as the "federal funds rate". Formally,

however,   it   is simply "the" nominal interest rate in our aggregative model.

       Finally, to complete the model, we need a relation describing policy behavior,

one which determines either h or r on a period-by-period basis. In each case

we assume that the instrument, h or r, is set according to a deterministic

feedback rule that specifies h or r as a linear function of variables realized

in period t—1 or before. And in each case, we assume that this linear function

is chosen so as to make the expected value of m, that is, Et_,cn, equal to a

target value denoted         We conceive of m itself being set by a deterministic,



                                         —8-
linear feedback rule --   perhaps, but not necessarily, one that attempts to
"lean against the wind" in sczne fashion. But   since   our concern will be h

well the target values      (for t=l,2,...) are attained, we will not need to

specify any pazticular rule for determining ui.     All we need note is that,
since   it is determined by a feedback rule, there are no one-period expectational
errors:
                *   *
          Eim = m.




                                       -9-
III. Monetary Control Under CRA

          In   this section we derive expressions for our monetary control criterion,

the mean—squared error E(m —                      under a regime of contemporaneous reserve
                                           m)2,
accounting. First we find the value of E(m —                             implied by the model when h
                                                                   m)2
is set at the beginning of period t to make Eim =                             with r then determined
                                                                         m,
in the marketplace. We find, that is, the minimum mean square control error when

the reserve aggregate is used as the operating Instrument. In this case, the

relevant system of equations includes (1), (2), (3), (4), and the instrument

setting



                               —
(5)               h = (m                   \1E1r)/v2.

These equations determine values of y,
                                                              m,         and h.
       Since our interest is in the expected square of m —                             let us begin by
                                                                                  m,
using (4) and (5) to obtain



(6)
                  m_ m =       vi(r — E1r) ÷              •
Next we develop "innovation't versions of (l)—(3) by applying the operator                               to

each equatIon and, for each, subtracting the resultant from the original equation.

The results are:



(7)                  —
                         Eiy = bi(r Eir) + bi(p — E_ip) +
                                              —




(8)               m—       =           —
                                                  + c1(r
                                                              —
                                                                  Eir) + c2(y — Eiy)          + TI.




                         Etlyt
                                   =
                                       ai(p   —
                                                  Eip) + Ut.
                                                   -10-
Elimination of the innovations for                               and r then leaves us with the desired
                                                       y,
expression for m —               It is:
                          m.

(10)                        =        -                      + 1v + (c2 -          —




                         1 + a1c,,
where
                   1 a1—b1

                     —     c11b,+c1
and                                              )<O
                                V1


        Since we have assumed that the disturbances are mutually independent, the

mean squared control error is then

                                             2       22
                                         a + •,a + (c. —             •,) 22
                                                                         a + 22
                                                                             4a
(11)              E(mt    m*) =
                            t                                        2
                                                            (l_4i)
        2
where a is the variance of r, etc.

        Next we take the case in which the federal funds rate, r, is the operating

instrument. Now the optimal setting, which makes Eim =                                is
                                                                                m,

(12)             r =     c[m —           C       —
                                                     Eip — c2Etiy]
and m —         is expressible as
            m

                                     —
(13)             mt —           Pt       Et ipt + c2(y —            Etiy)   +



Equations (9) and (7) ——        with         rt —     E_ir = 0 —— can then be used to eliminate the
innovations for p and y. The resulting expression is



                                                       —11—
(14)




where        is as before. The control criterion is., obviously,



(15)              E(m —         *)2   =       + a2          +
                                                                (C2   •)2

            Given our specification, it is not clear whether expression (11) or (15) is

the smaller. The variance of the banking sector disturbance, a, does not appear

on the right—hand side of (15), which tends to make the criterion smaller with

the funds rate instrument. But the divisor, (1 —                              in (11), is unambiguously
                                                                       *1)2
greater than 1.0, which tends to make the reserve instrument preferable. Which

tendency predominates depends upon the magnitudes of                           and the various variances.

        One useful way of simplifying the expression for E(m -                               is to note
                                                                                       m)2
that, as the parameter a1 grows in magnitude, $j approaches c2. This eliminates

the term involving o from (11) and (15), and generates the implication that the

reserve instrument ht will be superior to the funds rate instrument r if


                        22+ 22
                  a2 + c2a  *1a
(16)                                                  2
                                              <            + c2a2
                                                      fl      2v
                       (l_*l)2
        •

where *1 =
               c2b1+c1      <   0.     Rearranging, we obtain the condition
                   1

                        2                 2
                                      a + C2(J
                                                  22
(17)                   *1
                   2                              2



Here the left-hand expreèslon is positive and less than 1.0. Thus, even ithOut

knowledge of the magnitude of 4, we can conclude that the reserve instrument will

be superior provided that


                                                           —12-
                      a2     22
                           +ca
 (18)           1<           2v


 But this condition will obtain, whatever the magnitude of c2, unless            c:r2 is at

 least as large as a2. Furthermore, relatively small absolute values of                   ——

reflecting   relatively large values of v1 ——          will   decrease the left—hand side of

 (18) and make the sufficient condition less stringent.. Consequently, it seems

rather likely that the reserve instrument will be superior ——             given contempor—
aneous reserve accounting! ——      if   a1 is large.
                                                       16


         But why should that condition, a relatively large value for a1, be consid-

ered likely? The answer, of course, is that a large a1 value implies a high sensi-

tivity of supply to the price level expectation error. Conversely, then, a large

a1 value corresponds to a situation in which actual inflation responds weakly,

given inflationary expectations, to the value of y relative to normal ——              i.e.,    to

a relatively flat one—period Phillips relationship. That such a specification is

empirically relevant is, of course, widely believed to be the case.

         A bit of additional discussion may be warranted. Suppose we write (3)

in the form just alluded to, as follows:



                  —
                      t—l
                            =       — a2y1        —
                                                      a] + Ei(pt —           —




In   the limit, as a1 -    , this relationship degenerates to the condition Pt = Eip.
Given rational epectations this implies that p is determined entirely by condi—

tions prevailing in t—l and is unaffected by shocks occurring in t.              Beyond   that,

however, it does not specify aggregate supply or price behavior so some additional

relationship must be included as a replacement for (3). One attractive specifica—

tion, previously used by Barro and Grossman (1976), Mussa (1980), and McCallum

(1980b), is as follows:


                                            -13
               Pt —      = a1(_1            +   E1( —               ;   a1
                                                                             >   0



Here    is   the capacity or "full employment" value of   while    is the value of


Pt that would make aggregate demand equal to       given actual policy actions in t.

Thus (19) is an accelerationist Phillips curve with the inflation rate determined

by the previous period's level of excess demand and the expected rate of inflation

of the full-employment price level, rather than the actual price level. Consider-

able discussion of such a relationship is provided by NcCallum (l980b) and Mussa

(1980). For present purposes, the main relevant feature of (19) is simply that

it makes Pt predetermined and thus equal to Et_ipt. so that the     -
                                                                        Eip terms
vanish from equations (7) and (8). Other supply functions with that property

would also lead to the conclusion based on (18).




                                     -14-
IV. Monetary Control Under LRA

          We now turn to the derivation of expressions for the criterion     E(m —
in     regimes with lagged reserve accounting. In the case in which the instrument is

the funds rate r, there are no new calculations to make: since banking behavior

does not affect m when r is the instrument, the relevant criterion expression

is again given by (15). In the case of the reserve instrument, however, a new

calculation is needed. Indeed, the nature of monetary control with a reserve

instrument is drastically different under LRA than it is under CRA. This can be

seen from the banking sector behavioral equation (4'), in which the effect of
                                                                                     ht
         occurs only indirectly, by way of          when LRA is in force7 The optimal

setting for h is obtained from (4') only after r in (4') is replaced by the

value of Eir that equates E1m to m in the money demand function (2), as
follows:



                                —
(20)             ht =   [mt_i       — V1cj1(m *Et_iPt — c — c2 Eiy)i / v2


Thus with LRA, monetary control with a reserve instrument amounts to an indirect

method of exercising control with an interest rate! One would expect such a pro-

cedure to provide relatively poor monetary control, and such is the case —_ as we

shall now demonstrate.

          To determine the value of E(m —           with LRA and the h instrument, we use
                                             ni)2
equations (7), (8), and (9) and the innovation version of (4'), which is



(21)            0 =
                      v(r E1r) +
                            —




Elimination of innovations in
                                    y, p, and   r   from these four equations then yields




                                          —1.5-
(22)               m         =        + 1v + (c2 —
                                                         1)u —

where     and       are as defined above. From (22), then, we immediately obtain



(23)               E(m - m*)2 =          +         + Cc2 -          +



And from the latter we are able to draw some quite definite conclusions. First,

since     <   0,   (1 —          is   greater than 1.0, so a comparison of (23) with (11)

shows that the mean squared control error with the h instrument is unambiguously

larger under LRA than under CRA.

        The quantitative magnitude of this effect may not, moreover, be small. To

see this, suppose that c1 =                  I.e., that the interest rate semi—elasticities
                                      —v1;
of money demand and supply are equal in magnitude. Then with                     >   0 and b1 <   0,
                    =                              negative and greater than 1.0 in absolute
the value of
                          (1b1   + c1) /   V1 is
value. Consequently, 1 —               exceeds 2.0 and (1 —             is greater than 4.0. The
                                                                 I1)2
magnitude of the mean squared control error in (23) is therefore over four times

as great as in (11).

        Furthermore, since (_l)2 > 0, the mean squared error in (23) is also

greater than that in (15), which holds for the r instrument with either CRA or

LRA. Thus, the h — LRA combination provides the poorest monetary control among
                                             18
the four possibilities considered.

        Finally, since some analysts have suggested that excess reserves are

highly insensitive to interest rate movements, let us briefly consider results

that obtain as v1— 0. This implies, since                        ( $1b1 + c1)/v1, that
Of course, the behavior of the control error is independent of reserve demand

parameters when r is used as the instrument, a conclusion that is verified by


                                                  -16-
expression (15). With h used as the instrument, however, E(m -
                                                                 *2
                                                                 m)   approaches
   and   under CRA AND LRA systems, respectively: see expressions (11) and (23).

Thus the results in this limiting case do not alter the main conclusions.




                                  -17-
V. Generalizations and Qualifications

          It is important to recognize that the foregoing results are robust to

model specification in some significant respects. One such respect involves

distributed—lag modifications of the behavioral equations. Suppose, for example,

that the money demand equation (2) was replaced with a distributed—lag version

such as the following:


                                       J                   J
                               c                    +                     +
(24)               m Pt =          +
                                       j0   cj.r                c2r_

Here it       is assumed that past, as well as present, values of r and
                                                                                        y influence
money    demand in   period t, with the number of relevant past values, J, arbitrarily

large.        It is important that generalizations of this type be considered, because

with a two—week definition of the time period, large values of J will presumably

be required for a realistic specification. But this extension has no effect on

the foregoing analysis, for it is the innovation version of the relationship that

enters in the various calculations of E(m —
                                                           mr).     And   the   innovation version of

(24) is simply



(25)               m —m    —       — E_ip)     =
                                                    c10(r
                                                               —
                                                                   E1r)    + c20(y     —
                                                                                           E1y)   +



which    Is   identical in form to (8). All         that   is needed      in making   this generaliza-

tion is to interpret the a, b, c, and v parameters as those applicable to the

first—period response in a distributed—lag formulation. Thus, for example, c1 in

(8) must be interpreted as c10 in (24). Clearly, the same type of argument would

apply if, instead of (24), we had a money—demand specification of the partial

adjustment type often used in empirical work, as follows:




                                             -18-
 (26)                Pt = c     + c1r + c2y + c3(m1 —                   +



Furthermore, the stochastic disturbances in the behavioral equations do not need

to be white noises. If          in (2) were, for Instance, of the form



(27)           t =   p_i ÷
with     white, then a familiar transformation would convert the equation to one

with lagged values of                         —        on the right—hand side in which the
                               y, and
disturbance is the white noise            .
                                              Consequently, expressions such as (11), (15),
and (23) continue to prevail if the disturbance variances are interpreted as those

applicable to the unpredictable component of behavior in period t, such as

instead of

        There are, however, other modest changes in the model's specification which

will not leave our results unaffected. One that is of considerable importance

Involves the dating of the expectation operator In the IS equation. According to

specification (1), agents do not have knowledge of period—t magnitudes when

forming expectations of inflation between periods t and t+l, expectations used in

converting nominal into real interest rates. An alternative specification that

gives agents knowledge of period—t values is as follows:



                 =        ÷          —             —       +
(27)
                     b0       b1[r       (Ep+i                 v
Here Etp+i is the expectation of                  within the model conditional upon values

of y, m, p, r, and h in period t, as well as periods prior to t. Given this

change, the innovation version of the IS function, equation (7), no longer obtains.

In its place we have instead



                                                  -19—
(28) y - Et   lyt =   b(r Eir)
                          -             -
                                            bi(Ept÷i
                                                        -
                                                            E   iP+i) + bi(P -   Et_iP)   + Vt,



in which the change in the expectation (between t-l and t) of               appears. With

this change, the model becomes dynamic in a more thoroughgoing sense. As a result,

it ceases to be one in which E(m m*)2 is computable without reference to the

behavioral rules specifying m.

          There is one special case of some interest in which the results presented

in previous sections continue to hold precisely even if (27) is used instead of

(1). That case is the one in which no lagged terms appear in the IS,             LN, or
aggregate supply equations --   i.e.,   in which equations (27), (2), and (3) prevail

with a2 = 0 -- and the policy rule specifying m makes these target values

exogenous and known in advance (as, for example, a constant money-growth rule).

Under these conditions, the usual undetermined-coefficient solution equations for

the endogenous variables will include only m and current disturbances on the right-

hand side. In particular, p will obey



(29) Pt =   'o + ir11m + rri2u + r13v + l4t +
where the 1r1.'s are constant coefficients related to the parameters of (27), (2),

(3) and the policy rule. Consequently, we have




(30) Etpt÷l Etlpt÷l =           + ¶TllEm÷l -         (rT +   TriiE im÷i) = 0



and the change in the expectation of               disappears from (28), leaving (7) to be

used as before in the computation of m -           m.
          In general, however, the results will differ from those based on the IS

specification (1) and will depend upon the policy rule that governs m. For any


                                            -20-
given rule the model is solvable in principle, but the calculations may be

much more complex than those presented above. Furthermore, the results for

E(m    m*)2 will depend upon the precise distributed-lag specifications in

the IS, LM, aggregate supply, and reserve demand equations. This sensitivity

makes it unlikely that any conclusions of wide applicability would be forth-

coming from an analysis that uses specification (27).




                                   2 1-
VI. Conclusions

        The two   main substantive   results of the paper are easily sunnarized, as

folls. First, from the standpoint of monetary control, a reserve instrument

will19 perform less well with lagged reserve accounting than with contemporaneous

reserve accounting. Second, it seems likely that a reserve instrument will, with

comtemporaneous reserve accounting, permit tighter monetary control than will

an interest rate instrument (which is equally effective under lagged and con-

temporaneous accounting).

        In terms of analytical interest, one conclusion is that the messages

concerning monetary control are not drastically different in a dynamic, rational

expectations model   than   in a static model   provided   that current information is

unavailable to agents in forming expectations about the inflation rate relevant

to the real-nominal interest rate distinction. If this current information is

available, hxever, the substantive results described above will hold only for

highly special cases of the model and it seems unlikely that other general results

are obtainable.




                                         -22—
                                           APPENDIX



          The purpose here to derive the expression for the mean-squared money

 control error, E(m m)2, for the case in which a reserve instrument is used

 under LRA and the reserve demand equation is of the form mentioned in footnote

 ii, namely,

 (A-i) ôm + (1 -              6)m1
                                     =   + v1r + v2h +


with 0     6        1.       Here it is presumed that the right-hand side parameters (in-

cluding o) have the same values as in equations (4) and (4').

          Before beginning the analysis, let us briefly motivate specification (A-i).

Suppose that the reserve instrimient used Is the monetary base, H              Rt + C
                                                                           t
                                                                              20/
where Rt and C denote total reserves and currency in circulation, respectively.

Also let the money stock be Mt =
                                            C+   Dt where Dt = demand deposits. (These

are raw values, not logarithms.) Then assume that money holders keep a constant

fraction, k, of their money balances in the form of currency; thus               =      and
   =
        (1_k);       Next assume that banks desired reserves can be expressed as



            =
(A—2)
                p(Di,          r)

with p1 > 0 and p2 < 0. That desired reserves in period t must depend positively

upon Dt_i is -clear, given LRA. The lower is r. in addition, the more excess

reserves will be held for possible use in period t + 1.

         From (A-2) and the identities we have



(A-3) Ht =      C   + p(D..1, r)

                         t   Pt(l_k)Mi, rJ

                                              -23-
which relates H positively to both Mt and Mi and negatively to r. Equation

(A-i) is simply a rearranged version of the best approximation to (A-3) that is

linear in ht =      log            =   log                log Mt_li and r.
                          Ht,                Nt, me_i =
  -       To determine the value of E(tn -                     in the case at   hand we use
                                                         mp2
equations (7), (8), and (9) plus the innovation version of                         (A-i), which is




(A-4)         -
                  m)          v1(r -   E1r)      +



Elimination of the innovations in                        and r from these four equations then

yields



(A-5) W
        -    m
                  * =   '!l   + 1v + (c2 -
                                   1 -
                                                i)u -!ijC

where $ andI7are defined above. From (A-5), then we immediately obtain


                          2  22
                        2 a,.+a +(c   22 +*
                                      -) 22
(A-6) E(m - m) =
                   *         lv  2  1  u
                                                     2



which is the desired expression.

         To what extent do the conclusions of Section IV survive the change from

(4') to (A-l)? First, since l < 0, the value of (1 -                            in (11) is greater

than t-he value of (1 - o*l)2 in (A-6). Thus the mean squared control error with

the ht instrument continues to be unambiguously larger under LRA than under CRA.

And with small values of 8 the quantitative magnitude of the difference may

again be large.

         Second, since (f)2 > 0, the numerator on the right-hand side of (A-6)

is greater than the expression in (15). Thus, for small values of 6, the mean

squared error in (A-6) will exceed that in (15). For a substantial range of



                                                 -24-
parameter values, then, theh- LRA combination continues to provide the poorest

monetary control, even with the modified reserve demand equation.




                                   -25-
                                  REFERENCES



Axilrod,   Stephen H., and Lindsay, David E., "Federal Reserve System Implementation

       of Monetary Policy: Analytical Foundations of the New Approach," American

       Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 71 (May 1981), 246-252.

Barro, Robert J., and Grossman, Herschel I., Money, Employment, and Inflation,

       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976.

Burger, Albert E., "Money Stock Control," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Monthly

       Review 57 (October 1972), 10—16.

Friedman, Benjamin M., "Targets, Instruments, and Indicators of Monetary Policy,"

       Journal of Monetary Economics 1 (October 1975), 553—473.

____________   "The Inefficiency of Short—Run Monetary Targets for Monetary Policy,"

       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 2, 1977), 293-335.

Goodfriend, Marvin, "Discount Window Borrowing, Monetary Control, and the Post—

       October 6, 1979, Federal Reserve Operating Procedure," Federal Reserve
       Bank of Richmond, January 1981.


Kareken, John H., Muench, Thomas J., and Wallace, Neil, "Optimal Open Market

       Strategy: The Use of Information Variables," American Economic Review 64

       (March 1973), 156-172.

Kareken, John H., and Wallace, Neil, "Introduction," in Models of Monetary

       mies, Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1980.

Kaufman-, Herbert M., and Lombra, Raymond E., "The Demand for Excess Reserves,

       Liability Management, and the Money Supply Process," Economic Inquiry 18

       (October 1980), 555—566.

LeRoy, Stephen F., and Lindsay, David E., "Determining the Monetary Instrument:

      A Diagrammatic Exposition," American Economic Review 68 (December 1978),

       929—934.

LeRoy, Stephen F., "Monetary Control Under Lagged Reserve Accounting," Southern

      Economic Journal 46 (October 1979), 460—470.

                                       -26-
Lucas, Robert B., Jr., "Son    International   Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"

       American Economic Review 63 (June 1973), 326-324.


McC1lum, Bennett T.,, "Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate Policy Rule

        and Rational Expectations," NBER Working Paper No. 559, October 1980,

        forthcoming in Journal of Monetary Economics.     (a)

____________   "Rational   Expectations and Macroeconomic Stabilization Policy: An

        Overview," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 12 (November 1980, Part 2),

        716—746. (b)

Meltzer, Allan H., "Controlling Money," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Monthly

       Review 54 (May 1969), 16—24.

Mussa, Michael, "Sticky Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a Rational Model

       of the Inflationary Process," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on

       Public Policy, vol. 14, 1981, forthcoming.

Patinkin, Don, Money, Interest, and Prices, 2nd ed., New York: Harper and Row, 1965.

Pierce, James L., and Thomson, Thomas D., "Some Issues in Controlling the Stock of

       Money," in Controlling Monetary Aggregates II: The Implementatiion, Federal

       Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 9, 1972.

Poole, William, "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple Macro

       Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (May 1970), 197—216.

Poole, William, and Lieberman, Charles, "Improving Monetary Control," Brookings

       Papers on Economic Activity (No. 2, 1972), 293-335.

Sargent, Thomas J., Macroeconomic Theory, New York: Academic Press, 1979.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Wallace, Neil, "Rational' Expectations, the Optimal Mone-

       tary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political

               83 (April 1975), 241—254.

Sivesind, Charles, and Hurly, Kevin, "Choosing an Operating Target for Monetary

       Policy," Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (February 1980), 199—203.


                                       -27-
                                       FOOTNYES



1.   These studies employ an analytical approach developed in the well-known

and justly influential paper by Poole (1970).

2. The source of this belief is the famous paper by Sargent and Wallace (1975).

The result developed in that paper (and discussed further by Sargent (1979))

obtains when the interest rate policy rule is not designed to have a desired

effect on the money stock or the price level.

3. In this case, the system includes one economic actor --                   the   monetary author-

ity -- who is concerned with nominal magnitudes. Price level indeterminacy

occurs, as Patinkin (1965, pp. 303-309) clearly describes, when there is no one

whose real supply or demand behavior depends upon nominal magnitudes.

4. "Poorer" in terms of oi. criterion, described above, and in our model.

5. Here we are accepting at face value the Fed's claim to have altered procedures

to more nearly reflect a reserve instrument procedure. It would probably not be

accurate, however, to describe this recent period as one in which a reserve instru-

ment is used in any very pure sense.

6. Severe criticism of IS-LM relationships, even when used with classical supply

functions, has been expressed by Kareken and Wallace (1980).

7. Of course the same       is   true of the studies of Pierce and Thomson (1972),

Friedman (1975) (1977), Le Roy (1979), and virtually all writers on the subject

of monetary control. A partial exception is provided by Goodfriend (1981), who

develops a dynamic optimizing analysis of banks' behavior with respect to borrowed

reserves.

8. The possibility that agents have knowledge of period t magnitudes when forming

expectations regarding             is considered below, in Section V.


                                                -28-
 9. See, fo; example, Pierce and Thomson (1972, P. 118), Friedman (1975, P. 445)

 (1977,   p. 305), LeRoy (1979, p. 461), Sivesind and       Hurley   (1980, p. 200), and --

 implicitly   --   Axilrod   and Lindsey (1981, p. 247).

10. We recognize, nevertheless, that in some        cases   equations analogous to (4)

 may reflect not only the portfolio behavior of banks but also the desires of the

 non-bank public regarding the composition of its money holdings.

11. More generally, reserve demand might be dependent upon both current and

 lagged values of the money stock, in which case the relationship comparable to

 (4) would be ôm + (l_â)mi =            + vir + v2h +        with 0    a 1.    This sort

 of relationship would be implied if h were interpreted as the monetary base and

 the non-bank public maintained a constant ratio of currency to demand deposits.

 For more discussion, and an analysis of this case, see the Appendix.

12. The practice of counting lagged vault cash txard current reserves, for example,

 tends to make total reserves more nearly controllable than the base.

13. Previous arguments along lines similar to ours have been made by Burger (1972)

 and Meltzer (1969).

14. We do, hever, presume that fractional reserve banking is maintained.

15. Thus we are not compelled to support or dispute the contention that total

reserves could not possibly be used as an instrument under LRA, even if the

discount window was closed before the cessation of open-market activities on the

last day of the statement period.

16. The same result was obtained, within a static model, by Axilrod and Lindsey

(1981). Also see LeRoy and Lindsey (1978).




                                             -29-
17. This and subsequent statements in this paragraph are based on the reserve

demand specification (4') and are not strictly applicable to the more general

version used in the Appendix.

18. This conclusion does not obtain for all parameter values when (4') is

modified as in the Appendix. It still holds, however, for small values of the

parameter 8.

19. In the model considered.

20. Note that the setup does not reflect provisions whereby lagged vault cash

 is counted toward current reserves.




                                   -30-
