                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                RETIREMENT ANNUITY DESIGN IN AN
                      INFLATIONARY CLIMATE



                            Zvi Bodie
                        James E. Pesando

                     Working Paper No 896




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                             May 1982




This per was prepared for presentation at the Conference on
Financial Aspects of the US. Pension System, Amelia Island
Plantation, Florida, March 25-26, 1982. The authors are indebted
to Franca Modigliani for several helpful discussions. The research
reported here is part of the NBESs research program in Pensions.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #896
                                                    May 1982




     Retirement Annuity Design in an Inflationary Climate



                            AB STRACT




       This paper examines the tilt and risk—return characteristics

of real retirement incomes provided by variable annuities tied to bills,

long—term bonds, stocks and a mixed portfolio which combines all three.

The analysis emphasizes the riskiness of the real value of benefits

provided by conventional nominal annuities. The Rockefeller Foundation

Plan, together with the "ad hoc" cost—of—living adjustments made by

many large firms, are interpreted as representative market responses

to increased inflation uncertainty. The paper examines the annuity

designs implicit in these innovations, and shows them to be variants of

the standard variable annuity.



                                        Zvi Bodie
                                        School of Management
                                        Boston University
                                        704 Commonwealth Avenue
                                        Boston, MA 02215
                                        (617) 353—4160


                                        James E. Pesando
                                        University of Toronto
                                        Institute for Policy Analysis
                                        150 St. George Street
                                        Toronto, Canada M5S lAl
                                        (416)   978—8621
        A pensioner who receives his benefit in the form of a nominal

 annuity has claim to a stream of payments whose nominal value is certain.

The real value of this claim, however, will be highly uncertain if

there exists substantial uncertainty regarding the future level of

prices. Since this appears to be the case, and since pensioners are

presumably concerned with the real value of their retirement incomes,

the question of annuity design in an inflationary climate merits increased

attention. Our belief is that at least some individuals may find alterna-

tives to the nominal level—payment annuity better suited to their needs

or preferences in an environment of substantial inflation urlcertainty)

If individuals are to make rational choices, they must first understand

the risk—return and other characteristics of alternative annuity designs.

The primary objective of this paper is to clarify these issues.

       The first task is to examine the streams of real benefits that

are likely to be provided by variable annuities (VA's). Although equity—

based VA's appear to have fallen into some disfavor, perhaps because of

the lack of attention accorded the inherent volatility of common stocks,

recent work by Bodie (1980, 1981) suggests that VA's tied to bills or

short—term bonds may produce income streams that are quite stable in

real terms. VA's backed by bills, long—term bonds, common stocks and a

mixed portfolio are thus examined, and the results contrasted with those

for a graduated—payment, nominal annuity.

       The second task is to examine novel annuity designs which have

emerged in recent years, in which floors or floors together with ceilings

have effectively been added to the standard VA. The Rockefeller Founda-

tion plan, for example, provides cost—of—living adjustments which equal
                                  2




the average prime interest rate for the year less 3% (Heaton (1977)).

Once granted, these adjustments are never reduced and thus the annuitant —

in    effect — has a VA subject to a nominal floor.2 Annuities provided by

the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association (TIAA) also have a guar-

anteed nominal floor.3    In recent   years, large firms in both Canada and

the   United States have frequently made "ad hoc" cost—of—living adjust-
ments to the pensions of retired workers. In Canada, these adjustments
have   often been financed from pension fund earnings in excess of the plan's

valuation rate (Pesando (l98l)). Once granted, these adjustments are

again permanent. Moreover, there appears to be a ceiling on these adjust-

ments in that the real value of the initial benefit is never increased

even if "excess" fund earnings might so permit. The second part of the

paper thus examines avariable annuity subject to a nominal floor (VAF)

and a variable annuity subject to a nominal floor and a real ceiling (VAFC).

The former is suggested by the Rockefeller plan, and both may be viewed

as an attempt to formalize the apparent practice of many firms in grant-

ing cost—of—living adjustments to retired plan members. Unlike VA's,

the cost of VAF's and VAFC's is not known with certainty at their date

of purchase.

         The paper is organized as follows. The performance of a nominal,

level—payment annuity is first contrasted with that of a hypothetical

"purchasing power annuity" for the period 1971—1980. The latter is

formally equivalent to a VA backed by an index bond yielding a certain

real return of zero percent. Theoretical distributions of the real

payments from VA's tied to alternative asset bases are then presented,
                                    3




 and serve to illustrate the nature of the tradeoff between risk and

 expected real returns. These payments are also contrasted with those

 provided by a graduated—payment, nominal annuity. The properties of

 VAF's are then explored, and simulations conducted to contrast their

 performance with VA's backed by identical asset portfolios. The same

 exercise is then repeated for VAFC's. To place the alternative annuity

 designs in a final perspective, an historical simulation is conducted

 for the period 1971—1980. A summary and conclusion completes the

 paper.




 1. Thel-Payment, Nominal Annuity

          The nominal and real values of the benefits provided by a nominal,

 level—payment annuity during the period 1971—1980 are illustrated

in Table 1. The annuity is purchased at the beginning of 1971 for the

sum of $100,000, the annuity is sold at a (nominal) interest rate of

7.5 percent, and the benefits are payable with certainty for 10 years.5

The real value of the annual, nominal payment declines by more than

50 percent during the decade. Further, it is likely that a substantial

portion of this decline was unanticipated. If the anticipated rate of

inflation embodied in the nominal rate of interest was 5 percent, then

the annuitant would have expected the real value of his benefit to

decline at about 5 percent per year.6 Deviations around this rate of

decline would then have been unanticipated.

          For illustrative purposes, the performance of a "purchasing

power annuity" (PPA) for the period 1971—80 is also shown in Table 1.

This annuity is fully linked to the consumer price index and is sold at
                                         4




a certain real return of zero percent. Earlier work by Bodie (1980)

indicates that the minimum—variance portfolio (in the absence of short

selling) consists of one—month Treasury bills hedged with commodity

futures, and that the expected real return on this portfolio would not

exceed zero percent. For simplicity, it is assumed that a portfolio

could be constructed which would provide a certain real return of zero

percent. The PPA is analytically equivalent to a VA tied to an index

bond which provides this certain real return. Although the stream of

real payments provided by the PPA is certain, there is no requirement

that this stream of payments be constant. If RV is the annuity valuation

rate used to determine the base value of the annuity payment and if r

is   the certain real return on the portfolio, then the real value of the
annuity payments will change with certainty at an annual rate equal to
(1 +   r)/(l + RV)   —   1.   (See   Appendix for details.) With r =   0   and RV = 5,
the real benefit declines with certainty at 4.76 percent per year, as

shown in Table 1. When r and RV are equal, there is no tilt to

the projected stream of real annuity payments. If the real return is

uncertain, the previous expression depicts the expected degree of tilt-

ing in the real payments stream. If pensioners wish to design a stream

of pension payments which is expected to decline in real terms, perhaps

due to liquidity constraints or estate motives, this is readily accom—

plished with vehicles other than the nominal, level—payment annuity.

The downward tilt in the real benefit provided by a nominal, level—

payment annuity is, of course, equal to the expected rate of inflation.
                                 5




 2. Variable Annuities with Alternative Asset Bases


        The limitations of fixed—dollar annuities in an inflationary

 climate prompted life insurance companies in the 1950's to offer equity—

 based VA's. As emphasized by Bodie (1980), however, an equity—based VA

 exposes the annuitant to substantial investment risk even if it is

 assumed that the real return on equities is unaffected by unanticipated

 changes in the rate of inflation.7 The purpose of this section is to

 explore the real income streams provided by VA's with alternative

 asset bases.

        Theoretical distributions are presented in Table 2 for the real

 benefits provided by VA's backed by one—month Treasury bills, long—term

 U.S. government bonds, common stocks, and a mixed   portfolio.   (The mech-

anics of a variable annuity are detailed in the Appendix.) The mixed

portfolio is the minimum variance portfolio with the same expected return

as the long—term bond portfolio.8 The VA's are purchased for $100,000 and

benefits are paid with certainty for 15 years. The real returns on bills,

bonds, and stocks are assumed to be lognormally distributed with means of

zero, 2.956 and 7.232 percent, respectively, and standard deviations of 1.52,

7,64 and 18.61 percent. The means are the continuous time equivalents of

annual returns of zero, 3 and 7,5 percent. These parameters, together with

the covariances necessary to construct the mixed portfolio, are based on

historical data for the period l953—80. The valuation rates used to deter-

mine the base level of the annuity payments are the annual equivalents of

the   continuously compounded real rates of return. Examination of the

historical data indicates that real bill returns, but not those on stocks

and bonds, are serially correlated)0 For this reason, the theoretical

distribution of real benefit payments is also calculated for a bills—based

VA on the assumption that real bill returns are serially correlated.
                                 6




       The assumption that real returns are lognormally distributed

implies that annuity payments are also lognormally distributed. Since

the valuation rates used to calculate the base values of the benefits are

the annual equivalents of the expected real returns on the portfolios,

median benefit payments show no tendency to rise or to fall over time.11

Because these payments are lognormally distributed, they exhibit posi-

tive skewness and thus the mean payments rise steadily over time. The

distribution of real benefits provided by a graduated—payment, nominal

annuity is also included in Table 2. For this annuity, all of the

uncertainty regarding the real value of the benefit payments stems from

price level uncertainty. Thus, an additional set of assumptions is

required. The price level is assumed to be lognormally distributed, and

the continuously compounded rate of inflation is assumed to follow the

first order autoregressive process which characterizes the period 1953—

1980.12 The degree of graduation is set equal to 8 percent, which is

the (annual) steady state rate of inflation implied by the autoregression.13

The purpose of including the graduated, nominal annuity is to emphasize

the fact that while its nominal payments are devoid of risk, its real

payments are not.

       The distributions of real benefit payments reported in Table 2

mirror the risk—return characteristics of the underlying portfolios. The

stream of real benefits provided by the bills—based VA is smaller and

more stable than the stream provided by the bonds—based VA, and so on.

Acknowledgement of the serial correlation in bill returns produces a

more risky stream of benefit payments, especially as the time horizon

increases. Even when this serial correlation is acknowledged, however,
                                  7




bills remain the cornerstone of any VA which is intended to limit uncer-

 tainty regarding the real value of benefit payments. The importance of

diversification is seen in the comparison of the bonds—based VA with

the VA tied to the mixed portfolio with the same expected return.

Although the median benefits are identical, the standard deviation of

the real benefit payment in the 15th year is 22 percent smaller for the

VA tied to the mixed portfolio.

       Note, finally, the real benefit stream provided by the graduated—

payment, nominal annuity. We assume that the pcit expected real return

is 3 percent (at an annual rate), and is thus equal to the expected real

return on long—term government bonds.14 This assumption is equivalent

to assuming that life companies can hedge graduated—payment, nominal

annuities by holding an appropriate sequence of long—term bonds, and that

competitive pressures ensure that this is the implicit real yield at

which these annuities are sold. Because of the 3 percent return assump—

tion, the median benefits are identical to those for the VA's tied to

the government bond and mixed portfolios. The standard deviation of the

benefits provided by the nominal annuity is less than those for either of

the VA's in year 5, but significantly exceeds them by the 10th year. The

significant increase in the riskiness of real benefits provided by the

nominal annuity as the annuitant ages merits emphasis. This is a direct

reflection of the substantial serial correlation in the inflation rate.

These results, especially as the annuitant ages, illustrate how inappro—

priate it is to argue that VA's are inferior to nominal annuities because

they transfer all of the investment risk to the annuitant. The results

also highlight the importance of acknowledging the serial correlation in
                                      8



inflation     rates in attempting any assessment of the risk of the real

benefits provided by nominal annuities.



3. Variable Annuities_with Nominal Floors

         As noted, the Rockefeller Foundation Plan provides retiring

emDloyees with a variable annuity subject to a nominal floor, or VAF.

Sun Life Insurance Company of Canada has recently introduced a VAF,

tied to Treasury bills, in which "excesst' earnings above 3 percent are

also used to provide permanent benefit enrichments. The nominal floor

in each of these cases is equivalent to the plan sponsor's guaranteeing

that the fund will earn at least 3 percent. If the fund earns less
than 3 percent in a given period, the plan sponsor fully absorbs the loss.
(The mechanics of a VAF, as well as the contrast to a standard VA, are
detailed   in the Appendix.)



        The   pension   plans provided by most large firms in the United States

(and   Canada) are defined—benefit    plans. These are plans in which the

employee   receives a benefit equal to a given fraction of his average
or   of his final earnings for each year of service. Although the promised

benefits are nominal, firms —       especially   in Canada — have typically

granted "ad hoc" cost—of—living adjustments to the pensions of retired

employees. Once made, these adjustments tend to be permanent. Thus the

nominal value of the pension benefit is never reduced even if the fund

performs poorly. This is, of course, what happens explicitly under the

Rockefeller Foundation Plan, which functions as an ordinary defined—

benefit plan during the pre—retirement period.
                                 9




        If the source of these adjustments is pension fund earnings in

 excess of the plan's valuation rate, and if there is no ceiling on the

 size of the benefit increases, then the plan member effectively owns a

 VA with a guaranteed nominal floor, or a VAF. Equivalently, he is pro-

 vided with a traditional VA plus a put option on the nominal investment

 earnings of the pension assets with a striking price equal to the plan's

 valuation rate. The plan's valuation ratebecomes the equivalent of the

 valuation rate used to set the base payment in a standard VA. If the
                                     —-




nominal return on the pension fund is less than this valuation rate,

 then the nominal benefit is unchanged and the shortfall is absorbed

fully by the plan sponsor.

       Let A represent the initial amount in the fund, RV the valua-

tion rate and (R) the measure of the risk of the nominal return that is

relevant to option pricing. The value      (AVAF) of the VAF is:



                    A + Put(A, RV, 0(R))
           AVAF                                                    (1)



For a given A, the value of the put option is an increasing function

of both RV and G(R). If the fund is invested exclusively in the risk—

free nominal asset and thus earns the certain nominal return Rf,

the value of the put option is zero as long as RV     Rf. On the other

hand, the value of the put option is likely to be large if the nominal

return on the pension assets is very uncertain, even if RV is well

below the expected nominal return on these assets. If the objective of
                                    10




the plan sponsor were to minimize the value of the put option, he would

wish to set a low RV and to choose an asset base which would effectively

make the VAF into a standard VA. If the sole objective of the employee

were to maximize the value of the put option, he would —     of   course —

prefer   that the funds be invested in the riskiest asset, or common stocks.

Since the employee presumably cannot sell his VAF, he might nonetheless

prefer   that the fund not be invested in risky assets if he wishes the
real retirement income provided by the VAF to be stable. This point is
examined   below.

         Simulation results (1,000 trials) are presented in Table 3 for

VAF's tied to (i) bills and (ii) the mixed portfolio described previously.

The   interest in bills reflects the fact that they represent the corner-
stone of   any low—risk stream of real annuity payments. Although still

active workers may have sufficient flexibility to vary their consumption—

saving and work—leisure decisions to permit them to assume considerable

investment risk, this is less likely to be the case for retired workers.

The interest in the mixed portfolio stems from the desire to monitor —

in   effect —   the value of the put option when the uncertainty in the

return on pension assets is increased. Since the value of this option

depends upon the nominal return on the pension fund, simulations are

performed for both a low inflation (3%) and a high inflation (9%)

scenario. The (continuous) nominal return is equal to the sum of the

stochastic real return and the continuous time equivalent of these two

inflation rates. Both low (3%) and high (8%) valuation rates are included

in the simulations for the VAF tied to the mixed portfolio.
                                     11




        When the inflation rate is 3 percent, the expected real return

 of zero on the bills portfolio implies an expected nominal return of

 3 percent. Since the valuation rate is also 3 percent, the floor

 frequently binds and thus the put option is frequently exercised. The

 result is that benefits have a higher median and a lower standard devia-

 tion than do those provided by the corresponding VA. When the infla-

 tion rate rises to 9 percent, the floor never binds and the result is

 identical to that for the VA. This result occurs because the com-

bination of the high (expected) nominal return relative to the valua-

tion rate arid the low standard deviation of bill returns ensures that

the realized nominal return always exceeds the valuation rate. Note

also that the expected real return of zero together with the valuation

rate of 3 percent causes the stream of real benefits to be tilted

downward. This is most easily seen for the VA, but occurs as well for

the VAF.

       When   the   inflation rate rises from 3 to 9 percent, the put option

is occasionally exercised for the mixed portfolio. This is a direct

result of its more uncertain return. When     the   valuation rate (again,

the interest rate used to set the base       payment) is raised for a stan-

dard VA, the sole effect is to tilt the real payments stream downward

relative to what it would otherwise have been. When the valuation rate

is raised for a VAF, it has the additional    effect   of raising the value

of the put option. When the valuation rate is raised to 8 percent,

which is typical of the rates now used to value defined benefit plans

in the United States, the striking price of the option rises accordingly.

The result is a dramatic rise in the value of the put option in the low
                                 12




inflation scenario. With an expected nominal return of 3 plus 3 equals

6 percent, the nominal return typically falls short of the valuation rate.

By the 15th year, the median real benefit is 65 percent greater than that

provided by the corresponding VA. In the high inflation scenario, the

effective value of the put option falls sharply as realized nominal returns

fall short of the valuation rate with much lower frequency.

       It is interesting to note that proponents of the Rockefeller

Foundation Plan, which functions like a VAF, emphasize the importance

of investing the pension fund reserve for retired employees exclusively

in short—term commercial paper. If the nominal interest rate on short—

term securities remains high relative to the plan's valuation rate of

3 percent, the value of the put option which distinguishes the VAF from

a traditional VA will be very small. In effect, the Rockefeller Founda-

tion Plan will have been transformed from a defined-benefit plan in the

pre—retirement period to a defined—contribution plan at the date of

retirement, with the plan's valuation rate of 3 percent used to capital-

ize the nominal benefits due at the date of the employee's retirement.

If inflation were to recede and thus short—term interest rates to fall,

the value of the put option would increase. Thus the annuitants stand

to gain and the plan stands to lose from a reduction in the rate of

inflation. This fact is of particular interest since the Rockefeller

Foundation Plan is widely cited as a means whereby cost—of—living pro-

tection can be provided to retired workers, perhaps implying that the

plan is particularly attractive to workers if inflation is high.

       It is also interesting to note the continued emphasis in policy

discussions in Canada on investing pension fund reserves held for retired
                                   13




 employees   exclusively in short—term securities if "excess" earnings are
 to   be used to provide cost—of—living protection. Since the VAF is vir-

 tually identical to a VA when the value of the put option is small, the

 use of "ad hoc" adjustments may simply reflect the metamorphosis of

 defined—benefit into defined—contribution plans as the market response

 to Increased inflation uncertainty (Pesando (1982)). Because most large

 firms had already introduced defined—benefit plans, the use of VAF's —

 rendered virtually ident:ical to VA's by the combination of low valuation

 rates and investments concentrated in short—term securities — may be the

most convenient way to effect the rnetamorphosis.5



 4. Variable Annuities with Nominal Floors and (Cj.mu1ative) Real Ceilings


         In the preceding section, it was assumed that firms which provide

"ad hoc" cost—of-.living adjustments could be regarded as providing their

employees with VAF's. Although this may well be true for some firms,

the reality may also be more complicated. Firms which make ad hoc cost—

of—living adjustments may impose a ceiling on such increases, and may

also bank underwriting losses (when the nominal floor binds) as a first

claim on future "excess" earnings. In citing options for pension reform

in Canaaa, the Task Force (1979) considered an "excess" interest scheme

which contained a cumulative real ceiling. The real value of any enriched

pension could not exceed its initial level and any "excess" earnings

above the amount necessary to preserve fully the real value of the pen-

sion would be banked against future investment shortfalls.   In addition,

any underwriting losses incurred by the plan sponsor by virtue of the

guaranteed nominal floor would be banked, would accumulate at a market
                                         14



rate of interest, and would represent a prior claim on future "excess"
earnings. Only after any accumulated losses borne by the plan sponsor
were repaid would "excess" earnings be used to enrich pensions in pay.
Significantly, this illustrative scheme was chosen for study after the

Federal government solicited input from both firms and members of the

employee benefits industry.

       The most important feature of a VAFC relative to a VAF is its

banking provisions.          (This is perhaps most easily seen by considering the

case in which there is a real floor equal to the initial benefit. In this case,

the annuity would be constant in real terms and the banking provisions

would mirror the underwriting experience of a plan sponsor who provided

a fully indexed pension and held assets other than index bonds in the

pension fund.) Nonetheless, it is useful to consider the options inherent

in a VAFC without reference to the banking provisions. By virtue of the

ceiling on the real value of the pension benefit, the worker has —        in
effect —   sold   a call option on "excess" investment earnings above those

sufficient to provide full cost—of—living protection. Since the nominal

return on the plan's assets is the real return plus the inflation rate,

this is equivalent to the worker's having sold a call option on real

investment earnings in excess of the valuation rate. Let AVAFC represent

the value of the variable annuity subject to both a floor and a ceiling;

let a(r) be the measure of risk of the real return that is relevant to

option pricing, and let AVAF and A be as defined in (1). Then:



      AVAFC = A +     Put(A, RV, o() — Call(A, RV, (r))

              =
                  AVAF
                         —   Call   (A, RV, (r))                          (2)
                                    15




 Unlike   a   VAF, whose value to the beneficiary is at least as great

 as that of a standard VA, the value of a VAFC may be greater or less

 than that of the corresponding VA, depending on the relative values of

 the put and the call. For a given A, the value of the call option is

 a decreasing function of the plan's valuation rate and an increasing

 function of the risk of the real return on the plan's assets. The

 value of the call option will be zero if the pension fund is invested

 exclusively in a risk—free real asset and if the risk—free real rate of

 return rf < RV.      As noted by Bodie (1980), there is no risk—free real

 asset. A pension fund invested exclusively in bills will, however,

earn a real return which is quite stable and which has an expected

value of (approximately) zero. The value of this call option will thus

be close to zero if (1) the fund holds only bills or their equivalent,
                                                         16
and (2) the valuation rate is above (say) 3 percent.          In this case,

the value of the VAFC will equal that of the VAF. If, in addition,

the anticipated rate of inflation is sufficiently high that the nominal

bill yield significantly exceeds RV, then the value of the put option

contained in both the VAF and VAFC will equal zero and thus both will

be equal in value to the corresponding VA.

          Consider first (Table 4) the distribution of real benefits by a

VAFC tied to a bills portfolio when the inflation rate is low. Because

the projected stream of real annuity payments is tilted downward (since

the expected real return of zero is less than the valuation rate), the

ceiling binds rarely and only in the initial years of the annuity pay-

out. Median benefits fall short of those provided by a VAF, primarily

due to the banking provisions, but exceed those of a VA. In the high
                                   16




 inflation scenario, the VAFC provides benefits which simply reproduce

 those of a VA. This result, which was anticipated in the discussion of

 (2), may be empirically relevant. If so, this might explain the apparent

 lack of attention that is sometimes accorded this issue. The Rockefeller

 Foundation Plan, for example, makes no reference as to whether or not

a ceiling exists on the cost—of—living increases. Because the valuation

rate of 3 percent exceeds the expected real return on a portfolio of

short—term coimnercial paper (or its surrogate, the prime rate), the

question of whether or not there is a ceiling may simply not be empirically

relevant.

       For the mixed portfolio with a valuation rate of 3 percent, there

is no tilt to the projected stream of real benefits provided by the

corresponding VA. For the VAFC, unlike the VAF, the benefit payments

are similar in both the low and the high inflation scenarios. This is,

of course, due to the banking provisions. For both scenarios, the

ceiling binds frequently (i.e. ,   the   call opt ion is exercised) as evidenced

by the fact that median benefits remain at the ceiling in all years.

Although we do not attempt to explicitly evaluate them, it would appear

that the value of the sponsor's call option exceeds the value of the

annuitant's put in these two cases. Note that the median and mean bene-

fits are lower than those of the corresponding VA in all years. Further-

more, in contrast to both the VA and the VAF, the mean benefit for the

VAFC is well below its own   median,    reflecting the reverse skewness induced

by the truncation of the upper tail of the distribution. The dramatic

decline in the standard deviation relative to both the VA and VAF is also

a result of this truncation and therefore reflects not a reduction in
                                  17




 risk from the annuitant's perspective, but rather the loss of upside

 potential. Further evidence that in these two cases the value of the

 VAFC is considerably less than that of the corresponding VA is provided

 by Table 4' which shows the distribution of the real accumulation in

 the   "bank" at the end of year 15. When this number turns Out to be
 positive at the end of a simulation run it means that the years of
 "excess" earnings from the portfolio were more than enough to   compensate
 for the years of shortfall.

         Raising the valuation rate, as noted in the discussion of (2),

reduces the value of the call option. When the valuation rate is set

at 8 percent, median benefits do exceed those provided by the VA for

all years in the low inflation scenario, lthugh they remain less than

those provided by the VAF. When inflation is high, and thus the per-

mitted real erosion in the value of benefits is also high, the stream

of payments provided by the VAFC and VA are quite similar. The ceiling

frequently binds, but the "excess" funds so banked are then used to

enrich nominal benefits in subsequent years.

        To sum up, three empirical results merit emphasis.   First, if
the pension fund is invested exclusively in bills, the VAFC will provide

benefits similar to those provided by a standard VA if (1) the inflation

rate is high relative to the plan's valuation rate and (2) the valuation

rate is (say) 3 percent or more and thus significantly exceeds the expected

real return on bills. In this case, the value of each of the put and

the call options is (approximately) equal to zero. Second, when the

expected real return on the plan's assets is equal to the valuation rate,

the real benefits provided by a VAFC are likely to be far more stable
                                 18




 than those provided by either a VAF or the traditional VA. This result,

 in essence, reflects the procedure for banking the gains or losses

 experienced by the plan sponsor. Third, by choosing appropriate com-

 binations of RV and asset allocations, it would appear possible to

 "cancel" the values of the put and the call (without setting each equal

 to zero) and to create a number of VAFC's all having a value equal to A.

 But there would have to be mutual agreement between sponsor and annuitant

 about the portfolio's composition, and some mechanism for monitoring

 adherence to it.

        As noted, our interest in the VAFC is motivated by the possibility

 that it may formalize the behavior of at least some firms which make

 "ad hoc" cost—of—living adjustments. If so, and if the stream of real

 payments is smoothed relative to those obtainable from (say) a bills—

 based VA, then firms must be compensated for their underwriting the

 attendant investment risk. In principle, this should be reflected in

 compensating wage differentials. Since the VAFC does not alter the

 efficient frontier, it will be the basic risk—return tradeoffs available

 in the capital market which dictate the size of these compensating wage

 differentials.




 5. AlternativetyDs. Historical Simulations               for the Period:



       Historical simulations of the nominal and real benefits provided

by VA's, VAF's, and VAFC's for the period 1971—1980 are presented in

Tables 5A-5D. As in Table 1, the initial capital in 1971 is $100,000 and

the payments are made with certainty for 10 years. VAF's and VAFC's must,
                                 19




of course, be underwritten by the plan sponsor (or life insurance com-

pany) and their cost may exceed or fall short of the initial capital.'7

Two valuation rates, zero and five percent, are used in the simulations.

The former is the expected real return on the minumum variance portfolio

 (i.e., bills) while the latter is typical of the rates actually used in

the early 1970's to value defined benefit plans.

       Consider first the bill results. When the valuation rate is zero,

the real benefit provided by the VA declines from $10,100 in 1971 to

$8,794 in 1980 or by 13 percent. This erosion is only modest in view of

the substantial unanticipated inflation that appears to have occurred

in the 1970's. Because the floor never binds, the VAF produces benefits

identical to the VA. Because the ceiling binds in 1971 and 1972, thus

causing "excess" earnings to be banked for future use, the real benefits

provided by the VAFC diverge from those provided by the VA and VAF. With

a valuation rate of 5 percent, the floor binds twice (1971 and 1972)

so that the final benefit provided by the VAF exceeds that provided by

the VA. Because of the banking feature, which requires that the plan

sponsor be compensated for prior underwriting losses, the stream of

benefits provided by the VAFC differs from that provided by the VA.

       The sharpest contrast among the alternative annuity designs

occurs with the riskiest asset base, which is common stocks. Consider

only the results when the valuation rate equals 5 percent. Although

this rate is less than the expected real rate of return on common

stocks, the real benefits provided by the VA, in fact, decline sharply.

This result simply reflects the poor performance of the stock market

during the decade. The value of the nominal floor (i.e., the put option)
                                  20




 is high as evidenced by the fact that the real benefit provided by the

 VAF in 1980 is almost twice that provided by the VA. The tendency for

 the VAFC to stablize the real stream of benefit payments is readily

 apparent. In 1973 and 1974, for example, annuitants are partially

 insulated from the precipitous declines in the stock market. When the

 stock market recovers in 1975, however, real benefits continue to de—

 dine as "excesst' fund earnings are first used to repay the plan sponsors

 for the net underiting losses they incurred in the previous years.

        The final comparison is between the bond portfolio and the

 mixed portfolio with the identical expected return. Because of the very

 adverse performance of the bond market, the real benefit by 1980 is much

 higher for the VA when it is tied to the mixed portfolio. This

ex post result is consistent with the greatEr ex ante risk of the bond

portfolio. The comparisons of the results for the VA's, VAF's and

VAFC's are quite straightforward, and only the continuing tendency for

real benefits to be stabilized under the VAFC merits note.



6 Summary and Conclusion


       Nominal annuities, whether level—payment or graduated, expose

the annuitant to substantial uncertainty regarding the real value of

his retirement income. The exclusive source of this uncertainty is

uncertainty regarding the future level of prices, and hence of the

future rate of inflation. Standard VA's backed by Treasury bills or

their equivalent provide much more stable real retirement incomes,

even when consideration is given to the serial correlation in real
                                      21




 bill returns. VA's backed by common stocks, long—term government bonds,

 and a mixed portfolio illustrate the risk—return tradeoffs inherent in

 the alternative portfolios. These should be of interest to plan sponsors

 who may   wish,   without increasing their own costs, to provide increased

 annuity choices to plan members.18

        The cost of a VAF, which is a VA with a nominal floor, is not known

 with certainty on the date the annuity is purchased and must be under-

 written by a plan sponsor or life company. The plan provided by the

 Rockefeller Foundation functions, in effect, like a VAF. If the objec-

 tive is to provide a stable stream of real benefits, then a VAF must

 also be linked to a bills portfolio. When nominal interest rates are

high and the valuation rate is low, this VAF will produce results vir-

 tually identical to those of a bills—based VA. This is the case for

the Rockefeller Foundation Plan. In effect, the Rockefeller Foundation

Plan functions as a defined—benefit plan in the pre—retirement period,

and becomes a defined—contribution plan at the date of the employee's

retirement. This metamorphosis of defined—benefit plans into defined—

contribution plans appears to have occurred extensively in Canada, and

may represent a market response to increased inflation
                                                           uncertainty.

       Because the "ad hoc" adjustments made by firms are never (to

our knowledge) more than those necessary to fully offset the impact of

inflation, it is likely that the behavior of many firms is more compli-

cated than that suggested by the VAF. We therefore analyze a VA subject

to a nominal floor and a real ceiling, in which underwriting losses and

gains by the plan sponsor are banked from one period to the next. Under

Stylized conditions which might well be met in practice, a VAFC tied to
                                 22




bills would closely replicate the benefits provided by a bills—based VA.

More generally, due to the interaction of the floor and ceiling with the

banking provisions, it is possible for a VAFC to provide substantially

more stable real benefits than a VA tied to the same asset base. Because

the risk—return tradeoffs available in the capital market have not

changed, however, sponsoring firms in these cases would presumably extract

compensating wage differentials from their employees if mean benefits

were unaffected. As noted in the text. however) mean benefits will be

reduced if the implicit call option (pertaining to the real ceiling) proves

to be more valuable than the implicit put option (pertaining to the nominal

floor).
                                                    23




                                             FOOTNOTES



1
     For simplicity, the discussion proceeds as if the sole source of

    wealth of the retiring plan member is his claim to a private pension.

     If he has other sources of wealth, then the risk—return characteris-

     tics of his pension benefit must be analyzed in the context of his

     total portfolio. For a discussion which explicitly focuses on

    social security as an additional source of wealth, see Feldstein

     (1981). See L. Summers.t paper in this volume for a discussion of the

    extent to which households may be able to diversify away the inflation

    risk implicit in nominal pension benefits.


2
    A separate provision in the Rockefeller Foundation plan provides that

    the cost—of—living adjustment equal at least 4 percent if the infla-

    tion rate as measured by the Consumer Price Index exceeds 4 percent.

    Otherwise, however, the floor is that cited in the text (Heaton (1981)).

    There is no reference to a ceiling on the size of the cost—of—living

    adjustments. Subsequent discussion of the Rockefeller plan ignores

    the separate floor provision.


3
    TIAA, which manages one of the largest pension plans in the United

    States, offers its members two annuity designs which resemble VA's

    which contain a nominal floor. The older of these, the traditional

    TIAA annuity, has a guaranteed minimum nominal floor. This floor is

    embodied in the guaranteed return of 3%. Unlike the Rockefeller

    plan (which is characteristic of the hybrid annuities examined

    at length in the text), this nominal floor does not ratchet upwards

    over time. The asset base in the TIAA annuity consists of a portfolio
                                   24




dominated by long—term bonds, mortgages and other fixed—interest loans.

TIAA pays to its beneficiaries a variable benefit which has been

"smoothed" relative to what it would be under a standard VA design.

by ignoring unrealized capital gains and losses on these dollar—

fixed investments. One consequence of this smoothing is that the

guaranteed rate cited previously is far less likely to bind. Another

consequence is that there can be cross—subsidization of different

generations of annuitants. Currently, for example, TIAA is paying

a total nominal rate of return of 11% to new retirees, while the

risk—free nominal rate of return in the capital markets is well in

excess of that. The interest rate used to determine the initial

benefit (called the Assumed Interest Rate or A.I.R.) is also equal to

11%, so the expected nominal benefit stream is level. Recently,

TIAA has offered its members an alternative design (called the Graded

Benefit Payment Method), which differs in two respects from the older

one. First, the expected nominal benefit stream has been given an

upward tilt by using an A.I.R. of 4% to determine the initial benefit

level. Secondly, the guaranteed nominal floor ratchets upward whenever

the interest rate declared in each period actually exceeds 4%. Earnings
above 4% are credited at the end of the year and —       in   effect —   are
used to purchase an additional TIAA annuity with its own guarantees and

dividends.        (The interest rate used in calculating the increase in the

nominal floor is the guaranteed rate of 3%.)

       It   is worth noting that TIAA has been shortening the average
maturity of its portfolio in recent      years. If   this process were     to

continue,     the TIAA graded payment annuity would come to look more
like    the Rockefeller Plan annuity.
                                            25



        4
             Ontario's Select Committee on Pensions (1981) has recommended that

             the use of "excess" investment earnings to provide inflation pro-

             tection be mandated by law. No reference is made to floors and/or

             ceilings in the proposed scheme, which the analysis in this paper

             shows to be of crucial importance.


    5
             For the purposes at hand3 there is no advantage in explicitly incor-

             porating mortality factors into the analysis. Mortality is thus

             ignored in all of the illustrations presented in the paper.


    6
            More precisely, each year's real benefit would be equal to the pre-

            vious year's benefit divided by 1.05.


    7
            In fact, real equity returns appear to be negatively correlated with

            unanticipated inflation, as noted by Bodie (1976) and Pesando and Rea

            (1977). Feldstejn (1980) attributes this result to the fact that

            inflation raises the effective tax rate on corporate—source income.


8
            The mixed portfolio consists of 52% bonds, 29% bills and 19% stocks.

            We do not refer to this as an efficient portfolio for two reasons.

            First, our portfolio proportions are derived from a single—period

            variance—minimization procedure which ignores the serial correlation

            in bill returns. Second, the efficiency of an annuity for a particu-

            lar household can only be determined if we know all of the household's

            other assets and liabilities.


9
            As noted by Bodie (1981), the mean realized real return on bonds is

            in fact negative during this period. The mean real return on bonds
                                                26




      was set equal to an annual rate of 3%, whose continuous time equivalent

      is 2.956%, while the other parameters were based on the observed means,

      variances and covariances.


10
      First order autoregressions were performed for the logarithms of the

      real annual wealth relatives of bills, bonds and stocks. The results

      are as follows:

      Bills: r = -.044 + .768                                 = .559            1.04 (% per year)
                    (.205)         (.136)
                                          ri                            SEE =


      Bonds: r = —1.619          + .261 r                  R2 = .056    SEE =   7.64
                                                t—l
                    (1.493)            (.207)

      Stocks: r = 5.847      —    .021     r               R2 = .0004   SEE =   19.28
                    (.3.849) (.201) t—1

      Bracketed figures are standard errors.


11                                                                     t r
     The real benefit in year t is given by bt = B0 .1(fRv) where B0 is the


     initial projected annuity payment, r is the realization of the stochastic

     logarithic real return in year i,               and   RV is the annuity valuation rate.

     Since bt is the product of lognormal variates, it is also lognormally dis—
                                                t
     tributed: log(b) = log(B0) +
                                  i=l
                                         —           rj t
                                             log(l+RV) . Since we have chosen
     RV such that E(r) = log(1+RV), the median value of b equals B0 for all t.


                                                      2
     By contrast, E(b) =         B e        where          equals the variance of       r..

     If                                                  2      '
          there is no serial correlation in the r series, 0 = tO where o
                                                                          t

     is the variance of rin a single year.

          Rea (1981) also discusses the design of a variable annuity which

     produces a payments stream which is expected to remain constant in real

     terms.


12
     The first order annual autoregression, based on the consumer price

     index, is:
                                                           27




           Ii      =    0.794     + 0.902 fl                    R2 = .750               SEE = 2.003 (%     per          year)
                        (0.597)        (0.117)



     where Tt = log                                  and          is the price level at time t.


13
     Assume              follows the first order autoregressive process, TI =

     where              is distributed N(0,c). Then ll =                           c/(l—p)    is the steady—

     state rate of inflation. Note that log(P) = log(P ) +                                                 where
                                                      °

           is     the    realization of the inflation process. Let P = 1                                  and let

                                                                                                          and

     variance           of log(P) =        2
                                                                                                      .   If B is
     the        known   nominal benefit in period t, then the real benefit b B/P.
     Thus log(b) =                         —                    Let B =                      where g is the rate
                                1og(B)         log(P).
     of graduation, and let                      =    (g_rI*)t.       Median bt =                 ÷ median P =
                                                                                             Bt
     Be                Since B    is   graduated so as to increase at the anticipated

     inflation rate, it = 0 and median b =                             B            Since B is non—stochastic,
                                          t                                0
                                                                               .
                                                                                              t                 2
     variance        of 1og(b) = variance of log(P) = O2.                                    Mean   b = B e2        t


     and        the variance of b = B2eG t(eU t —

14
     The continuously compounded nominal interest rate (R ) is thus
     equivalent to an annual rate of 11%, since the (annual) steady state
     rate of inflation built into the illustration is 8%.

15
     If   there were no nominal floor on                        the   pension benefits, any decision

     to channel pension fund reserves exclusively into bills or their

     equivalent would have an unambiguous interpretation. Workers, who
                                    28




     presumably cannot diversify away the inflation risk inherent in nominal

     pension benefits, are sufficiently risk averse that they will pay the

     price (i.e. a low expected real return on their pension wealth) of

     stabilizing their real retirement incomes.


16
     Remember that the standard deviation of the continuously compounded

     real bill return is only 1.52 percent per annum, so that the expected

     real return of zero is about two standard deviations less than 3 percent.


17
     The plan sponsor could underwrite VAF's or VAFC's on either a pay—go

     or a fully—funded basis. This issue is not explored in this paper.


18
     If the sponsor provides a defined—benefit plan, the lump sum necessary

     to purchase the requisite annuity could be made available to the

     employee, who could then choose his preferred VA. If the promised

     pension is purely nominal (and the firm has no tradition of provid-

     ing ad hoc adjustments), then discounting the promised payments by

     the risk—free nominal rate R        (as well as by mortality) would

     identify the lump sum to be offered to the employee.
                                       29


                                Bibliography


 Bodie, Z. "Common   Stocks   as a Hedge Against Inflation." Journal of

        Finance 31: No. 2 (May 1976): 459—70.

 ________ "An Innovation for Stable Real Retirement Income." Journal

        of Portfolio Management 7: No. 1 (Fall 1980): 5—13.

________ "Investment Strategy in an Inflationary Environment." NBER

       Working Paper No. 701, June 1981.

Feldstein, M. "Inflation and the Stock Market." American Economic

       Review 70: No. 5 (December 1980): 839—847.

_____________   "Should Private Pensions Be Indexed?" NBER Working

       Paper No. 787, October 1981.

Heaton, H. "Indexing Pension Payments to Inflation Without Material

       Increases in Expected Plan Costs: the Rockefeller Foundation

       Plan." Statement to the President's Commission on Pension

       Policy, Washington, D.C., January 11, 1980.

_________   "Inflation   Protection for Retired Employees." Harvard

       Business Review, September — October 1977, pp. 3—4.

Ontario Select Committee on Pensions. First Report (Toronto:

       Government of Ontario, 1981).

Pesando, J.E. "Employee Valuation of Pension Claims and the Impact

       of Indexing Initiatives." NBER Working Paper No. 767,

       September 1981.

_____________    "Investment Risk, Bankruptcy Risk and Pension Reform
       in Canada." Journal of Finance, June 1982, forthcoming.

_____________ and S.A. Rea, Jr. Public and Private Pensions in Canada:

      An Economic Analysis (Toronto: University of Toronto Press for

       the Ontario Economic Council, 1977)
                                         30




Rea, S.A. ,   Jr.   ,   "Consumption Stabilizing Annuities with Uncertain
        Inflation", Journal of Risk arid Insurance, XLVII: No. 4,

        (December 1981).

Task Force on Retirement Income Policy. The Retirement Income System

       In Canada: Problems and Alternative Policies for Reform

        (Ottawa 1979).
                                                 Table   1
                        ILLUSTRATION OF TRADITIONAL, LEVEL—PAYMENT ANNUITY AND
                             PURCHASING POWER ANNUITY FOR PERIOD 1971—1980
                                                                      -   Purchasing Power Annuityb
                                Traditional AflflUlYa          No Tilting (RV=O)           Tilting (RV=5)
              Inflation          Nominal        Real           Nominal         Real       Nominal      Real
Year         Rate   (CPI)         Value        Value            Value         Value        Value      Value
1971              3.3            14,568        14,095          10,336         10,000      12,748      12,334
1972              7.4            14,568        13,630          10,688         10,000      12,555      11,746
1973              8.8            14,568        12,527          11,629         10,000      13,009      11,187
1974             12.2            14,568        11,165          13,047         10,000      13,901      10,654
1975              7.0            14,568        10,434          13,962         10,000      14,167      10,147
1976              4.8            14,568         9,955          14,634         10,000      14,142      9,664
1977              6.8            14,568         9,324          15,624         10,000      14,380      9,204
1978              9.0            14,568         8,551          17,035        10,000       14,932      8,765
1979             13.3            14,568         7,547          19,303        10,000       16,114      8,343
1980             12.4            14,568         6,714         21,698         10,000       17,251      7,951
         a
Notes:       Assumes that the   nominal    interest rate is 7.5%,   initial capital is $100,000, annuiry
             is payable with certainty for 10 years and
             the year.
                                                        annuity payments are made at the end of
         b
             Assumes that life insurance company can purchase an index bond which offers a real
             return of zero.     If
                                 'ii is the inflation rate in period    then  t,
                                                                             the  nominal annuity
             payment     B Btl * (1 + T1)/(l + RV) where RV is the             interest
                                                                                 rate used to determine
             the base annuity payment (B). B equals RV *                  A/(1_(l+Rv)T
                                                                                   where A Is the
             initial capital and T is the number of
                                                      years the annuity is payable. For RV=0,
             '   equals A/T.
                                                                                            Table 2
                                                     VARIABLE   ANNUITI    WITH ALTERNATIVE ASSET BASES:           THEORETICAL DISTRIBUTIONS
Portfolio Expected             Standard      Annuity     Base                      Annuitv Payment                                Annuity Payment                    Annuity Payment
               RCS].a          Deviation    Valuation    Annultyb                     in Year 5                                   In Year 10                          in Year 15
               Return    (%)                Rate   (%)   Payment      median             mean                                       mean       atd.dev.                  mean
                                 (%)                                                                std.dev.          median                              median                    std.dey.
                                                          ($)
Bills           0               1.52          0           6,667           6,661          6,670          227            6,667        6,6714      321        6,667         6,678           393
Hi lie          0               1.014         0           6,667           6,667          6,677          361            6,667                   679                                       933
                                                                                                                                    6,idi.                 6,667         6,731
(SertaiC
Correla-
tion)
Bonds           2.956           7.614         3           8,377           8,377          8,500          1,1463          8,377       8,625      2,115       8,377         8,752      2,6141
Stocks          7.232          18.61          7.5        11,329       11,329            12,3514         5,372         11,329       13,1471     8,666      11,329      114,689      12,9114
)4ixeg'         2.956           6.08          3            8,377          8,377          8,1455         1,155           8,377       8,533      1,656       8,377         8,613      2,056
Port folio
Graduated
                                 '
raymente,       2.956                         3           8,377           8,311          8,14s5         i,08o           8,377       8,723       2,531      8,377         9,219           236
Nominal                                                                                                                                                                             14
Annuity
(Graduation
Rate'l3%)
ainean   of   the logarithm of the real annual wealth relative.            Valuation rate iB      the   equivalent annual rate.
bIflitial capital is $100,000, annual payments are made with certainty for 15 years, payments are in constant dollars.
CBased on the following autoregression for the annual real return on bills:
                                                                                                  r=    .T6rt_i+et with      a    1.014% per year and
                                                                                                                                                      r0   0.
d){ixed portfolio, consisting of bonds (52%), bills (29%) and stocks (19%), minimizes                         the variance of the annual real return for the given
 mean.
euncertainty regarding the           real
                                annuity payments stems solely from uncertainty regarding the price level, which is assumed to be log normally distri-
 buted. The continuously compounded               rate
                                          of inflation (s) follows the following autoregressive process:              +        +
                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                     with     — 2.00%
                                                                                                                                                          U          o
 per   year    and
                     '     The steady state inflation rate of 7.7% is equivalent to the annual graduation rate of 8%. The graduated—payment nominal
  annuity     assumes an expected real       return equal to that of bonds        (i.e., 2.956%).
                                                                                                    Table 3
                                                                            VARLAIILE ANNU TI ES WITH CUAR/INTEED NOMI NA). FLOORS
                            a
                 Expected       StandarI                         Inutuity       DaSe
                  Real          Deviation          Inflation   Valuation       Aflflityb           Ann        Pajment in Year              AimuiLentinYeart                Annully Payment in Year 15
Nttlollo        Retrn(%)              (7.)         Rate (7.)   Rate (7.)      ynenr      (5)    median          mean                   meiian        std.dev.
                                                                                                                                                    mean                median     mean      std.dev.
EllIs                 0               1.52             3            3           8,311           7,424          7,447            151)       6,604     6,619      188      5,867      5,888      204
                                                                                               (7,219)        (7,223)       (245)         (6,203)   (6,222)    (302)    (5,351)    (5,315)    (313)
hills'                0               1.52             9             1          8,3/7           7,221          7,3)4        248            6,219     6,229       312     5,365      5,373       322
                                                                                               (7,221)        (1,224)       (248)         (6,219)   (6,229)    (312)    (5,365)    (5,373)     (322)
MixedC            2.956               6.08             3            3           8,177           8,851          8,943        926                                         10,020     10,326     1.976
                                                                                                                                           9,369     9,616     1,434
                                                                                               (8,366)        (8,448)    (1.180)          (8,459)   (8,595)   (1,687)   (8,512)    (8,724)   (2.139)
MIxedC            2.956               6.08             9            3           8,3/7                                                                                               8,918     1,974
                                                                                                8,4/3          8,564      1,120            8,633     8,738     1,589     8,684
                                                                                               (8,407)        (8,489)    (1,176)          (8,461)   (8,571)   (1,655)   (8,406)    (8,6)1)   (2,047)
MIsedC            2.956               6.08             3            8           11,683         10,/8/         10,948        141           10,103    10,276       997     9,483      9,629     1,129
                                                                                               (9.192)        (9.289)    (1,225)          (7,326)   (7,446)   (1,40/)   (5,7/3)    (5,922)   (1.339)
PlIxedC           2.956               6.08             9            8           11,68)          9,586          9,11)1     1,035            7,960     8,070     1,190     6,549      6,706     1,229
                                                                                               (9.226)        (9.2/6)    (1,263)          (7,219)   (7,380)   (1,390)   (5,708)    (5,879)   (1,370)
        or the lo'arithm of the real annual wealth relative. The nominal return Is the
 sum   or the simulated real return plus the contipuoum time equivalent of the annual inflation rate
 noted    in the table.
6lnitiml    capital Is    tllV)0fl,   annual nayments are made    with certainty   for 15 years, payments are in
 constant    dollars.
         as In Table 2.
llracEeted   results are those for      a    variable annuity without the nominal floor.
                                                                       VARIAIII.E ArlNUIT1F WITh G(IAIIANTEEI) NOMINAL FlAXMl1 AND CUMUlATIVE    REAL CEILINGS
              Expected5      Standard                       Annuity         Base b
hortfollo
               Heal
             Heturn   ()     Deviation
                                 ()
                                          Inflation
                                          Hate (%)
                                                           Valuation
                                                           Bate (N)
                                                                           Annuity
                                                                          Paynent ($)
                                                                                                    AnnuitvPavmentInYer5
                                                                                               median
                                                                                                                                      Annuity_Payment
                                                                                                                                    median
                                                                                                                                                          in   Year 10        Annuly    Pa1mtinYe
                                                                                                           mean         std.dav.                mean           std.dev.   median        mean atd.dev.
IhilIg            0             1.57            1             1               (3,7              7,111       7,160                   6,31.8     6,1.03             1115     5,1.82       5,5ti3       187
                                                                                               (7,?P))     (7,771)        (21.5)   (6.703)    (6,22?)            (302)    (5.351)      (5,315)      (313)
HilIx             0             1.5?           9              3               (3,3(7            1,221       7,771.         21.8     6,71.)     6,779              312      5,365        5,313        322
                                                                                               (1,271)     (1.;'?')       (21.8)   (6,219)    (6,229)            (312)    (5.365)      (5,313)      (322)
,4ixe.I           2.956         6.08            3             1               8,177             (1,117      13,080         391      8,377      1,900              690      8,311        1.125        913
                                                                                               (8,366)     (13,1.1.8)    (1,180)   (fi,h,s)   (8,595)          (i,68t)    (8,512)      (8.121.)   (2.139)
 I41              2.956         6.08            9                             8,117             8,377       1.995          5115     (1,177                        796      8.371        1,806        911
                                                                                               ((3,1.00)   (8,1.89)     (1,176)    (8,1.61)   (8,511)          (1,655)    (8,1.06)     (8,671)    (2,01.9)
 Mi.e.(           7.956         6.08            1             8              11,6(13           10.106                      1.6?     8,760      9,063               585     1,561.       1,831.       561
                                                                                               (9,197)
                                                                                                           l0,3')9
                                                                                                           (9,289)      (l,22)     (i,.i)     (7,1.1.6)        (1,1.01)   (5.113)      (5.922)    (1,339)
 h1ixed'          7.956         6.08           9              (1
                                                                             11,683             9.251       9,112        1,129      7,263      1,1.28           1,1.20     5,511.       5,11.6     1,1.70
                                                                                               (9,226)     (9.276)      (1.263)    (7.219)    (1,380)          (1,o)      (5,108)      (5,879)    (1,310)
tmHeaflof the loariths, of the real annual wealth relative. The numinal return Is (I.e sum of the simulated real return plus the
 continuous time equivalent of the annual inflation rate notmi in the table.
biiti5i                                       are made with certainty for 15 years, paymants are in constant dollars.
           capital Is 5100,000, annual payments
ame as     in Table 2.
Bracketed fi'ure are those    for a variable   annuity   without the floor    and   cellinC.
                                                Table 4'
                        Amount lfl"Bank" at End of Year 15 for VAFC'S in Table 4
                                                                             Amount in Bank   ($)
             Expected      Standard    Inflation                                                       Standard
Portfolio   Real Return    Deviation     Rate      RV      Median      Mean     Minimum   Maximum      Deviation
Bills          0             1.52          3       3        —1,800    —2,209                    0
                                                                                 —9,421                  1,787
Bills          0             1.52          9       3          0          0         0            0         0
Mixed          2.956         6.08          3       3         2,591    10,024    —23,458   122,557       16,933
Mixed          2.956         6.08          9       3         3,381    10,898     —1,408   127,940       15,459
Mixed          2.956        6.08           3       8       —23,836   —24,112    —61,225       17,841   12,835
Mixed          2.956        6.08           9       8           —63      —770    —13,194        2,988    1,649
                                                                                          Tdble 5A
                                                     ALTERNATiVE ANNUITY DESIGNS:     SIMULATIONS FOR A BILLS ONLY PORTFOLIO. 1971—1980
                           Return On
       inflation         United States                                                                   Variable Annuity
Year   Kale     ()       T—bills   (Z)                    Variable Annuity b                                                                                 Variable Annuity
                                                                                                        with Nominal Floor                           with Nominal Floor, Real Ceiling
                                                   RV=O                   RV=5                        RV=O                     RV=5                       RV=O                     RV=5
                                         Nominal           Real     Nominal
1971     3.36               4.39         10,439           10,100    12,876
                                                                                  Real
                                                                                 12,457
                                                                                            Nominal
                                                                                             10,439
                                                                                                             Real
                                                                                                             10,100
                                                                                                                      Nominal
                                                                                                                      12,950
                                                                                                                                       Real
                                                                                                                                      12,529
                                                                                                                                                 Nominal
                                                                                                                                                 10,336
                                                                                                                                                                  Real
                                                                                                                                                                 10,000
                                                                                                                                                                          NminL            J!4
                                                                                                                                                                          12,950      12,529
1972     3.41               3.84         10,840           10,142   12,733        11,913     10,840           10,142   12,950          12,116     10,688          10,000   12,950      12,116
1973    8.80                6.93         11,591           9,967    12,968        11,151     11,591            9,967   13,189          11,341     11,626          9,997    12,950      11,136
1974    12.2()              8.00         12,518           9,594    13,337        10,222     12,518           9,594    13,565          10,396     12,556          9,623    13,284      10,181
1975     7.01               5.80         13,245           9,486    13,439        9,625      13,244           9,486    13,669          9,790      13,284          9,514    13,385          9,586
1976    4.81                5.08         13,917           9,510    13,449        9,190      13,917           9,510    13,679          9,347      13,959          9,539    13,396          9,154
1977    6.77               5.12          14,629           9,363    13,465        8,618      14,629           9,363    13,695          8,765      14,673          9,391    13,411          8,583
1978    9.03                7.03         15,657           9,191    13,726        8,057      15,657           9,191    13,959          8,194      15,705          9,219    13,670          8,024
1979    13.31              10.38         17,284           8,954    14,429        7,475      17,284           8,954    14,675          7,602      17,335          8,980    14,371          7,445
1980    12.41              10.40         19,082           8,794    15,170        6,991      19,082           8,794    15,429          7,111      19,138          8,820    15,110          6,964
         Notes.      a
                         Based on the consumer price index.  Inflation  and security return data are from Ibbotson and
                         Inflation, Financial Analysts Research Foundation,                                            Sinquefeld,             Stocks, Bonds, Bills and
                                                                             1977, updated by the authors.
                     b
                         The initial capital is
                                                $100,000; the annuity is payable with  certainty for 10 years; annuity
                         payments are made at the end of the year; RV is [lie interest rate used to determine the Initial level of the projected Stream of
                         annuity payments.
                                                                                                Table 58
                                                    ALTERNATIVE ANNUITY DESIGNS:         SIMULATIONS FOR A STOCKS ONLY
                                                                                                                       PORTFOLIO, 1971—1980
        inflat   ion    Nominal Return
Year    Rate             on Stocks ()                                          b                  .         Variable Annuity
                                                          Variable   Annuity                               with Nominal Floor
                                                                                                                                                            Variable Annuity
                                                                                                                                                    with Nominal Floor, Real Ceiling
                                                   RVO                        RV=5                       RVO                     RV5
1911      3.3b                14.31
                                         Nominal
                                         11,431
                                                           Real
                                                         11,059
                                                                     Nominal
                                                                     14,098
                                                                                       Real
                                                                                     13,640
                                                                                               Nominal
                                                                                               11,431
                                                                                                                Real
                                                                                                               11,059
                                                                                                                        Nominal
                                                                                                                        14,099
                                                                                                                                         Real
                                                                                                                                       13,641
                                                                                                                                                jj
                                                                                                                                                10,336

                                                                                                                                                         RVO
                                                                                                                                                               j.
                                                                                                                                                               10,000
                                                                                                                                                                        Nominal
                                                                                                                                                                        13,386

                                                                                                                                                                                 RV5
                                                                                                                                                                                        .J2I
                                                                                                                                                                                       12,950
1972      3.41                18.98      13,601          12,125      15,976          14,947    13,601          12,725   15,976         14,947   10,688         10,000   13,842
1973      8.iO               —14.66                                                                                                                                                    12,950
                                         11,607           9,981      12,985          11,166    13,601          11,696   15,976         13,738   11,629         10,000   13,842
1974     12.20               —26.48                                                                                                                                                    11,903
                                          8,533           6,540       9,092          6,968     13,601          10,424   15,976         12,244   11,629         8,913
1975      7.01                37.20                                                                                                                                     13,842         10,609
                                         11,708           8,385      11,879          8,508     18,660          13,364   20,875         14,951   11,629         8,329    13,842
1976      4.81                23.84      14,499           9,908
                                                                                                                                                                                        9,914
                                                                     14,012          9,575     23,109          15,791   24,621         16,824   14,359         9,812
1977     6.77                —7.18                                                                                                                                      13,842         9,459
                                         13,458           8,613      12,386          7,927     23,109          14,790   24,621         15,758   14,359         9,188    13,842
1918     9.03                 6.39                                                                                                                                                     8,859
                                         14,318          8,405       12,550          7,367     24,585          14,431   24,947         14,644   14,359         8,429
979      11.31               18.44                                                                                                                                      13,842         8,125
                                         16,958          8,785       14,157          7,334     29,119          15,085   28,140         14,578   16,039         8,309
1981)   12.61                32.01                                                                                                                                      13,842         7,171
                                         22,386          10,317      17,797          8,202     38,440          17,715   35,378         16,304   21,173         9,578    13,842         6,379
               Notes:    a
                           Based on the consumer  price  Index.  Inflation  and security return data are from Ibbotson and
                           Inflation, Financial Analysts Research                                                           Sinquefield, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and
                         b                                          Foundation, 1971, updated by the authors.
                           The initial capital is
                                                   $100,000; the annuity is payable with
                           made   at
                                   the end of the  year;  RV is the    interest
                                                                              rate         certainty for 10 years; annuity
                                                                                   used to determine the InItial level     payments are
                                                                                                                       of the projected stream of
                                                                                                                                                  annuity payments.
                                                                                         Table   5C
                                                ALTERNATIVE ANNUITY DESIGNS:     SIMULATIONS FOR A BONDS ONLY PORTFOLIO, 1971—1980
                       Nominal
                       Return On
       Inflation     United States
                                                                            b                           Variable Annuity                                 Variable Annuity
Year   R.,te (%)°      Boiid (%)                       Variable   Annuity                              wit%t Nominal Floor                       with Nominal Floor,   Real Cei1in
                                                RV=O                     RV=5                         RVO                    RV=5                     RV=O                  RVS
                                      Nominal           Real       Nominal       Real       Nominal          Real
i7i       3.36          13.23         11,322
                                                                                                                     Nominal         Real    Nominal          Rpj     Nominal    Real
                                                       10,954       13,966      13,512      11,323          lI1933    13,966        13512     10,336         JIYDO0   13,386    12,950
1972      3.41           5.68         11,966           11,195      14,056       13,151      11,966          11,195   14,056         13,151   10,688          10,000   13,842    12,950
1973      8.80          —1.11         11,834           10,176      13,239       11,384      11,966          10,290   14,056         12,087   11,629          10,000   13,842    11,903
1974     1..20           4.35         12,348            9,664      13,156       10,083      12,487          9,570    14,056         10,773   12,721          9,750    13,842    10,609
1975      7.01           9.19         13,484                       13,680       9,798
                                                       9,657                                13,634          9,765    14,617         10,469   13,890           9,948   13,842     9,914
1976     4.8k           16.75         15,742           10,757      15,212       10,395      15,918          10,877   16,253         11,106   14,634          10,000   15,041    10,278
1977     6.77           —0.67         15,636           10,007      14,391       9,210       15,918          10,188   16,253         10,402   15,625          10,000   15,041     9,626
1978     9.03            1.03         15,797            9,273      13,847       8,128       16,082          9,440    16,253         9,541    16,965          9,959    15,041     8,829
1979    13.31           —1.22         15,605           8,084       13,026       6,748       16,082          8,331    16,253          8,420   16,965          8,789    15,041     7,792
1980    12.41           —4.45         14,911           6,872       11,854       5,463       16,082          7,412    16,253         7,490    16,965          1,818    15,041     6,932
            Notes:   a
                       Based on the consumer once index, Inflation and
                                                                         securit" return c!ata are rom Ibbotson and
                       flation, Financial Aiialyts Research                                                          Sinqueeld, Stockc, Ronds Bills and In—
                                                            Foundation, 1977, updated by the authors.
                     b
                       The  initialcapital is $100,000; the annuity is payable with certainty  for 10 years; annuity
                       payments are made at the end of the year; RV is the interest rate used to determine the initial level of
                       annuity payments.                                                                                        the projected stream of
                                                                                                 Table 50
                                                     ALTERNATIVE ANNUITY DESIGNS: SIMULATIONS FOR A U.S.          MIXED PORTFOLIO,         1971 — 1980
                       Nominal Return
       Inflation       On Mixed c                                                                           Variable Annuity                                         Variable Annuity
?ear   Rate (%)5        Portfolo    (%)                      Variable Annuity b                            with Nominal Floor                                with Nominal Floor, Real Ceiling
                                                     RV=O                       RV5                      RV=0                       RV=5                          RV=O                     RV
                                          Nominal            Real     Nominal          Real    Nominal           Real     Nominal            Real        Nominal          Real    Nominal
1971                      10.89             11,089          10,729    13,678          13,233   11,089                                                     10,336
                                                                                                                10,729    13,677            13,232                       10,000   13,386    l2,9O
1972     3.41              1.70             11,943          11,174     14,030         13,126   11,943           11,174     14,029           13,125       10,688          10,000   13,842    12,950
1973     8.80             —1.40             11,777          10,127     13,175         11,329   11,943           10,270     14,029           12,064       11,629          10,000   13,842    11,903
1974    12.20             —0.52             11,716          8,979      12,483          9,567   11,943            9,153     14,029           10,752       12,027           9,218   13,842    10,609
1975     7.01             13.59             13,308          9,531     13,503          9,671    13,567            9,717     15,177                        13,661          9,784    13,842        9,914
                                                                                                                                            10,870
1976     4.81             14.75             15,271          10,435    14,758          10,085   15,568           10,638    16,587                         14,634          10,000   14,234        9,727
                                                                                                                                            11,334
1977     6.77             —0.25             15,233          9,749     14,020          8,973    15,568           9,964     16,587                         15,625          10,000   14,234        9,110
                                                                                                                                            10,616
1978     9.03              3.79             15,809          9,280     13,857          8,134    16,157           9,484     16,587                         16,592          9,740    14,234        8,355
1979    13.31              5.89             16,742          8,673     13,975          7,240    17,109           8,863     16,727             8,665       17,570          9,102    14,234        7,374
1980    12.41              6.82             17,882          8,241     14,217          6,552    18,276           8,423     17,017             7,842       18,768          8,649    14,234        6,560
          Notes:   a
                     Based on the consumer price index. Inflation and security return data are from Ibbotson and
                                                                                                                   Sinquefeld, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and
                     Inflation, Financial Analysts Research Foundation, 1977, updated by the autl,ors.
                   b
                     The initial capital is $100,000; the
                                                          annuity is  payable with
                     made at the end of the year; RV Is the Interest rate used to certainty
                                                                                             for 10 years; annuity payments are
                                                                                   ietermine the Initial level of the projected stream of annuity payments.
                   C
                        Mixed   portfolio    consists of bonds (52%), bills (29%) and stocks (19%).
                                      ppend ix


                 Description of Alternative Annuity Designs



I. Notation

             Nominal rate of return earned on the fund in year t.
   R
   RV   =    Interest    rate used to determine the base value of the

             annuity payment; also called the annuity valuation rate or

             valuation rate.


   rt = Real rate of return earned on the fund in year t.

        =   Nominal benefit payment received at the end of year t.
   Bt

        =    Base value of the benefit; i.e., the value of B1 if R1 =                   RV.
   B0

   b =       Real benefit received at the end of year t.

        =   Nominal value of the amount left in the fund at the end of
   At
            year     t after BC is paid out.
        =    Consumer    price level at the end of year t               with   P0 set equal
             to one.

   T=       Number   of years the annuity lasts.
                                               2




II. Terms of the Annuities

       For all annuities the base value of the annuity payment is deter-

mined by:



                 A0/T
                                                    if RV=0
       B0 =
                             —   (l+Rv)_T]_l if RV > 0
                 A0RV[1

We assume that benefit payments start at the end of the first year so B0

is not actually paid Out, but rather serves as the base value for computing

the first year's benefit, B1.

       For the standard variable annuity the nominal benefit is:


                                 (l+R)
                 B =

and the real benefit:


                                     (l+r)
                 b =    b1           (l+Rv)


or

                b =
                  t     B I?
                         t       t


       For a nominal annuitl Rt is nonstochastic so


               Bt —B
                  —
                     t—l
                                 (l-l-R)
                                 (1+RV)


and the rate of graduation in the nominal benefit payments is:

                                 (l+R)        - 1
                                 (1-i-RV)
                                            3




Note that if RV = R,     we have the conventional level—payment nominal

annuity.

       For a purchasing power annuity           rt is nonstochastic so

                                   (l+r)
                  bt —b t—l
                                   (1+Rv)


and the rate of graduation in the real benefit stream is:


                  (l+r) -
                          1
                  (l+RV)


       For the VAF, the variable annuity with a nominal floor, the nominal

benefit is given by:

                                   (l+R )
                         Btj       (l+RV)
                                                if   Rt > RV
               B=
                t
                         B
                             t—l
                                                if Rt—
                                                     <RV

and the real benefit by:


               b = Bt/P

       The VAFC, the variable annuity with a nominal floor and real ceiling,

is complicated.   The benefit calculation follows an iterative procedure that

can be seen by a sinple flow chart (Flow Chart 1).

       To create an algebraic flow chart, we need some additional notation:


       = Amount   of money in the "bank";             =   0.

      =    Amount of money available to increase the benefit stream.

  Ft = Present value of a $1 annuity due for T—t+l years at an interest
           rate of RV.

  B = Benefit     which would be payable in the absence of the real ceiling.

The benefit calculation follows the following iterative procedure (Flow Chart 2).
                                        4

                               Flow    Chart   1


             Flow Chart Showing the Iterative Procedure for
                    Calculating Benefit Stream for a VAFC




                             Check this period's
                              rate of return, R
                                                   t




                                   +



                            See whether there is
                           enough money available
                           to increase the benefit




                    YES/
                                                            Keep nominal benefit
                                                            unchanged and borrow
       See whether the new
                                                            from the bank enough
       benefit exceeds the
                                                            funds to sustain it
       ceiling                                              at an assumed rate of
                                                            return of RV


  NO /

Set bank at zero                  Set benefit level equal
and add amount in                 to ceiling value and
the bank to the                   keep the excess funds
fund                              in the bank
                                                                        5



                                                                  Flow Chart 2

                                    Algebraic Flow Chart Showing the Iterative Procedure
                                          for Calculating Benefit Stream for a VAFC




                                                            LAO RVJ
                                                                     t=l



    Increase
-
I                   t
      byl


                                                                                           B =B
                                                                                            t   t—l
                                    - (l÷RV)T_t+1                                          Kt =Xt
                                                                  if RV >   0
                                         RV
       Ft =                                                                                     —
                                                                                           AtAt 1(l+Rv) —   B
                                                                                                                t
                            (T—t-l-l)                             if RV = 0
                                                                                                tt
                                                                                           b =B /P
                                                                                            t


            = Btl           +




            If B t          >   BP
                                 Ot                                     < BP
                                                                   If Bt—  Ut


                    = BOPt                                                       Bt =B t

            Kt      = (ñ_BOP)F                                                        =0

            A
                t   =At —1(1+RV) +         .t X   — B
                                                        t   — K
                                                              t                  At =At—l(l+RV)+xt -B t
            b
                t
                    =B /P
                        t       t                                                      tt
                                                                                 b =B I?
                                                                                  t
                                                       6




       In the following table we demonstrate how the procedure works for

the VAFC based on the stocks only portfolio reported in Table 5.                                               In this

example, A0         $100,000 and RV = .05.                         We present the calculation for

the first three years only.




           .
               t          R
                              t
                                              P
                                                  t               X
                                                                   t
                                                                                 F
                                                                                  t
                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                     t______

               0         .05                1.0000                ——             ——              ——


    1971       1         .1431              1.0336               9,310         8.1078        14,099
    1972       2         .1898              1.0688              20,180         7.4632        16,090
    1973       3        —.1466              1.1629              —3,274         6.7864            ——




                   BP               B
                                        t
                                                        K
                                                            t
                                                                          A
                                                                           t
                                                                                         b
                                                                                             t

                   ——
                                  12,950                0              100,000          12,950
    1971       13,386             13,386               5,781             95,142         12,950
    1972       13,842             13,842              16,774             89,464         12,950
                   ——
    1973                          13,842              —3,274             80,095         11,903
