                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION IN MACROECONOMICS



                        N. Gregory nkiw
                        Julio J. Roteutherg
                       Lawrence H. Summers

                      Working Paper No. 898




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF EJONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                            June 1982




We are grateful to David Runkle for his research assistance and to
Henry Farber, Robert Shiller and Laurence Weiss for helpful com-
ments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program In Economic fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of onomic
Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #898
                                                     June 1982



                 INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION IN MACROECONOMICS




                                    ABSTRACT



       Modern neoclassical theories of the business cycle posit that -

aggregate fluctuations in consumption and employment are te consequence
of    dynamic optimizing behavior by economic agents who face no quantity
constraint.     In this paper, we estimate an explicit model cf this type.
In particular, we assume that the observed fluctuations co:respond to the
decisions of an optimizing representative individual. This individual
has   a stable utility function which is additively separable over time but
not necessarily additively separable in consumption and leisure. We
estimate three first order conditions which represent three margins on

which the individual is optimizing. He can trade off present consumption
for   future consumption, present leisure for future leisure and present

consumption for present leisure. Our      results   show that the aggregate

U.S. data are extremely reluctant to be characterized by a nodel of this

type. Not only are the overidentifying restrictions statistically

rejected but, in addition, the estimated utility function i.s often not

concave. Even when it is concave the estimates imply that either

consumption or leisure is an inferior good.

N.   Gregory Mankiw        Julio 3. Rotesnberg             Lawrence H. Summers
M.I.t                      Sloan School of Management      N.B.E.R.
                           50 Memorial Drive, E52—25O      1050 Massachusetts Ave.
                           M.I.T.                          Cambridge, MA 02139
                           Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                           (617) 253—4426     -

                           (617) 253—2956
                                                                        —1—




I..   INTRODUCTION



      Modern neoclassical theories of the business cycle are founded upon

the assumption that fluctuations in consumption and employment are the

consequence of dynamic optimizing behavior by economic agents who fate no

quantity constraints. In this paper, we present and estimate an explicit

operational model of an optimizing household. Our examination of post-

war aggregate data provides no support for these theories.

       As in many recent studies of consumption and asset returns, we posit

that observed fluctuations can be modeled as the outcome of optimizing

decisions of a representative individual. The individual has a utility

function that is additively separable through time and faces in economic

environment where future opportunities are uncertain. Our      approach
avoids the intractable problem of finding a closed form soluUon for the

representative individual's choices. Rather, we use the restrictions on

the data implied by the first—order conditions f or an optimum. The

estimation of these first—order conditions makes   it   possible to recover

the structural parameters of the underlying utility function.

       The three first—order conditions we consider represent three margins

on which the representative individual is optimizing. He can        trade—off

present and future consumption at a stochastic real interest rate

measured in terms of the consumption good. He can       trade—off   present

leisure and future leisure at a stochastic real interest rate measured in

terms, of leisure. And he can trade—off present consumption and present

leisure at the real wage. Thus the approach taken here has the potential
                                                                           —2'-




-

    to   recover parameters describing both consumption and labor supply

    decisions.

          The estimation technique we use is the nonlinear instrumental

    variables procedure Hansen and Singleton (1981) suggest. It not only

    produces consistent estimates of the relevant parameters, but also allows

    us to test overidentifying restrictions implied by the theory.               -



                                                                             -




    Throughout the study, we experiment with different measures of

    consumption, different lists of instruments, and different frequency
    data. We also try various functional forms for the underlying utility

    function. In particular, we allow the utility function to be non—

    separable in consumption and leisure. Such experimentation assures our

    conclusions are robust to changes in the various auxiliary assumptions

    necessary for implementation of the model.

          We find that aggregate data is not readily characterized as ex post

    realizations from a stochastic dynamic optimization. In particular, the

    orthogonality conditions implied by theory are almost always rejected.

    More importantly, the parameter estimates are usually highly implausible.

    The estimated utility function is often not concave, which implies that

    the representative individual is not at a maximum of utility, but at a

    saddle—point or at a minimum. In addition, the estimates imply that

    either consumption or leisure is an inferior good. We conclude that

    observed economic fluctuations do not easily admit of a neoclassical

    Interpretation.

          Section II discusses the previous work on intertemporal substi-

    tution. Section III develops the model, while Section IV discusses the
                                                                       —3—




data.     Section V explains the estimation procedure, and section VI

presents    the results. Section VI considers the implications of the
modelts failure for equilibrium theories of the business cycle, and
suggests directions for future research.


II.     MOTIVATION



        The major difference between modern neoclassical and traditional

Keynesian macro—economic theories is that the former regard observed

levels of employment, consumption and output as realizations from dynamic

optimizing decisions by both households and    firms,   while the latter

regard them as reflecting constraints on firms and households. This

distinction is clearest in the case of labor supply decisions. In

classical macro—economic models, observed levels of labor supply

represent the optimizing choices of households given their perceptions of

the macro—economic environment. In Keynesian macro—models, employment is

frequently regarded as "demand determined" and fluctuations in employment

do not necessarily correspond to any change in desired labor supply.

      The   goal of the present paper is to examine the extent to which data
on consumption and labor supply for the United States over the post—war

period are consistent with the hypothesis of continuous dynamic optimiza-

tion. At the outset, it is crucial to be clear about the limitations of

this empirical inquiry, or any investigation of this kin4. It is

impossible to test the general proposition about continuous optimization

discussed above. Only particular simple versions of the dynamic
                                                                    —4—




optimization problem can be considered. Any rejections of the models

estimated can be interpreted as a failure of the underlying theory or of

the particular parametrization of it which is tested. Of course, to the
                                                                            t
extent that a theory fails when simply expressed, its utility as an

organizing frauiework for understanding economic events is called into

question.

     Explanations of business cycles based on continuous dynamic

optimization differ in many respects. However, they share the notion

that the elasticity of labor supply with respect to changes in the

relative return from working currently and in the near future is likely

to be quite high. This would seem to be a necessary implication of any

such theory, since cyclical fluctuations in employment are large and the

long—run labor supply elasticity observed in cross—sections is typically

small. A central thrust of this paper is to examine empirically the

differential response of labor supply to permanent and transitory shocks

to real wages.

     Recent research on consumption by Grossman and Shiller (1981),

Hansen and Singleton (1981), Hall (1978, 1981) and Mankiw (1981) shows

how it is possible to estimate directly the parameters of the

intertemporal utility function characterizing the behavior of the

representative individual. Hansen and Singleton (1981) and Mankiw (1981)

show how to test the overidentifying restrictions that are implied by the

hypothesis of continuous optimization of a stable additively separable

utility function. The major virtue of the approach pioneered by these

authors is that it permits utility function parameters to be estimated
                                                                   —5—



directly without requiring explicit solutions of the consumers' dynamic

optimization problem. Unfortunately, both Hansen and Singleton and

Mankiw report rejections of their estimated models.

     This paper uses techniques similar to those developed in connection

with consumption to estimate the parameters of an intertemporal utility

function characterizing the labor supply behavior of the representative

consumer. This permits judgements to be made about the magnitude of the

key interteniporal elasticities. In addition, we can directly test the

hypothesis of dynamic optimization usinz the implied overidentifying

restrictions on the data. A major additional motivation for this

research is the rejection of the overidentifying restrictions in the

models Hansen and Singleton (1981) and Mankiw (1981) estimate. These

models all maintain the assumption that the marginal utility of

consumption depends only on the level of consumption. It is flatural to

entertain the hypothesis that the utility function is not separable so

that the marginal utility of consumption depends on the level of leisure.

The intertemporal utility functions we estimate allow this possibility..

     There are at least two other motivations for estimating an

intertemporal utility function characterizing the behavior of both

consumption and leisure. As Feldstein (1978) demonstrates, the form of

this utility function determines the optimal structure of consumption and

income taxation. If consumption and leisure are additively separable,

optimal taxation involves a zero tax rate on capital income. More

generally, depending on the relative substitutability of present and

future consumption with leisure, a negative or positive tax rate On
capital income is appropriate. While the absence of empirical evidence

on these crucial cross—effects has been widely noted, no empirical

estimates of the full intertemporal utility function are yet available.

     A. second motivation for exploring intertemporal substitutability of

consumption and leisure is provided by models of the business cycle based

on imperfect information. These models which date from the contribution

of Lucas (1973) have in common a Lucas supply function of the form:



     7 =                       a1 > 0                              (1)
           a0+ a1(pj?)



This supply function states that when prices are unexpectedly high,

producers capitalize on their perceived transitory opportunity and

produce more output. While there is no logical flaw in this argument,

Friedman (1980) and Barro (1980) point out an equally compelling argument

in the opposite direction. When prices are transitorily high, the demand

for output should be low as consumers substitute their consumption

towards periods when output is less costly. Hence the sign of the

correlation between unexpected price shocks and output is theoretically

ambiguous. The validity of (1) as a reduced form description of

macroeconomic   behavior depends on its implicit premise that aggregate
supply   is more responsive to transitory shocks than is aggregate demand.

Comparison of the estimated interteniporal substitutability of consumption

and leisure can throw light on this issue.                            -
                                                                          —7—




        Several   previous papers attempt to measure the extent of

intertemporal substitution in labor supply using aggregate data. These

papers do not try to estimate directly the parameters of an underlying

utility function but attempt to estimate structural labor supply

equations. The results are mixed. Lucas and Rapping (1969) provide

estimates of an aggregate labor supply function which suggest very large

intertemporal substitution effects. Their results depend on the Koyck

lag—adaptive expectations scheme they use to nodel expectations of future

wages and prices. Altonji (1981) shows that when the Lucas—Rapping

equations are re—estimated using several different econometric techniques

to proxy rational expectations, the results are almost invariably

inconsistent with the intertemporal substitution hypothesis. Clark and

Summers (1982) also report econometric evidence inconsistent with the

substitution hypothesis, drawing on both aggregate time serieg and

information       on local labor markets.
        In   an influential   recent paper. Hall   (1980) obtains estimates which

he views as providing support for the interteoporal substitution

hypothesis. However, it is very difficult to interpret his econometric

formulation. The labor supply equation that Rail estimates is of the

form:




        La+ (w+r)                                                         (2)




where w is the log of the real wage, and             is the real interest rate.
                                                                     —8--




The motivation for this specification is unclear. The intertemporal

substitution hypothesis implies that labor supply should depend on the

relative return from working in period t and from working in period t+1.

This depends on the real wage in period t relative to the discounted

real wage in period t+l. The omission of expected future real wages from

(2) wakes it hard to interpret the resulting estimates.

     These studies of intertemporal substitution share two major

difficulties. The first is the question of identification. Since the

labor supply schedule is likely to shift through time, it is

inappropriate to regard the real wage as an exogenous variable. The

problem is that satisfactory instruments are almost impossible to find.

Labor supply shocks are likely to affect most macroeconomic policy

variables. After a lengthy discussion of the pitfalls to be avoided in

selecting instruments for the estimation of (2), Hall settles on measures

of military spending as exogenous determinants of aggregate demand. But,

military spending is highly correlated with the size of the draft which

has a direct impact on labor supply. The problem of finding suitable

instruments becomes even more formidable when the supply equations

include expectational variables.                  -




    The second difficulty involves the measurement of expectations. The

theory holds that labor supply should be a function of the distribution.

of the entire path of future real wages and interest rates, not just of

the first moments of those variables in the succeeding period.

Satisfactory proxies for these expectations are almost impossible to

develop. Problems of serial correlation and the length of the
                                                                      —9--




expectational horizon rule out the possibility of using instrumental

variable procedures of the type 4cCallum (1976) suggests to solve this

problem.

     Hence, there is very little empirical evidence at the aggregate

level bearing on the importance of the intertemporal substitution      -




effects    upon which modern neoclassical macroeconomics nodels are

premised. In recent papers, MaCurdy (l981a,b) examines intertemporal

substitution effects at the micro—econometric level. It might at first

seem that micro data provide a much firmer basis for estimating

intertemporal substitution effects, than do aggregate data. However, the

use of micro data involves serious problems. At the micro level, wages

and changes in wages are typically taken as exogenous. It is difficult

to justify this assumption. Individual wages presumably differ because

of differences in individual characteristics which affect their

productivity. It is difficult to see why these same characteris tics—

motivation, innate ability or whatever—should not also be associated with

the taste for working.



III. THEORY



     This section describes the model to be estimated, To estimate the

model, it is necessary to make a number of auxiliary assumptions about

the behavior of consumers. These assumptions pertain to issues such as

the information set available to consumers and the functional form of

their utility functions. Tests of the model are also tests of these
                                                                     —10—



auxiliary assumptions, so they require careful attention. We make a

major effort to explore alternative sets of auxiliary assumptions to

insure the robustness of our conclusion regarding the economic issues of

major interest.



     We examine a basic premise of many classical macro—economic models

that observed movements in per capita consumption and leisure correspond

to the behavior of a rational individual who derives pleasure from these

two goods and whose utility function is additively separable over time1

and is stationary. Such a utility function is:




Vt   Et            u(c, L)                                        (3)
          •t=t




Here, Vt is expected utility at t,    is the expectations operator

conditional on information available at t, p is a constant discount

factor, C is consumption of goods at , L    is leisure at   and U is a

function which is increasing and concave in its two arguments.

     Given a specification of the budget constraint, and of the

conditional distributions of all future wages, prices and rates of return

an all assets, it would in principle be possible to use (3) to find


     1The models of Lucas and Rapping (1970), Prescott and Mehra (1980),
Long and Plosser (1980) and King and Plosser (1981) for example exhibit
this feature. Some models such as those of Icydland and Prescott (1979)
rely on the absence of additive separability to generate intertemporal
substitution effects. We return to this possibility in the final section
of the paper.
                                                                          —U—.




consumers' choices of consumption and leisure at time t. In practice it

is almost impossible to conceive of all this information being available

to the econometrician. Even were it available, analytical solutions of

(3) do not exist even for very simple functional forms. Therefore,

following earlier work on consumption by Hankiw (1981), Hansen and

singleton (1981) and Hall (1982), we attempt to estimate directly the

form of U in (3) without specifying a model capable of predicting the

chosen levels of              and Lt. We exploit the restrictions on the data

imposed by the first—order conditions necessary for the maximization of

(3) subject. to a budget constraLnt.

     We assume the representative individual has access to some financial

assets which can be both bought and sold. In addition, he has access

spot markets in which labor and consumption are freely traded. As long

as the optimum path lies in the interior of the budget set, wg can use

simple perturbation arguments to establish certain characteristics of

this optimal path. At any point along an optimal path, the

representative individual cannot make himself better off by foregoing one

unit of consumption or leisure at time t and using the proceeds to

purchase any other good at any other point in time. In particular, when

the representative individual is following his optimal path of

consumption and leisure, these three first order conditions must hold.

     oil/bc           P
'    bU/oL
              t   =       t



        pOU/bC                P (Fit )
                                         — 1 — 0
(EC): Et7oc
                              't+l
                                                                     —12—




            Oil/b
               +1
                    L    (l+r )
(EL): EtpoU,oLt                   —1=0
                    t   t+l
Here, P is the nominal price of a unit of C, W is the wage the

individual receives when he foregoes one unit of Lt and r is the nominal

return from holding a security between t and ti-i.2

    The static first—order condition (s) says that the individual cannot

make himself better off by foregoing one unit of consumption (thereby

decreasing his utility by oU/oC) and spending the proceeds          on

           of leisure each of which he values at oU/bL. The reverse

transaction is also unable to increase his utility. Note that the model

implies that equation Cs) holds exactly. Since we assume at time t the

consumer knows the real wage       he choses consumption and leisure to


equate the real wage and the marginal rate of substitution.

    The Euler equation for consumption (EC) states that along an optimal

path the representative individual cannot alter his expected utility by

giving up one unit of consumption in period t, investing its cost in any

available security, and consuming the proceeds in period t+l. The

utility cost of giving up a unit of consumption in period t is given by
                                                              P
OU/bC. The expected utility gain is given by EpbU/bC1•p (1 + re).
                                                              t+l

Equating the cost and gain £ row this perturbation yields the first—order

condition (EC). It is important to be clear about the generality of this

result. The condition (EC) will hold even if labor supply cannot be


         more than one security is available, (EC) and (EL) should hold
for all securities which can be freely bought and sold.
                                                                              —13—




freely chosen, and trading is not possible in many asset, as long as

some asset exists which is either held in positive amounts or for which

borrowing is possible.

       Finally, the Euler equation for leisure (EL) asserts that along an

optimal path the representative individual cannot improve his           welfare   by

working one hour more at t, (thereby losing bU/aLt of utility) and using

his earnings            to purchase a security whose proceeds will be used to buy
       W (l+r )
back                  of leisure at t+l in all states of nature. Such an invest—
                                        -
               t+l
went would increase expected utility by EpEôU/bL1] W(l + r)/W+1.

Therefore       (EL) ensures that this expression is equal to or/oLt.
        If the static first order condition (5)       held   exactly one of (EC) and
(EL) would be redundant. We can see this by replacing oUl3C             and

               in    (EC) using (5).   This procedure produces (EL). However,

since    (5)    is   unlikely to hold exactly in the data we use the information
in   all three of these first—order conditions to estimate the         parameters
of   the utility function (i).


     3Even if (s) doesn't hold exactly, the residual in one of the Euler
equations is equal to the residual in the other Euler equation times a
deterministic function of the residual of (5)- at t divided by a
deterministic function of the residual of S at t+l. The fact that there
is no linear relationship between the three residuals suggests, as will
be argued below, that the three equations should be estimated
simultaneously.
                                                                     —14—




     In order to estimate the instantaneous utility function U, it is

necessary to specify a functional form. The most general utility

function weuse is:




               =[       C
                            1
                                      L'
                                _a'+d t1]                            (4)




     This utility function which is similar to MaCurdy's (1981) has, as

special cases, an additively separable utility function in consumption

and leisure, (y0);4 a CES form for the ordinal utility function

characteristizing single period decision making, (a);5 and a

logarithmic utility function, (ol, f3=l,   yO).   This functional form also

provides for the possibility of differential degrees of interteinporal

substitution in consumption and leisure. This is easiest to see when

yO, so that    represents the elasticity of intertemporal substitution of



     4This is the utility function considered by Altonji (1981) and
Blinder (1978) among others.

     51n fact we consider a slight variation of (4) when we impose a.
This variation which has been used by Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1981) and

Lipton and Sachs (1981) is given by: [C + d                •   This utility

function has the advantage that a and y are readily interpretable. 1/a
is the elasticity of substitution of consumption for leisure while l/y is
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of the composite good

[c +    d
                                                                    —15-S




consumption and   represents the corresponding elasticity for leisure.6

     Previous work on intertemporal substitution in consunption estimates

the condition (EC) maintaining the hypothesis that yO. Even if this

supposition is correct, it is clear that this is not an efficient

estimation procedure since it neglects the information coitained in.(S).

Civen the failures of overidentifying restrictions in the previous

research, it seems worthwhile to entertain the hypothesis that the

marginal utility of consumption depends also on the level of leisure

enjoyed by consumers.

     Below we describe how to statistically test the orthogonality

restrictions implied by the hypothesis of dynamic optimization. Here it

is useful to describe how the parameter estimates can be used to examine

the issues of economic interest. An argument can be made that this

provides a more satisfactory way of testing the relevance of the model

than is provided by statistical tests of overidentifying restrictions.

The model is at best an approximation to reality. Therefore, with enough

data the point hypotheses corresponding to the overidentifying

restrictions will be rejected at any given critical value. On this view,

testing these hypotheses sheds as much light on the quantity of data

available as on the model's validity as an approximation of reality. The

last question can only be answered by estimating parameters which

correspond to magnitudes relevant for assessing the reasonableness of the

theory. In any event, this methodological issue is moot in the context


     6This elasticity is simply the percentage change in the ratio of
consumption (or leisure) at t+l to consumption (or leisure) at t over the
percentage change in the real interest rate Pjl+r)/P+1 (or
Wt(l+rt)IWt+l). Elasticities like these have been studied by Hall (1981)
and Hansen and Singleton (1981).
                                                                    —16—




of this paper, since both the statistical tests of the model and the

parameter estimates point to a common conclusion.

     We assess the estimates in two ways: by checking that they obey the

restrictions on utility functions implied by economic theory, and more

importantly by examining the implied values of short and long run

elasticities. Theory requires that the function U be concave; otherwise,

the first—order conditions corresponds to a local minimum or saddle point

rather than a local maximum. We check this by verifying that the matrix

of second derivatives of U is negative definite at all points in our

sample.

     In informal discussion of the importance of interteraporal

substitution, it is often pointed out that the responses of consumption

and leisure to temporary changes in prices and wages must be different

from the response to permanent changes in these magnitudes. However, the

actual responses are impossible to compute without first solving the

stochastic control problem whose objection is (3). Instead, we compute

some simple measure of responses of consumption and leisure. We derive

all measures under the assumption that individuals face a deterministic

environment.

     The "short—run" elasticities illustrate the changes in consumption

and leisure at t in response to temporary changes in WtJ    and r. We

derive these elasticities under the assumption that the effects of these

changes on consumption and leisure after t can be neglected. These

effects are all mediated through the change in total wealth at t+l that

results f row the changes in W,    and r. Insofar as this change in
                                                                                     —17—




wealth must be very small compared to the wealth of the individual at t+1

if he still has long to live, this approximation is valid. The "short—

run" elasticities can be computed by totally differentiating (EC)and

(EL);




                                               dct/c
        ro2UTh2                Lto2U/oCtoLtl

        Lcto2u/tt              Lto2U/oL2 J dL/L
 —
     (1+r     )                                            P
                                                   ( 1+r t)tou/oc
                                                                            dP/Pt
                  poU/oct+1

                                                                            dWt/Wt      (5)
                              w(l+r)               (l+r)W
          0                                                    PoU/oLt+i    dr/l+r
                                       poU/oLt÷i
                                                    w1

        If one were interested in the long—run effects of a change in the

income tax on consumption and hours worked, the elasticities in (5) would

not be very informative. Instead, one would be interested in a measure

of the extent to which consumption and labor supply is affected on

average over the individual's lifetime. One simple measure of this long—

run response is obtained from assuming that the individual has no

nonlabor income, that both the real interest rate in terms of leisure and

                                          P(1+r)           W(1+r)
the one in terms of consumption (                    and              )
                                                                          are   equal to 1/p
                                             t+l                t+l

and that the real wage is constant. Then, the individual plans to
                                                                   —18—



maintain a constant level of consumption and of leisure over his

lifetime. His plan is consistent with a static budget constraint which

makes his expenditure on consumption equal to his labor income:



             Si

                                                                        (6)
      ct_t(N_Lt)O


where N is his endowment of leisure. Totally differentiating (6) and (8)

one obtains the following long—run elasticities:              -




                                                      Si
                         t
                                                                        C
                                                                              t
 Co2U/oC2
 __________        —
                       CoU/oCo2U/oCo1,   tO2U/btbLt   —
                                                                        dL
                           (oU/oL)2        oU/oLt                       —-

                       wt-I
                                  tt.
                  (N—L)--- I d(W/P )
                                                                          7




IV.   DATA



      Estimation of the parameters of (4) requires several choices about

the data to be used. These choices reflect auxiliary assumptions which

must be made in order to test the hypothesis of market clearing and -

dynamic optimization. These auxiliary assumptions are of pivotal
                                                                       —19'-




    importance because the estimation results depend on their validity as
-




    well as on the basic theoretical notions being examined. This subsection

    describes the assumptions underlying the estimates in the paper.

         The first—order conditions (5), (EC), and (EL) characterize

    optimization for a single individual with a given utility function.

    Their application to aggregate data is more problematic. Rubinstein.

    (1975) presents results showing that if all individuals have identiëal,

    separable utility functions, and if all risky assets including human

    capital are freely traded, the model we consider here can be rigorously

    justified as applied to aggregate data. To state these conditions is to

    recognize their falsity. They imply that the consumption of all

    individuals should be perfectly correlated. Hall and Nishkin (1981)

    present data indicating that, at least using one taasure of consumption,

•
    there is only negligible correlation between the consumption of different

    individuals.7 It is standard in studying consumption to model per capita

    consumption as if it were chosen by a representative consumer. We follow

    the standard convention of using consumption and labor input per member

    of the adult population. As Summers (1982) points out, the rationale for

    this procedure is unclear. If it is appropriate to give individuals

    under 16 zero weight, presumably because they consume little, might it

    not also be appropriate to weight individuals of different ages according


         7Grossman and Shiller present another aggregation theorem. However
    their theotm cannot be used to rigorously justify the estimation of a
    representative consumer's utility function as is done here. Their
    results are only local and so do not apply over the discrete intervals
    which generate the data, unless the utility function has a special form,
    different train the one assumed here. Furthermore, their theorem assumes
    interior solutions for each agent, which is unrealistic for leisure.




                                                                                .4
                                                                  —20—




to their consumption or labor supply in constructing per—capita

variables? This approach is taken in Summers (1982) where it has a

significant impact on the results. It is not pursued here because of the

difficulty in finding a population index which is appropriate for both

consumption and leisure.

      The choice of the measure of consumption is fundamental. Herethe

distinction between consumption and consumption expenditure is crucial.

Even goods classified as non—durables in the National Income Accounts

have a durable component, as has been pointed out by Nankiw (1982). The

pen with which this sentence is written was purchased nine months ago.

Clothing is another obvious example of a durable good which is officially

classified as a non—durable. Even services, are in many ways like durable

goods. Utility comes not from trips to the doctor but from the stream of

good health which they provide. Vacations are taken in part for the

memories they create. Thus all of the available data pertain to

consumption expenditure not actual consumption and so are not strictly

appropriate. We use as our measure of consumption alternatively real

expenditures on non—durables and non—durables and services as reported in

the National Income and Product Accounts. The NIPA price deflators are

used to measure prices.

    The choice of a consumption concept poses a second fundamental

issue, that of separability of the utility function. Both measures of

consumption with which we experiment in this study can only proxy part of

total consumption since the expenditure and the services from durable

goods are completely excluded. Implicitly each of our alternative
                                                                     —21—




 specifications impose the assumption that the excluded fnms of

 consumption eater the utility function in additively se;arable ways.

 This assumption which has been maintained in all the earlier work on

 consumption is obviously problematic. Consider freezers and food, or

 cars and gasoline. An alternative defense of using a subset of

 consumption as a proxy for aggregate consumption is to rely on Nicks or

 Leontief aggregation.8 If the relative price of different types of

 consumption is fixed and the utility function is homothetic, or if

 different goods are consumed in fixed proportions, any subset of

 aggregate consumption can be used as a proxy for total consumption. The

 data do not provide much support for either of these assumptions.

      The measurement of leisure also poses problems. Scnewhat

 arbitrarily we specify that the representative individual has a time

 endowment of 7 x 16   112 hours a week. We compute leisure by

 subtracting per—capita total hours worked by the civilian labor force

 from this time endowment. In principle, it would be possible to estimate

 econometrically the size of the time endowment. In practice, this

 parameter is difficult to estimate so we constrain it a priori. The

 specification we adopt here based on total hours worked is open to the

 serious criticism that it does not distinguish between changes in the

 number of persons working and in average hours per worker. The former -

- poses serious problems for the model since the first—order conditions (S)


      81f reliance is placed on Leontief aggregation, there is still a
 problem of measuring real returns, unless a price index for all
 consumption is employed.
                                                                      —22—



and (EL) need not hold for individuals whose labor supply is at the

corner solution of zero hours worked.

     The measurement of the-price of leisure, the wage, also involves a

choice between less than Zully satisfactory alternatives. The series we

use refers to average total compensation of employees in the non—farm

business sector. We calculate after tax wages by using a time series of

marginal tax rates on labor income, measured as the sum of Federal Income

taxes,9 Social Security taxes and state income taxes. The problems with

this measure of wages include its partial coverage, and its failure to

include some forms of compensation such as the accrual of Social Security

and private pension benefits. Perhaps more seriously, the extent to

which market wages reflect the marginal return from working has been

BeriouBly questioned. Hall (1980) argues that certain features of the

economy's cyclical behavior can   be   explained by assuming wages do not

reflect true compensation for working on a period by period basis, even

though the economy always attains the Walrasian equilibrium level of
                                                                      -

employment.

     The final data decision is the choice of an asset return r. We

experimente with both estimates of the before and after tax Treasury Bill

interest rate. As a crude approximation, we assume a 30 percent tax rate

on interest income. Since the results are fairly similar, only the after

tax results are reported. This choice is appropriate for recent years

when savings instruments paying near market rates of return were widely


     9The data on average Federal marginal tax rates came from Seatar
(1981).
                                                                           —23—




available.    Its appropriateness is less clear during the bulk of the

sample period when interest rate ceilings constrained the rates

obtainable by most individuals. The extent to which Installment credit

rates match with the treas.ury bill rate is not clear. Su2xners (1982)

finds very similar results in a study of fluctuations in consumption

which uses both time deposit and treasury bill yields. The time deposit

rate is not used here because data are not available over a large enàugh

period.

     A final issue to be addressed is the appropriate period of

observation. As is by now well known, the use of discrete time data can

lead to biases if the data are generated by a continuous time process.

In particular, time averages of a random walk will not have serially

uncorrelated increments. There is the additional problem that the link

between consumption and consumption expenditure is likely to be better

at lower than at higher frequencies.

     Because   of the latter problem we reject the common view that models
of this type should be estimated with data for as short of a period as
possible.    In addition the assumption of additive separability is more

realistic for large period lengths. We use two different procedures.

The first, which we employ with apology but without excuse, is to use

seasonally adjusted quarterly data. There is clearly a serious risk that

• the averaging involved in seasonal adjustment disturbs the results. The

second procedure involves using only data from the fourth quarter of each

year.     The interval between   observations   reduces time aggregation
problems.     In addition, the gap between observations may reduce the
                                                                      —24—




problems which come f row the use of expenditure to proxy consumption.

Finally, the use of data £ row only one quarter may reduce seasonality

problems.

     We use three lists of instruments for every specification we

estimate. List A includes a constant, the rates of inflation beuJeen t—2

and t—l and between t—5 and t—l, the nominal rate of return between t—l

and t and the holding period yield between t—5 and t—1. List B includes

a constant and the levels of consumption, the interest rate, leisure,

prices and wages at t—l and t—2. Instead list C includes the values of

these variables at t and t—l. Therefore, list C allows us to check

whether the estimates worsen when current variables are included as

instruments.



V. ESTIMATION METHOD



     We estimate the parameters a, p, d and ''   of   the function U given by

 (4). This is done by fitting the implied first order conditions (S),

 (EC) and (EL) to U.S. data. Hansen and Singleton (1981) suggest that        the
 theoretically correct method for estimating Euler Equations like (EC) and

 (EL) is a nonlinear instrumental variables procedure. The rationale for

 this procedure can be stated as follows: The equations (EC) and (EL)

• state that the expectation at t of a function of variables at t and (t+l)

•is zero. Hence they can be written as Eh(X+19) — 0,          where h is a

vector function,       includes variables at t and t+l and e is a vector


of parameters. However, this states that the expectation of the product
                                                                    —25—



of any variable in the information set at t with the actual values of

h(X+ie) must be zero. This suggests as a natural estimator for 0 the

value of 9 which minimizes an appropriately weighted sum of the squares

of the product of instruments at t with h(X+j.e). In particular, Hansen

and Singleton (1981) propose that the value of 0 be chosen which

minimizes:




     Jh' ZHZ' Li                                                   (8))




where h is the qT x 1 vector of actual values of h(X+ii0), q is the

number of equations, T the number of observations, H is a weighting


matrix while Z is the qT x mq matrix given by:



             z    0     0

     1=           z     0
             0




where there are as many blocks of Z as there are equations and Z is the T

x m matrix of observations on instruments.10   Here, m is the number of

instruments. Hansen and Singleton (1981) derive the weighting matrix

which produces the smallest assymptotic standard errors for e even when


     10Note that the product of the instruments and the residual of (EL)
at t is not a linear function or products of the instruments with the
residuals of the other two equations. Therefore,if only two equatipns
were estimated the results would depend on which two were chosen.
Therefore, we have chosen instead to estimate all three equations at once
with a common set of instruments.
                                                                          —26—




the h's are heteroskedastic conditional on the Z's as long as they are

not unconditionally heteroskedastic. For simplicity, we assume instead

that the h's are also conditionally homoskedastic. This leads to.

consistent estimates although the standard errors are inconsistent if the

assumption of homoskedasticity is wrong. In the case we consider, the

•optimal"       H reduces to the familiar three stage least squares formula:


     ii     [
                S 1R(z'z)    ]




where S is the covariance matrix of the h's of different equations. Here

the h's are the fitted values of Ii after a two: stage least squares

estimation procedure whichminiunizes (8) using I g (Z'Z)1 as the

weighting matrix.

     Hansen (1981) also shows that the minimized value of .J when the

"optimal" H is used is assymptotically distributed as 2 with degrees of

freedom equal to (qm —       r)   where r is the number of parameters that are

estimated. This provides a very simple test of the overidentifying

restrictions.11 These restrictions simply require that the addition of

extra instruments shouldn't increase the value of J very much. This is

so because, according to the model, at the true e, the expectation of the

cross product of any new instrument and h is zero.


     '1Hansen's theorem strictly applies only to situations in which the
variables are stationary and ergodic. This requirement is probably met
by our first list or instruments while it is less likely to old for lists
8 and C.
                                                                    —27—




    The main problem with using any variable in the information set at t

as an instrument is that this procedure is appropriate only when the sole

reason for h to differ from zero is that, at t+l, agents discover new

information about prices and incomes.   (f this were indeed the only

source of uncertainty in the economy then the static condition (5) wuld

hold exactly; there is no reason for the marginal rate of substitution of

consumption for leisure to be different from the real wage. However, it

is inevitable that any empirical estimate of (S) will not fit perfectly.

Any of the natural explanations or this residual seen to invalidate the

use as instruments of all the variables known at t. Such explanations

include the presence of errors of measurement of the variables, errprs of

specification, the presence of nominal contracts and the absence of full

information by the agents at t about variables which occur at t. These.

last two explanations for the residual in (S) appear to be cQnsistent

with assuming that all three first order conditions hold in expectation

with respect to a weaker conditioning set than the one Hansen and

singleton (1981) suggest.

     In particular, in a model like that of Fischer (1977) these

conditions might hold for every agent when the expectation is taken

conditional on the variables known when the nominal contract which

prevails at t is signed. Likewise, in a model like that of Lucas (1973)

they would hold when the conditioning set is the set of economy wide

variables known by agents at t. However, the aggregation over agents who

signed contracts at different dates or over agents who have different

private information might present serious difficulties. In any event,
                                                                         —28—



these considerations suggest that an appropriate estimatQr of a, p, d and

y can be obtained by estimating the system of equations (5), (EL) and

(EC) by nonlinear three stage least squares where the instruments are

variables whose realizations occur before t.     In   fact, we compare the

results of using current and lagged instruments with those of usitig only

lagged instruments.



VI. RESULTS



     We begin by estimating the three first—order conditions separately,

since each of these equations requires a different set of assumptions

regarding which markets clear. We then estimate the entire system of

equations. These system estimates require that the individual does not

face a quantity constraint in any market. Because our preliminary

results using only fourth quarter data are essentially identical to those

using quarterly data, we report, only the latter.

     The   first   Euler equation (EC) requires that the   expectation   of the

product of the marginal rate of substitution between consumption in t           and

consumption in t+l with the real interest rate equals unity. This

condition holds so long as the individual is not constrained either in

the goods market or in the capital market. In particular, (EC) does not

embody any assumption regarding the determination of the level of

employment.

     Table 1 contains the estimates of (EC) imposing additive

separability between consumption and leisure (y0)       as   is done implicitly
                                                                            —29—




                                     Table   1

    Estimates of Euler Equation for Consumption (EC) Separable Case




                      (1)       (2)              (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)



Consumption
   measure           ND         ND            ND         ND+S      ND+S       ND+S



Instrument   List    A          B             C            A          B         C

     a                .234      .174             .512     .330      .092      .333
                     (.219)    (.199)         (.193)     (.237)    (.209)    (.182)

     p_i              .997      .997             .996     .996      .997      .996
                     (.001)    (.001)         (.001)     (.001)    (.001)    (.001)

Concave?             YES.       YES           YES        YES       YES        YES



     J              25.48     43.06          35.43      24.8      47.41     44.78


Critical J* at 1% 11.34       21.66          21.66      11.34     21.66     21.66




                    Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                 —30—




in earlier work. The estimates of a are positive, as is necessary for

concavity. They vary between .09 and .51, and center at about .3. Other

studies estimate this Euler equation in the additively separable case and

generally report higher estimates of a. Hansen and Singleton (1981) find

a to be about .8, Summers (1982) about 3, Mankiw (1981) about 4, and Hall

(1981) about 15. In all cases, the overidentifying restrictions are

clearly rejected, indicating that the orthogonality conditions upon which

these estimates are premised do not hold. This is precisely the same

rejection Etansen and Singleton (1981) and Mankiw (1981) report. Beyond

the variations in the measure of consumption and the instrument list

àhown in the table, we also experimented with the use of pre—tax returns,

with little impact on the results.

     The failure of the overidentifying restrictions suggests that it is

likely that parameter estimates will be sensitive to the choice of

instruments lists. In a-different context, Rausman (1978) shows that the

difference between estimates obtained with different instrument lists can

be used as a basis for an exogeneity test. If adding instruments changes

the results by "too much" the hypothesis that the additional instruments

are exogenous can be rejected. We suspect, but have not been able to

prove) that the exogeneity tests used here can be given an interpretation

as Hausman tests.

     Table 2 contains the estimates of (EC) that allow non—separability

between consumption and leisure. The standard errors of the parameter

estimates are extremely high. In particular, we cannot reject the null

hypothesis of additive separability between consumption and leisure

(yO). This is not surprising, as the difficulty of testing separability
                                                                                     —31—



                                          Table 2
  Estimates of Euler Equation for Consumption (EC) Nonseparable Case


                       (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)               (6)


Consumption           ND           ND           ND            ND+S        ND+S              ND+S

  measure

Instrument List       A             B          C               A                 B          C


    a                 1.118          .257       .375            —.204        .147            .799

                   (118.13)        (1.568) (1.302)            (15.94)      (4.112)       (.393)


    p              —45.827        151.9       150.99         —71.39       134.5       —41.858
               (12839.8)        (472.3)       (612.97)       (872.6 )    (248.95)     (800.2)



    T               —4.730           .098            .086       —.537        .1780           .034

                  (1299.3)         (1.592)      (1.329)       (21.8)       (3.757)          (.549)


    d                 1.383      280.8         280.0          301.2       264.3        284.2
                   (332.3)     (3480.0) (3364.8) (23595.)                (2840)      (4454.)



    p_i                .999          .997            .997       1.001        .996            .993

                      (.048)        (.001)          (.001)      (.015)      (.002)          (.002)


    Concave?         NO            YES          YES              NO          YES                NO



    .1                            29.23        24.63                      33.51         27.50

Critical J*
at 1%                              16.81       16.81                      16.81         16.81



                             Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                       —32—



restrictions is well known. Alternative values of a, fl, and y have very

similar implications for the short—run and long—run behavioral

elasticities. For example, if d is close to zero, it will be impossible

to separately identify a and y. Furthermore, we continue to reject the

overidentifying restrictions. Thus, the rejection of the model hansen

and Singleton (1981) and Mankiw (1981) report cannot be attributed to

their maintained hypothesis of separability between consumption and

leisure.

     The second Euler equation (EL) specifies that the product of the

marginal rate of substitution of leisure in t    and   leisure in tEl and the

real interest rate in terms of leisure has an expectation of 1. This

condition is premised upon the absence of qyantity constraints both in

the capital market and in the labor market.

     Table 3 presents the estimates of (EL) in the additive separable

case. The estimates of    often have the wrong   sign    (negative), rejecting

the concavity restriction. Note that when the concavity restriction is

violated, the estimated parameters imply a utility function whose maximum

is given by a corner solution, or which does not exist. Obviously the

data decisively reject either possibility. In principle, concavity of

the utility should be imposed, as the likelihood of observed consumption

and leisure is zero if the utility function is not concave. In practice,

imposing this restriction is difficult. Therefore, it is hard to

interpret in a very meaningful way the standard errors or the parameters

in the case where the concavity restrictions are rejected. Nonetheless,

the data indicates no clear relation between the quantity of leisure and

the relative price of present versus future leisure. This result casts
                                                            —33-.




                           Table 3

Estimates of Euler Equation for Leisure (EL) Separable Case




                              (1)      (2)         (3)

         Instrument List       A        B          C




              p              —.739    —.996        .121

                             (.959)   (.474)      (.480)




                               994      994        994

                             (.001)   (.001)      (.001)




             Concave?          NO       NO         YES



             J                8.47      15.75       21.7



         Critical J*
         at 1%                11.35     21.66       21.66




            Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                            —34—



                                        Table 4
    Estimates of Euler Equation for Leisure (EL) Nonseparable Case

                       (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)

                       ND        ND           ND        ND+S      ND+S       ND+S
Consumption
  measure

Instrument   List       A         B               C      A         B           C


    a                  2.286     —.227       1.6332     1.696      1.970      2.947

                      (5.490    (39.4)     (35.9)      (2.975)    (2.434) (64.315)


     p                 8.753    —1.032        .1837    13.083      7.23        .481

                     (22.78)     (4.504) (52.0)       (19.374) (11.49) (2344.9)


                     —18.42      —.318       —.466    —21.457    —18.8       —9.678

                    (217.3)      (9.155) (30.4)       (143.31) (110.1) (1754.)


     d                  .528      1.132       .510      1.355       .4)8       .021
                      (7.763) (344.3) (118.7)         (13.5)      (3.305) (121.9)


                        .995       .995       .994      1.0002      .996       .994
     p_i
                       (.001)     (.0001) (.0009)       (.008)     (.002)     (.002)


Concave?                 NO        NO         NO         NO         NO       BARELY1


     J                            8.26      21.63                  5.76      25.47


Critical
at 1%                            16.81      16.81                 16.81      16.81



                       Standard errors are in parentheses.


     'The determinant of the matrix of second partials of U is negative.
but very close to zero, making inversion of the matrix, and thus
computation of elasticities, impossible.
                                                                           —35—




serious doubt on the preise of most classicAl macro—economic models that
observed labor supply re?resents unconstrained choices given perceived
opportunities.     Note especially that the results are not very sensitive

to the choice of instruent list. In particular, the use of lagged

instruments to capture the possibility      of imperfect information has
little effect    on the resilts.

     Table 4 presents the estimates of (EL) that allow non—separability.

The standard errors are huge, and thus do not reject separability. The

estimated utility function is almost never concave. Hence, the failure

reported above for the separable case cannot be attributed to the then

maintained hypothesis of separability.

     The   third   conditioi Cs), which   equates   the marginal rate of

substitution between consumption and leisure to the real tage, is the

crucial test of labor—narket—clearing. Unlike either of the other first—

order conditions, this static relation does not rely upon the assumed

absence of liquidity—constraints. It relies only upon the ability of the

individual to trade—off consumption and leisure within a single period.

In other words, it assuzes only that there is no quantity constraint

either in the goods market or in the labor market. Since consumers are

generally not constrained in the goods market, this equation should hold

so long as observed employment lies on the labor supply curve. Recall

that the underlying model also predicts that (5) should hold exactly.

     Table 5 presents the estimates obtained from the estimation of CS),

which has the same form for both the separable and nonseparable utility
                                                                           —36—



                                       Table 5

                       Estimates of Static Condition (5)




                     (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)



Consumption          ND        ND          ND        ND+S        ND+S      ND+S
   measure



Instrument List       A                     C         A           B         C



    a              1.873      2.377       4.636      3.694      3.639      2.789

                   (.118)     (.053)      (.040)     (.035)     (.032)     (.032)




    p               .018     —1.107     —8.042     —5.426     —16.231     —.212

                  (1.417)    (1.097) (5.306)       (10.038)    (9.324) (4.235)



    J             63.98     118.05      118.97     87.91      118.25     121.86


Critical 3*
at 1%              9.21      20.09      20.09       9.21       20.09     20.09




                    Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                    —37.-




functions. In almost every case, the estimate of a is positive, and the

estimate of 13 is negative. We find these signs for different instrument

lists, for different measures of consumption, for different frequency

data, and for different estimation periods. Although not displayed,

these signs also emerge when Cs) is estimated in first differences.

Altonji (1981) also estimates a version of (5) and reports estimates of a

and 13 with these signs. The data inescapably point to at least one

robust result. For any given real wage, consumption and leisure move in

opposite directions in response to other exogenous changes.

     This result provides powerful evidence against the hypothesis that

observed labor supply behavior can be described as resulting from -

continuous maximization of a stable additively separable intertemporal
utility function. The estimated utility function is extremely

implausible, as can be illustrated easily. holding the real .wage

constant, consider an increase in non—labor income, If a and .13 have

opposite signs, then either consumption or leisure must fall. That is,

since consumption and leisure move in opposite directions for any given

real wage, one must be inferior if the movements represent voluntary

maximizing behavior.

     These results are due to the fact that over the business cycle

consumption and leisure move in opposite directions. At the same time,

we simply do not observe at the aggregate level the procyclical movements

in the real wage which would make this behavior rational for households.

     We next estimate the three first—order conditions jointly as a

system. For (EC), (EL) and (5) all to hold, the representative
                                                                             —38—




                                  Table 6

                             System Estimates

                              Separable Case



                     (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)             (6)



Consumption          ND          ND           ND          ND+S       NDI-S          ND+S
  measure



Instrument List       A           B            C           A          B              C




    a               1.45        1.535        1.570        .793       .889            .904

                   (.038)      (.025)       (.026)       (.017)     (.015)          (.016)




    p             —1.181       —.704        —.236       —3.030     —1366        —1.100

                   (.799)      (-.389)      (.407)       (.470)     (.284)          (.290)




    p_i             .994        .994         .994         .994       .993            .993

                   (.001)      (.001)       (.001)       (.001)     (.0004)         (.0004)



Concave?             NO          NO           NO          NO         NO             NO



    .1            30.67       55.23      56.51          50.75     109.76        125.09


Critical J*
at 1%             24.73       49.59      49.59          24.73      49.59         49.59




                  Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                           —39—


                                     Table 7
                                System Estimates
                               Non—Separable Case


                     (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)


Consumption          NI)         ND         ND        ND+S       ND+S       ND+S
   measure


Instrument List       A           B          C        A           B          C
     a              1.407       1.680      1.713      .789       .889        .928

                    (.030)      (.033)     (.035)     (.017)     (.014)     (.018)



     p             —4.937       —.340       .158     —3.637     —1.718      —.688
                   (.549)      (.414)     (.493)     (.464)     (.281)     (.324)


              —6.452            .050       .321     —2.720     —2.716        .080

                  (1.791)      (.035) (1.178)        (.967)     (.602)     (.176)


     d              .843     146.406     16.540      8.297      —.640 114.612
                   (.448) (71.198) (68.970)         (4.112)     (.776)(310.028)



     p_i            .997        .994       .993       .999       .997        .993

                   (.001)      (.0005) (.001)        (.001)     (.001)     (.0005)


Concave?             NO         YES         YES       NO         NO         YES


     J            21.308     41.91       47.23      31.45      99.07      128.24


Critical J*
at it             21.67      46.96       46.96      21.67      46.96      46.96




                    Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                           —40—




                                        Table 8

                          System Estimates Imposing u
                                  Separable Case



                    (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)



Consumption        ND            ND         ND      ND+S         ND+S       ND+S
   measure


Instrument List     A             B          C          A         B          C




    a              1.506        1.554      1.608        .948    1.005       1.012

                  (.030)       (.022)     (.028)    (.019)       (.019)     (.019)




                   .993         .993       .993         .993      .99.1      .993
    p_i

                  (.001)       (.001)     (.001)    (.001)      (.001)      (.001)




Concave?            YES          YES        YES          YES       YES       YES



     J            38.21       66.82      59.44     61.65       119.06     117.81


Critical J*
at 1%             26.22       50.89      50.89     26.22       50.89       50.89




                   Standard errors are in pareatheses.
                                                                              —41—




                                           Table   9

                           System Estimates Imposing a =
                                   Non—Separable Case




                     (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)


                    ND              ND         ND        ND+S       ND-I-S     ND+S
Consumption
  measure

Instrument List      A               B             C      A          B          C

                    1.635          1.600      1.648      1.722     1.079      1.019
    a
                   (.112)         (.023)     (.023)      (.040)    (.026)     (.027)


                  —3.486          —.563      1.068      —7.757    —1.092       .892

                  (2.246)         (.557)     (.599)     (5.554)    (.776)     (.639)



     d              .730            .447       .112       .226       .403     —.613

                   (.381)         (.115)      (.209)     (.100)    (.242) (1.496)
                    .996            .995       .994      1.002       .999       .995
                              -



                   (.001)          (.0001)    (001)      (.005)    (.001)      (.001)



                     NO             NO          YES       NO        NO         NO
Concave?


     3             18.80          53.83      63.26      53.38     151.35     110.53


Critical 3*
at 1%              23.21          48.28      48.28      23.21      48.28      48.28




                    Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                      —42—



individual must face no quantity constraint in any market.

     Table 6 presents the system estimates in the separable case. For

both consumption measures and for all instrument lists, the estimate of a

is positive and the estimate of p    is   negative. Thus, the estimited

utility function is not concave. The data is not consistent with

continous dynamic maximization of a utility function that is additively
                                                                          -

separable in consumption and leisure.

     Table 7 presents the system estimates for the non—separable case.
The estimated utility function is concave for only half of the estimates.

In most of the concave cases, a and p have opposite signs, implying that

either consumption or leisure is an inferior good. In addition, we

reject the overidentifying restrictions, for all concave estimates. Thus,

the data does not readily produce reasonable parameter estimates of the

representative individual's utility function.        This result provides

little support to business cycle models that posit continuous dynamic

maximization and the absence of quantity constraints.

     We next estimate the system imposing the constraint a". The

separable estimates are in Table S. The estimate of a is consistent

across instrument lists: 1.5 for nondurables, and 1.0 for nondurables

and services. The overidentifying restrictions are always rejected. The

nonseparable estimates are in Table 9. The estimated utility function is

usually not   concave.   The overidentifying restrictions almost always can

be rejected, while the null hypothesis of separability cannot be

rejected.

    Various elasticities are presented in Table 10 for those
                                                                  —43—




nonseparable estimates that imply a concave utility function.8 Since the

estimates of the utility function parameters vary greatly, the estimated

elasticities also vary greatly. The long—run elasticity of consutiiptloa

with respect to the wage is approximately .6, and the long—run elasticity

of leisure with respect to the wage is .26, implying a backward—bending

long—run labor supply curve.


     8These elasticities are computed using data corresponding to the
first quarter of 1980. A problem arises from the fact that all three
equations have a residual in this period. This residual is Ignored in
our calculations which use the actual values for C, L, P, J and r on both
sides of (5) and (7). Alternatively, we could have changed some of these
variables to make (S), (EC) and (EL) hold exactly and then computed the
elasticities.
                                                                               —44—



                                             Table 10



                              Elasticities Implied by the Estimates




Table and Column
   of Estimates              2.2       2.3        2.5       7.2       7.3     7.6      9.3




Short—Run Elasticities



C with respect to P         —3.1      —2.4       —3.4       —.61      —.60    —1.1    —2.7

C with respect to bY          .0055     .0047      .0061    —.64       .55     1.8      .22

C with respect to i+r       —3.1      —2.3       —3.4       —.045     —.045    —.72   —2.5

L with respect to P           .0015     .00086     .0038     .0005    —.l8.     .21     .273

L with respect to W         —.0027     —.0028     —.0035    —.36      —.25      .99   —4.2

L with   respect   to 1+r   —.0013     —.0020     —.00030   —.36      —.22     —.99    3.9




Long—Run Elasticities



C with respect to W/P                                                  .54     .61      .89

L with respect to WIP                                                  .26     .26      .25
                                                                     —45—




    Probably the inost.important elasticity for evaluating the

intertemporal substitution hypothesis is the short—run elasticity of

leisure with respect to the current wage. This elasticity varies from

—.0027 to —4.2 across estimates. This implies a short—run labor supply

elasticity between .01 and 17, since leisure is roughly four times labor

supply. Note that the elasticity of leisure with respect to changeè in

the interest rate is in all cases but   one   essentially identical to the

e1aticity with respect to the wage. Hence it too fluctuates widely over

different estimates. Moreover, the short run elasticity of consumption

with respect to changes in prices varies from —.6 to —3.4. It is not

surprising, given the reluctance of the data to be characerized by the

three first—order conditions, that these short—run elasticities are not

well pinned down.



VU. Conclusions          -




     The empirical results reported in this paper are consistently

disappointing. The overidentifying restrictions implied by the model of

dynamic optimization in the absence of quantity constraints are rejected

by virtually all of the estimates. The estimated utility function

parameters always imply implausible behavior. We can conclude that the

data strongly reject specifications of the type used in this paper. In

this final section, we examine a number of alternative explanations for

the results obtained. The abundance of plausible explanations for the

results we obtained (or for other results that might have been obtained)
                                                                      —46—




    leads us to be somewhat skeptical of the power of aggregate time series

    data in distinguishing alternative macroeconomic hypotheses.

        A first possibility is that our poor results are a consequence of

    problems of measurement and estimation. As emphasized in the inItial

    discussion of the data, our measures of consumption and leisure are all

    open to question, as is our proxy for real returns. Probably wore

    serious is the use of seasonally adjusted data. Seasonal fluctuations,

    which account for most of the variance in leisure, should be explained by

    dynamic optimization rather than averaged out as in our data. Utility

    presumably depends on actual consumption not on consumption as adjusted

    by X—ll. Time aggregation issues are possibly serious as well.

        A second, more likely possibility is that the auxiliary asôumptions

    we maintain to make the problem tractable are false. Aggregation in

    models of this type is very problematic. It is also possible that our

    assumption of additive separability across time is the root of the

    problem. Over some intervals, this assumption is unwarranted. People

    who have worked hard want to rest. Mealtimes are not staggered through

    the day by accident. How serious these types of effects are at the macro

    level remains an open question. Clark and Summers (1979) examine several

    types of evidence bearing on the effects of previous employment

    experience on subsequent experience, and conclude that habit formation,

-

    and persistence effects predominate over intertemporal substitution

    effects. This suggests that while non—separability may help to explain

    the failure of our results, the sign of the key cross derivatives may
                                                                    —47—



well be the opposite of that usually assumed in intertemporal

substitution theories. Note that this problem of non—separable utility

in consumption relates closely to the issues connected with

distinguishing between consumption and consumption expenditure.

    A third general class of explanation for the results we obtained

involves changing tastes. Just as the identification of traditional

demand curves depends on the predominance of technological shocks

relative to taste shocks, identification in models of the type estimated

here depends on the maintained hypothesis of constant tastes. This is

clearly a fiction. In every arena where taste shocks are easy to

disentangle, fashion being an obvious example, they are pervasive. Even

if the tastes of individuals were stable over time, the tastes of

individuals of different ages differ, and the age distribution

represented by the representative consumer has changed through time. An

important topic for future research is the estimation of models which

allow for changing tastes) either through random shocks, or endogenously

on the basis of experience. The latter possibility relates closely to

the problem of non—separability in the utility function.

    A final possible reason for the failure of the model is that    the
assumption that individuals are unconstrained in the labor and capital

markets is false. While fully satisfactory theories of wage rigidity

have not been developed, the observed data suggest that wages are in fact

rigid. The apparently large effects of sharp nominal contractions that

have been observed in repeated historic episodes support this view.
                                                                     —48—



Analyses of the macro character of unemployment, such as Clark and

Summers (1979) and Akerlof and Main (1981), find that it is extremely

concentrated among relatively few individuals whose employment Is

strongly pro—cyclical. This tends to suggest a role for disequilibrium

in certain labor market segments in explaining cyclical fluctuations;

     In sum, the results of this investigation are discouraging. We find

little evidence in favor of any of the models estimated here. In

particular, we conclude that taking account of leisure does not

rationalize the failure of previous models of consumption based on

intertemporal decision making.
                                                                    —49—



                               Bibliography


Akerlof, George and Brian G.M. Main, "An Experience Weighted Measure of
     Employment Durations'. AER, Dec. 1981, pp. 1003—1011.

Altonji, Joseph G., Does the Labor Market Clear? A Test Under
     Alternative Expectations Assutnptions". Mimeo, 1980.

Altonji, Joseph C., "The Intertemporal Substitution Model of Labor Market
     Fluctuations: An Empirical Analysis:. Mimeo, 1981.

Auerbach, Alan S. and Lawrence Kotlikoff, "The Efficiency Gains from
     Dynamic Tax Return".

Barro, Robert J., "A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business Cycle
     Model", Econometrica 48, 1393—1417. September 1980.

Blinder, Alan S., Toward an Economic Theory of Income Distribution, MIT
     Press, 1974.

Clark, Kim B. and Lawrence K. Summers, "Labor Market Dynamics and
     Unemployment: A Reconsideration". Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity 1: 1979, pp. 1360.

Clark, Kim B. and Lawrence K. Summers, "Labor Force Participation:
     Timing and Persistence'. Mimeo, 1981.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the
     Optimal Money Supply Rule" • Journal of Political Economy 85,
     pp. 191—205, February 1977.

Friedman,   Benjamin, Comment on "After Keynesian Macroeconomics' by
     Robert E. Lucas, Jr. and Thomas Sargent in: After the Phillips
     Curve: Persistence of High Inflation and High Unemployment, Federal
     Reserve   Bank of aoston, (1978).
Grossman, Sanford and Robert Shiller, "The Determinants of the
     Variability of Stock Market Prices".   American Economic   Review
     Papers and Proceedings, May 1981.

Hall, Robert E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life—Cycle Permanent
     Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence" • Journal of Political
     Economy, 86(6), pp. 971—89, December 1978.

Hall, Robert E., "Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity". Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1980.
                                                                     —50—




Hall,    Robert E., "Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations" in K. Brunner
        and A. Melger eds., On the State of Macroeconomics. Carnegie—
        Rochester Conference on Public Policy vol 12, North Holland,.
        Amsterdam, 1980.

Hall, Robert E., "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption". Mimeo,
     July 1981.

Hansen, Lars Peter, "Large Sample Properties of Method of Moments
     Estimators". Mimeo, 1981.

Hansen,   Lars Peter and Kenneth Singleton, "Generalized Instrumental
        Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models".
        Mimeo, 1981, forthcoming in Econometrica,

King, Robert G. and Charles I. Plosser, "The Behavior of Money Credit and
     Prices in a Real Business Cycle". Mimeo, September 1981.

Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott, "Time to Build and the Persistence of
     Unemployment". Mimeo, 1981.

Lipton,   David and Jeffrey Sachs, "Accumulation and Growth in a Two
        Country Model: A Simulation Approach".

Long, John and Charles Plosser, "Real Busiffess Cycles". Mimeo, November
        1980,

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation
     Tradeoffs". American Economic Review 63, 326—334, June 1973.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Leonard Rapping, "Real Wages, Employment and
                                                            -
     Inflation". Journal of Political Economy 77, 721—54,
        September/October   1969.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life Cycle
     Setting". Journal of Political Economy 89, 1059—85, December 1981.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "An Intertemporal Analysis of Taxation and Work
     Disincentives: An Analysis of the Denver Income Maintenance
     Experiment". Mimeo, 1981.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real
     Interest Rate". Economics Letters 7, 307—311 (1981).

Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Hall's Consumption Hypothesis and Durable Goods".
     Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming 1982.
                                                                    —51—


Prescott, Edward C. and Rajaish Mehra, "Recursive Competitive
     Equilibrium: The Case of Ifotnogeneous Households". Econometrica
     48(6), 1365—80, September 1980.
Rubinstein, Mark, "AnAggregation Theorem for Securities Markets".
    Journal of Financial Economics 1, 255—4t (1974).

Seater, John, "Marginal Federal Personal and Corporate Income Tax Rates
     in the U.S. 1909—1975". Research papers of the Philadelphia Federal
     Reserve Bank 57, November 1980.

Summers, Lawrence Ii., "Tax Policy, The Rate of Return and Savings".
     Mimeo, 1982.
                                                                A-i


                        DATA APPENDIX
        Per Capita Consuujption of Nondurable Goods
1947    1     15.1181        15.3253    15.3145   15.0508
1948    1     14.9965        15.1193    14.9251   15.1231
1949    1     15.176         15.1679    15.0105   15.1684

1950    1     15.2864        15.397     15.6202   15.3359

1951.   1     15.7318        15.5684    15.8787   16.01

1952    1     15.8778        16.218     16.4036       16.5468

1953    1     16.5085        16.5194    16.3525   16.2695

1954    1     16.2964        16.1772    16.3403       16.5462

1955    1     16.6223        16.835     16.9179       17.2254

1956    1     17.342         17.2493    17.2076       17.2753

1957    1     17.2842        17.3054    17.4953       17.3392

1958    1     17.0793        17.1669    17.4182       17.5529

195?    1     17.7135    .
                             17.7698    17.7844       17.8401
1960    1     17.7538        17.9004    17.7241       17.6619

1961    1     17.7245        17.8361    17.7898       18.0217

1962    1     18.1356        18.144     18.2191       18.241

1963    1     18.2095        18.2046    18.2686       18.1997

1964    1     18.4467        18.6952    18.9275       18.8923

1965    1     19.0122        19.0697    19.2591       19.8004

1966    1     19.8806        19.9736    20.0571       19.8963

1967    1     20.0165        2O.0267    19.9361       19.9453

1968    1     20.2717        20.4233    20.6881       20.5674

1969    1     20.6554        20.6685    20.6322       20.6068
1970    1     20.6915        20.6665    20.7158       20.7679

1971    1     20.7305        20.6905    20.5826       20.6065

1972    1     20.5418        20.9292    21.1102       21.3195

1973    1     21.4016        21.0774    21.0711       20.8738

1974    1     20.5617        20.4624    20.4872       20.1342

1975    1     20.2005        20.4478    20.4365       20.4243

1976    1     20.7229        20.8821    21.0148       21.1827

1977    1     21.2164        21.2692    21.306        21.6011

1978    1     21.5059        21.5881    21.8042       22.1046

1979    1     21.8658        21.7538    21.9646       22.2214

1980    1     22.1486        21.7699    21.5778       21.8319
1981    1     22.0082
                                                         A-2


           Price Deflator for Nondurable Goods
1947   1     57.3        57.8        58.9        60.8

1948   1    61.7         62.3        62.9        62.2

1949   1     61.3        60.5        59.8        59.5

1950   1     59.2        59.6        61.4        62.7

1951   1     65.3        65.8        65.6        66.4

1952   1     66.5        66.3        66.5        66.8

1953   1     66.4        66.2        66.3        66.3

1954   1     66.6        66.9        66.6        66.4

1955   1     66.4.       66.3        66.3        66.2
1956   1     66.4        67.         67.7        68.

1957   1     68.6        69.         69.8        70.

1958   1     71.1        71.2        71.         70.8

1959   1     71.         71.2        71.6        71.9

1960   1     71.8        72.4        72.7        73.3

1961   1     73.4        73.1        73.3        73.3

1962   1     73.6        73.9        74.         74.3

1963   1     74.6        74.6        75.1        75.3

1964   1     75.7        75.7        75.9        76.1

1965   1     76.3        77.2        77.6        78.

1966   1     79.1        79.9        80.4        81.1

1967   1     81.1        81.4        82.2        82.9

1968   1     83.9        84.8        85.6        86.7

1969   1     87.5        88.8        90.         91.3

1970   1     92.5        93.3        93.9        94.9

1971   1     95.2        96.2        97.1        97.9

1972   1     98.8        99.3       100.2        101.6

1973   1    103.7       106.8       109.5        113.1

1974   1    118.1       121.8       124.7   .    127.9
1975   1    129.2       130.5       133.6        135.1

1976   1    135.5       136.        137.5        138.9
1977   1    141.        142.8       144.1        145.8
1978   1    148.3       152.        154.5        157.9
1979   1    162.9       167.3       172.1        176.9

1980   1    182.9       186.2       190.         195.2

1981   1    199.2
                                                             A-3



   per Capita Consumption   of Nondurabies and Services
1947   1    27.0029     21:3062        27.1868    26.8148

1948   1    26.9505     27.214         27.0903     27.3367

1949   1    27.3652     27.386         27.1353    27.2766
1950   1    27.5666     28.031         28.3958    28.2527
1951   1    28.7838     28.7001        29.068     29.1406

1952   1    29.1059     29.5682        29.8571     30.1201

1953   1    30.0547     30.1821        30.0416     29.7926

1954   1    29.9176         30.015     30.3785     30.6358
1955   1    30.8897     31.117         31.2747     31.8062

1956   1    32.0184         32.0416    32.1406     32.3319

1957   1    32.3915         32.4693    32.639      32.5904

1958   1    32.3107         32.6322    33.019      33.133

1959   1    33.5295         33.7377    33.8374     34.076
1960   1    34.0298         34.3475    34.1464     34.1734
1961   1    34.3721         34.6965    34.6233     35.1102
1962   1    35.3157         35.507     35.6257     35.7823
1963   1    35.7425         35.8456    36.1736     36.2563

1964   1    36.6544         37.0887    37.4717     37.5782

1965   1    37.8054         38.0212    38.3663     39.1592

1966   1    39.3288         39.5447    39.7669     39.7728
1967   1    40.1126         40.2875    40.3474     40.384
1968   1    40.7918         41.2242    41.698      41.7105
1969   1     41.9194,       42.0941    42.1803     42.3201

1970   1    42.4848         42.4352    42.6205     42.6579
1971   1    42.7321         42.8002    42.7457     42.951
1972   1    43.0162         43.5023    43.8326     44.3231
1973   1     44.4612        44.2454    44.4331     44.2535
1974   1     43.8722        43.8509    43.919      43.6346
1975   1     43.769         44.225     44.2163     44.3262
1976   1     44.8178        45.0625    45.4028     45.8958
1977   1     46.0542        46.0632    46.4386     46.9381
1978   1     47.1251        47.4466    47.9977     48.3231
1979   1     48.3156        48.2977    48.6142     48.9341

1980   1     48.8883        48.4233    48.5246     48.9224

1981   1     49.112
                                                          A-4


       Price Deflator for Nondurables and Services
1947   1    49.9491     50.4322      51.6095    53.0329
1948   1     53.585      54.1288     54.7721    54.6497
1949   1    54.258      53.9437      53.7245    53.8191
1950   1     53.721      53.8755     55.1427    56.0682
1951   1     57.9071    58.346       58.575     59.4619
1952   1     59.7286    59.9384      60.3772    60.8081
1953   1     60.9484    61.0859      61.5166    61.853
1954   1     62.186     62.3357      62.2583    62.351
1955   1     62.474     62.5815      62.766     62.9458
1956   1    63.2367     63.722       64.2632    64.6447
1957   1    65.2428     65.6396      66.4104    66.7693
1958   1     67.5642    67.6959      67.8354    67.9774
1959   1     68.1692    68.5026      69.1316    69.5184
1960   1     69.6958    70.1506      70.4884    70.9805
1961   1     71.0762    71.0111      71.3072    71.4017
1962   1     71.7514    72.0895      72.338     72.6342
1963   1     72.9807    73.0737      73.4664    73.7065
1964   1     74.0112    74.1121      74.3656    74.658
1965   1     74.9088    75.5558      76.0066    76.4681
1966   1    77.2703     78.018       78.6162    79.25
1967   1     79.4972    79.8916      80.5811    81.28
1968   1     82.3401    83.1348      83.887     84.9257
1969   1    85.8765     87.0695      88.2115    89.4009
1970   1     90.5503    91.5047      92.4096    93.6678
1971   1     94.4275    95.5282      96.7369    97.6398
1972   1     98.6432    99.4038     100.355     101.548
1973   1    103.13      105.333     107.292     109.824
1974   1    113.423     116.413     119.149     121.868
1975   1    123.601     125.069     127.577     129.493
1976   1    130.662     131.868     133.686     135.83
1977   1    138.303     140.539     142.585     144.558

1978   1    146.832     150.147     152.808     156.11
1979   1    160.053     163.232     167.275     171.714

1980   1    176.719     180.586     184.613     189.164

1981   1    193.24
                                                               A-5



               Per Capita   Hours Worked Per Week
1948   1       24.4081        24.5651     24.5377    24.4427

1949   1       23.9676        23.7894     23.3321    23.3202

1950   1       23.3794        23.6307     24.0283    24.0508

1951   1       24.3355        24.3792     24.5267    24.219

1952   1       24.4683        24.1751     24.0549    24.3893

1953   1       24.5186        24.2007     24.1054    23.7828

1954   1        23.4174       23.0957     22.859     22.9464

1955   1        23.3124       23.3365     23.8715    23.9023

1956   1       23.9133        23.9242     23.9617    23.8341

1957   1        23.7526       23.5422     23.472     23.0542

1958   1        22.5518       22.4383     22.4046    22.7434

1959   1        22.7784       23.046      22.8695    22.7777

1960   1        22.6122       23.0295     22.9992    22.7056

1961   1        22.5141       22.3225     22.312     22.5442

1962   1        22.5202       22.6517.    22.5588    22.4623

1963   1        22.394        22.5329     22.4491    22.4778
1964   1        22.3338       22.6493     22.4657    22.5526

1965   1        22.7423       22.8232     22.8428    23.0068

1966   1        22.9991       23.0685     23.0833    23.098

1967   1        23.0906       23.0241     23.2083    23.2011

1968   1        23.0192       23.1808     23.209     23.1812

1969   1        23.1054       23.2199     23.2648    23.181

1970   1        22.9715       22.8039     22.6012    22.4735

1911   1        22.3341       22.2897     22.1942    22.3522

1972   1        22.3958       22.4593     22.5155    22.5196

1973   1        22.6198       22.8116     22.8589.   22.9457

1974   1        22.8261       22.7511     22.6516    22.3101

1975   1        21.7893       21.6395     21.6866.   21.8196

1976   1        22.0321       22.0682     22.0907    22.1806

1977   1        22.242        22.5613     22.5659    22.7518

1976   1        22.8953.      23.4821     23.232     23.4287

1979   1        23.5041       23.4095     23.4278    23.5442

1980   1        23.3296       22.828      22.6608    22.8242

1981       1    22.9808
                                                           A-6



   After Tax Compensation of Nonagricultural Employees
1947   1     1.05326     1.10046     1.13768     1.18948

1948   1     1.21603     1.23419     1.27342     1.29148

1949   1     1.30153     1.31132     1.31423     1.31586

1950   1     1.33078     1.33066     1.34682     1.37884

1951   1     1.40515     1.43341.    1.451       1.47696

1952   1     1.49488     1.51599     1.53447     1.55827

1953   1     1.56917     1.5982      1.61918     1.62939

1954   1     1.65201     1.66946     1.68607     1.69902

1955   1     1.70366     1.71949     1.74195     1.76021

1956   1     1.7821      1.81156     1.83736     1.85406
1957   1     1.89364     1.9061      1.92462     1.94462

1958   1     1.9576      1.98855     2.02892     2.03

1959   1     2.04334     2.05373     2.06949     2.08253

1960   1     2.11673     2.13069     2.13757     2.14798
1961   1     2.16017     2.16996     2.18371     2.2094

1962   1     2.24817     2.25636     2.26386     2.27576

1963   1     2.28977     2.29257     2.31895     2.37195

1964   1     2.44614     2.48961     2.54119     2.5627
1965   1     2.56812     2.59016     2.61571     2.64181
1966   1     2.66183     2.6933      2.7381      2.76705
1967   1     2.80463     2.83        2.85374     2.87796
1968   1     2.91771     2.94134     2.96778     3.00251

1969   1     3.03294     3.07656     3.14362     3.20135
1970   1     3.26616     3.34898     3.4403      3.44999

1971   1     3.52528     3.57353     3.62174     3.65462

1972   1     3.75025     3.78711     3.83014     3.8815

1973   1     3.95776     3.98998     4.03862     4.11371

1974   1     4.18268     4.29485     4.38762     4.4963

1975   1     4.61002     4.6968      4.78804     4.87599

1976   1     4.96132     5.07213     5.14693     5.24567
1977   1     5.33795     5.42641     5.50795     5.61742
1978   1     5.71794     5.79717     5.90583     6.03649
1979   1     6.1863      6.34586     6.43757     6.59069
1980   1     6.71842     6.87616     7.03934     7.23279
                                                                 A-7


       After Tax Nominal Interest Rate on Treasury Bills
1947         1    1.00066        1.00066    1.00126    1.00158
1948         1   1.00172         1.00174    1.00181   1.00198
1949         1   1.00203        1.00202    1.00178    1.00187
1950         1   1.00195         1.00203   1.00215    1.00236
1951         1   1.00244        1.00267    1.00284    1.00287
1952         1   1.00286        1.00292    1.00319    1.00335
1953         1   1.00356        1.00383    1.00352    1.00259
1954         1   1.00189        1.00142    1.00152    1.00181
1955     1       1.00219        1.00264    1.00324    1.00409
1956     1       1.00414        1.00451    1.00451    1.00532
1957     1       1.0055         1.00548    1.00587    1.0058
1958     1       1.0032         1.00178    1.00298    1.00484
1959     1       1.00486        1.00524    1.00613    1.00744
1960     1       1.00683    :
                                1.00537    1.00416    1.00411
1961     1       1.00413        1.00404    1.00404    1.0043
1962     1       1.00476        1.00472    1.00496    1.00487
1963     1       1.00505        1.00511    1.00569    1.006b7
1964     1       1.00613        1.00604    1.00608    1.00639
1965     1       1.00676        1.00672    1.00669    1.0072
1966     1       1.00801        1.00795    1.00872    1.00906
1967     1       1.00784        1.00634    1.00752    1.00827
1968     1       1.00875        1.00951    1.00902    1.00963
1969     1       1.01057        1.01075    1.01211    1.01257
1970     1       1.01247        1.01161    1.01097    1.00925
1971     1       1.00669        1.00728    1.00872    1.00733
1972     1       1.00596        1.0065     1.00734    1.00838
1973     1       1.00973        1.01137    1.01437    1.01281
1974     1       1.01304        1.01416    1.0142     1.0126
1975     1       1.01012        1.00932    1.01091    1.0098
1976     1       1.00856        1.00892    1.00892    1.00812
1977     1       1.008          1.00834    1.00944    1.01057
1978     1       1.01103        1.01115    1.01256    1.01486
1979     1       1.01599        1.01601    1.01644    1.02005
1980     1       1.02276        1.01714    1.01578    1.02317
1981     1       1.02425
