                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION AND THE UNIONIZED SECTOR




                         Gene   M. Grossman




                      Working Paper No. 899




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            June 1982




I thank Orley Ashenfelter, Jean Baldwin Grossman, Andrew Oswald and
Carl Shapiro for helpful comments and discussion. The research
reported here is part of the NBERtS research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #899
                                                    June 1982




            International Competition and the Unionized Sector



                               ABSTRACT


     This   paper studies the wage and employment behavior of a unionized

sector that is confronted by an intensification of international competition.

After developing a formal model of a monopoly union subject to majority rule,

I study the response of a unionized sector operating under a seniority rule

for layoffs and rehires to a trend decrease in the international price of

its output. Conditions are provided to validate the casual argument that

majority voting in unions and the seniority system together provide an

explanation for the lack of union wage adjustment.

     A modified version of the model allows the job queue to deviate from a

strict seniority ranking. In this context I ask, what importance can be

attached to the seniority system in determining the wage response to

international competition?




                                                Gene M. Grossman
                                                Woodrow Wilson School
                                                Princeton University
                                                Princeton, NJ    08544
                                                609—452—4823
I. INTRODUCTION

       International competition which takes the form of a decline in the

price of a substitute foreign good often effects an increase in the level

of industry unemployment, while sectoral wages are "sticky downward".

This observation has led trade theorists to extend to an open economy con-

text a model first developed by Harris and Todaro (1970), which incorporates

a sector—specific rigid wage and associated industry—specific unemployment.1

This model has been used extensively to investigate appropriate policy

responses to international competition in this second—best setting.

       A deficiency coon to most of these analyses is that the level of the

rigid wage is exogenously specified, and its cause is rarely discussed.            For

justification, appeal is sometImas made to the pressures of unions, but no

attempt is made to model the union behavior that might give rise to the
observed   wage stickiness.2 At a more informal     level, however, an explanation
for this phenomenon     has been suggested. It is casually argued that in the

face   of increased international competition union wages do    not fall because

union   votes are swayed   by senior workers for whom the probability of layoff

is   quite small.3
       The purpose of   this paper   is to investigate the wage and   employment

behavior   of a unionized sector that is confronted by international competition.

Two questions   are addressed. First,     will a unionized sector operating
                                          how

under a seniority rule for layoffs and rehires respond to a trend decrease
in the international price of its output? Second, what importance can be
attached to the seniority system in determining this response? In other
words, would wages respond more flexibly if criteria other than
                                                                seniority

extered into the layoff decision?
                                   —2—

      To answer these questions, a model of the unionized sector that I

have developed in Grossman (1982) is adapted to an open economy setting.

The salient features of this model, which is reviewed in Section II, are

that (i) layoffs and rehires are based on seniority; (ii) the union

wage demand emerges from a majority vote among union members; and (iii) the

membership of the union is determined simultaneously with the wage demand

by a free—entry condition. In Section III I apply this model to study how

a fall in the international price of the sector's output will affect wages,

union size and industry unemployment. Then in Section IV the model is

extended to allow factors other than seniority to influence the order of

layoffs, and I study how this    change in specification alters the behavior of
the union in response to international competition.



II. THE MODEL
      This section develops the basic model of the unionized sector which I

shall use in the following sections to investigate the effects of international

competition. The model presented here modifies that in Grossman (1982) to

allow   for   the existence of an internationally traded good which ubstitutes

perfectly for the output of the unionized sector.

      Consider, then, a small open economy that comprises two sectors. The

outputs of both sectors are    internationally   traded, and   the   world prices are

taken to be exogenous. In the nonunion sector, which is intentionally made

as   simple. as possible, the riumeraire good, X, is produced by labor alone,
according to a constant returns to scale technology. One unit of good X
is assumed to require l/ units of labor, so that w is the prevailing wage
in the nonunion sector by the zero—profit condition.
                                        —3—


       The union—sector good has international price p*. Letting v(p, w)

be the indirect utility function of all workers, the utility of nonunion

labor is given by v(p*, w). To further simplify the analysis of the wage

demands of the union, I assume that the union good constitutes a negligible

fraction of the consumption basket. Thus, the indirect effect of

international competition (i.e. changes in p*) on worker's utility as a

function of consumption behavior can be ignored, and we concentrate instead

on its direct effects on the factor income of union members. With this

assumption, the utility of nonunion workers is now written simply as v(') E v.

       Output in the union sector requires labor and sector—specific capital.

The production function for good Y is



             Y       OF(K, E)                                                         (1)




where K is the fixed stock of sector—specific capital, E is the level of

sectoral employment, and 8 is a stochastic variable, assumed to be uniformly

distributed on (B — 1, B]. 8 represents a random element in the production

technology,      and   therefore the demand for labor, which is assumed to be unknown

at the time of        labor negotiations. Uncertainty is resolved prior to the
time that hiring and        output   decisions are made, but while     8 is   then   known

by   firms   it is    unobservable by workers during   the   current   contract   period.
This implies that incentive compatible contracts cannot be state contingent,
for   otherwise firms would always plead an unfavorable draw of 8 to extract

concessions from the union.

       I assume that all workers have identical skills, and that job sharing

is ruled out with reference to a non—conved.ty in the technology. Then E

represents the number of jobs in addition to the labor input. Define
                                     —4—


f(E)         F(K, E)/9E, with decreasing returns to labor for fixed capital

input implying that f'(E) < 0.       Then the marginal value product of labor

is given by p*Of(E).

       The   union in this sector   is assumed to have monopoly power vis—a—vis

the large     number of perfectly competitive firms in the industry.4 The

union specifies a state—independent wage, referred to as the wage demand,

subject to the constraint imposed by the demand—for—labor schedule. Firms

choose the level of employment once the state of nature is realized. Note

that this latter assumption does imply some limitation on the monopoly

power of the union, for otherwise the union could demand a wage—employment

package as "take—it—or—leave—it", subject only to a zero—profit constraint.

The specification that the union chooses the wage and the firm selects

E(G) is admittedly somewhat ad hoc, but has the virtue of according well

with observed behavior.5

       Union members are indexed by ie [0, U, where L is the size of the

union. The index i represents seniority, with i          0 the most senior member

and i        L the least senior, and all workers are aware of their location in

the seniority quene. It is assumed in this section and the next that layoffs

and rehires are based solely on seniority. This assumption will be relaxed

in Section IV.

       Labor is assumed to be perfectly mobile ex ante, i.e. workers have the

choice whether to enter the union sector (given their seniority ranking) or

accept employment in the     nonunion sector. Thus, I suppose that ex ante
there is free entry into the union. This assumption is best justified if we

think of an industrial (as opposed to craft) union operating in a multi—

period world, of wh..ch the present paper studies one representative period.

Then any worker whQis offered employment in some period (i.e. for some
realization of 0) must be admitted into the union according to U.S. law

which forbids "closed shops." Workers who are never offered employment by

any firm need not be permitted to become union members, but these workers

are of no concern because they would not choose to enter the union sector

given the alternative of nonunion employment.

       Once the contract period has begun, i.e. ex post, labor is completely

immobile. This means that all workers who do not gain employment: in the

union sector once the state of nature is realized remain unemployed for

the duration of the contract period.6 Unemployment in this model, as in

the Harris—Todaro model, is industry specific and its proximate cause is

the state—independent wage in conjunction with the assumed ex pos:t

immobility of labor. It is not claimed that either the union or the seniority

system is the cause of the unemployment. It is nonetheless interesting to

study how the industry—specific unemployment described here is affected by

international competition.7

       The final assumption of the model concerns the process by which the

union generates its wage demand. Following Atherton (1973) and especially

Farber (1978), I suppose this process to be one of majority voting.        Iii


principle the union might. then choose an entire wage schedule with payment

a. function of place   in   the seniority ueue, In this way the union could act

as   a discriminating monopolist. However, such wage schedules are ruled
out by appeal. to their high cost of negotiation.8 Thus, the union demand
that emerges froa the majority     vote   is by assumption a single wage payable
to all employed workers during, the contract period. Since union member
preferences are single—peaked, a unique voting equilibrium exists, and the
wage demanded is the one that maximizes the utility of the median (in terms
of seniority) worker.9
                                           —6--


     It is now straightforward to describe the equilibrium in this

economy. The probability of employment of a union member with seniority

index i, irS, given the union wage demand w, is




          'Wi
                     pr{p*ef(i) >   w}


                     pr{G >w/p*f(i)}


                = min[B    —   w/p*f(i),   1]                         (2)




The expected utility of a worker with index i is



          u(i)         ir. v(w) + (1 —                                (3)




where v is the utility associated with unemployment, deriving from

unemployment benefits, trade adjustment assistance and leisure.

     The union maximizes the utility of the median worker, who has index L/2.

The solution to this in'riTn{zation is illustrated in Figure 1. The indifference

                7r




                                                  £0




                                                         w
                     Figure 1: Worker's Most—Preferred Wage
                                       —7


  curves   deriving from (3), for any given worker, are downward sloping
 and convex.        Utility is maximizes where the constraint relating the wage

 to probability of employment, as expressed in (2), is tangent to the

 indifference curve.

      The union's wage demand depends on who is the median worker, and

 therefore on the size of the union. Referring once again to Figure 1,

 we see that a less senior worker with index i1 >               faces a worse trade-

 off between wage and probability of employment, and prefers a lower wage.

 More formally, the first order condition for the maximization of the utility

 of the median worker is



             EBp*f(L/2) —    w]v'(w) = v(w)     —   v                            (4)




The median worker is just indifferent between an increase in wage, which

raises utility in employed periods, and the accompanying decrease in the

probability of employment.

     If the union were       to expand in   size slightly, then the "new" median

worker,    who is   less senior then the "old" median, and therefore marginally

more concerned with his employment prospects,            will prefer a slightly lower
wage. This relationship between union           size    and the wage demand is termed
the voting   schedule, and depicted as the downward sloping curve, VV, in

Figure 2. The curve has slope


            dv             B/2p*f'(L/2)     <
            dL           v(w)-v
                          Wv' (w)
                                    °R+2

where R is the coefficient of relative risk aversion defined to be positive.

When risk averion is great, so that a marginal increase in the probability of
                                      —8—

unemployment has a large negative effect on utility, workers have approximately

the same most—preferred wage, and the voting schedule is relatively flat.




                 w

                      V




                                                             V


                                                    M
                                                             L

                 Figure 2: Unionized—Sector Equilibrium


       The second equilibrium relationship follows from the ex            ante perfect
mobility assumption. With free entry         into   the union    sector   the least

senior worker must be indifferent between the utility he achieves by

joining the union and     that   available to him    in   the nonunion sector)0

This   members schedule      is given   by


               v(w) + (1 -   L'o
or substituting equation (2)



                             —   w/p*f(L)]                                            (5)
            (v(w) —
                      v)[B                   (_.=v)
                                     —9—

It is depicted as 1M in Figure 2 and has slope



             dw
                        —(v(w) —   v)wf'(L)/f(L)
             dL       [Bp*f(L) —   wjv'(w)   —   [v(w)   —   vJ

This is negative in the neighborhood of the VV curve, because an increase

in wage lowers the utility of the least senior worker (who is most concerned

with employment prospects) and causes the union to contract.

      Equations (4) and (5) together determine the allocation of resources

between the union    and   nonunion sectors, the wage in the union sector, and

the employment (and hence unemployment) there in all states of nature. The

equilibrium shown in Figure 2 is stable under the assumption that the wage

adjusts according to the voting schedule and the union size adjusts according

to the membership schedule, so long as the               curve is steeper than the VV

curve. I assume this to be the case throughout.



III. TBE EFFECTS OF INTERNATIONAL COETITION

      We are now prepared to answer the first question raised in the introduction

namely: what effect does a. permanent increase in international competition

have on the long—run equilibrium in an industry with unionized workers and              a

layoff and rehire rule based solely on seniority? To do so, we perturb
the equilibrium described in Section II by chaning the international price

of   the   sector's output to a new (and lower) level, p           p + dp*.

       The intensification of international competition affects both the voting
and   membership schedules. The     fall in p*, ceteris paribus decreases the

probability of employment of the original median worker at the intial
equilibrium wage. Therefore, at thenew price, the original median worker
prefers a lower wage, to partially      offset this worsening of his       employment
                                        — 10 —




                                                   0*
                                                   10




                                                                  w


 Figure 3: International Competition Lowers the Most—Preferred Wage



prospects (see Figure 3). The upshot is a downward shift of the VV schedule

as shown   in   Figure 4, by an amount



           w                 =         Bp*f(L/2)                  >0
                  VV, dL=O
                                 Bp*f(L/2) + L/2   — 1)   +   w



where a circumflex indicates a proportional derivative. Note that a sufficient

condition for the fall in the most—preferred wage of a given worker to less

than fully compensate for the price decline, is R >               1.   In this   case the

real wage rises and the probability of employment             falls    (as drawn in

Figure 3).

     It; will prove useful below to have the expression for the leftward

shift of the VV curve        (ia.   at constant wage). It is given by
                                          — 11 —




                 VV, dwO
                             -l
                             -
                                 (L/2)

where (i)=—if'(i)If(i), the elasticity of the marginal product of labor

schedule. We can interpret this expression as the amount that the union

would have to shrink such that the smaller union, with a more senior median

worker,.would vote for the same wage at the lower international price as the

larger union did at the initial price. Note that c(E) is the reciprocal of

the elasticity of demand for labor, so that the leftward shift of the VV

curve is just this elasticity evaluated at the point where the median

worker is marginally employed.

       The trend worsening of the industry's condition also causes the union

to   shrink (at a given wage). Given the wage, the decrease in employment

probability of the original least senior worker lowers his expected

utility and causes him to leave the union sector. The result is a leftward

shift of the NM schedule (see Figure 4) given by



           L                      1

                 NM, dw—O

where we recognize that l/(L) is the elasticity of demand for labor at the

point where the least senior worker is just employed. If the demand for labor

is elastic (i.e. the marginal, product schedule is inelastic). Then as the

price falls     the   decline in employment in any given state of nature will be

large,   the   probability   of   employment for   less senior workers will decrease
precipitously, and the NM         curve   will shift   by a large amount.
                                     — 12   —




                       V




                                     \
                                                  V

                                                    L


           Figure 4: Effect of International Competition on
                      Unionized Sector Equilibriun



       Evidently, international competition has two offsetting effects on

the equilibrium wage rate in the unionized sector. On the one hand, a

union of given size will vote for a lower wage because at least some of the

workers will find that the likelihood of their being laid off has increased.

But at the same time, international competition tends ceteris paribus to

cause   the union to         leaving a union of higher (on average) seniority,
                       contract,

which therefore tends to vote for a higher wage. The net effect is ambiguous,
but   has an interesting interpretation.
       It is straightforward to show (by total differentiation of (4) and (5)),
that



                w
           sgn{-}.         sgn {e(L) — c(L/2)}
                                      — 13 —



When    (L) >     c(L/2)    the leftward shift of the VV curve is greater than

the leftward shift of the MM curve, and a lower union—sector wage obtains

in the new equilibrium. In this case the effect of the international

competition on the employment prospect of the median worker exceeds the

effect on tha.t of the least senior worker. It can be shown that R > 1

is sufficient for wages to fail proportionately less than does the inter-

national price, i.e. that the wage adjustment is less than complete. Since

employment and hence output in any state of nature is a decreasing

function of the real wage, this condition guarantees a normal output—price

response.

       When c(L/2)         c(L), as certainly holds, for example, if the labor

demand schedule has constant elasticity, the long—run wage in the unionized

sector is completely inelastic with respect to changes in the price of the

good produced in the sector. In this case all adjustment to international

competition takes place through movements of workers into and out of the

sector. Whereas the short—run wage within a contract period is rigid by

assumption, the constant elasticity of labor demand case gives rise here

to a long run wage in the sector that is endogenously sticky.11

       Finally, if c(L/2) >     e(L) the wage will actually rise when the price
falls, forcing even greater adjustment in the size of the sector. In this

case the decline in each worker's individual inost—perferred wage is more than

offset by the     increase   in the median seniority of the union. A majority of

the   more senior union is sufficiently less concerned with layoffs that a
higher wage demand emerges from the union vote.
       It   is perhaps   useful to relate the conditions on the elasticity of the
marginal    product   of labor schedule to the parameters of the underlying pro-
duction function in the industry. Consider the case where that function has
                                              — 14 —



constant elasticity of substitution, a, between capital and labor. Then
partial wage adjustment occurs for a < 1, wage movement in the opposite

direction from that of prices occurs for a > 1, and endogenous wage stickiness

corresponds to the Cobb—Douglas (a                      1) case.

       The adjustment of union size in response to international competition

is given by the solution, after totally differentiating (4) and                         (5), for
L/p*. As can be seen from the diagram (Fig. 4), an increase in union size is

possible only if the leftward shift of the VV curve is much greater than that

of the MM curve, and if the VV curve is relatively steep. The algebra confirms

this, and shows the (L/2) (L) or R > 1                             is sufficient foi the union

to shrink. Only if          the    elasticity of substition between capital and

labor   is very low and workers are very tolerant of risk can the union
expand when competition intensifies.
       A final variable of interest is the unemployment rate in the industry.
Unemployment occurs because the wage is rigid withinthe contract period,
and ex post mobility is absent. Thus, unemployment is a function most
directly of the      value     taken by the random technology variable. However,
changes in    the   extent of international competition influence the level of
industry unemployment for any               given   realization of the random variable,
via    their affect on      both     the supply of and demand for labor in the            sector.
       Define   the industry unemployment rate in state of nature 8 as

z(8)   = max{O,     [L. —   E(8)]/L}    .   Then for periods in          which   unemployment is

positive we have



             p*
                  dz(8)
                    p*
                              E(6)
                               L
                                                    1
                                              c(E(8))      (-
                                                            *      1)1
                                                                    J
                                                                                             (5)
                                     L*
Consider first the Cobb—Douglas case, for which the elasticity of the marginal
                                          — 15 —




product of labor schedule is constant. Then a fall in the international
price causes the union to contract by (lI)dp*. But since in this case,

as we have seen, the wage rate remains constant, labor demand in every state

of nature also falls by (1/s)dp*. Thus, when the production function is

Cobb—Douglas, international competition has no effect on the rate of industry

unemployment in the unionized sector in any                state   of nature.

     For more general production functions the analysis is rather eomplicated.

After substitution in (5), it can be shown that

                                                 2
                                 w[v(w) - v
     si{   dzO)
               dp*
                     =    sgn
                                    v (w)
                                             o
                                                     (R —   1) (1 — ____
                                                                    (E)

                          + W2[V(W), -      v]     [1 -   ____



                          +    Bp*f(L/2) [Bp*f(L) —         w]wv'(w)   [1 —




If R is large arid (E) is an increasing (decreasing) function (e.g. a < 1
(> 1) in the CES     case)    then the industry unemployment rate is likely to

increase (decrease) when p* falls in all states of nature except those with

nearly fuJi.   employment. Unfortunately, not much more can be said about
unemployment, even in the CES case.

     To stmmirize,   we have seen that       casual arguments to the effect that

union voting behavior gives rise to wage stickiness in the face of inter—

ntational competition may        indeed   contain an element of truth for some

production technologies. In fact, for unionized sectors with elasticities

of substitution between labor and other fixed factors greater than one, the

direction of    union   wage movement can     be     opposite to that of the price of the

sector's output.     In   these cases large adjustments in sectoral allocation
                                    — 16 —




of   labor are necessitated, with the attendant political problems. For

almost all reasonable parameter values international competition does

cause the union sector to contract, a plausible conclusion regarding

resource reallocation. Finally, a permanent change in international

competition may    increase,   decrease or leave unchanged the average long—

run rate of industry unemployment.



IV. DOES THE SENIORITY RULE CONTRIBUTE TO WAGE STICKINESS?

      Can the blame for wage sluggishness in unionized sectors following a

fall in the internationaj. price be attributed to the seniority system?

In order to answer this question we must investigate the behavior of a

unionized sector which is in every way identical to that studied in the

preceding sections, expect as regards the extent to whidh seniority rules

layoff decisions.

      Suppose workers are indexed by i representing seniority, as before, but

let i€[6, L —     5],   so that the most senior worker has index S.   Assume   that
there are LIL —   2 workers with each seniority index,and therefore a total
union membership of L.

      Now let the order of layoffa and rehires be indexed by j, with the

job quene running from j=O to jL. We assumed in the previous sections

that the seniority ordering was identical to the job queue, but here we.

wish to modify this assumption to allow for the possibility that other

criteria enter employnt decisions. Suppose that a worker with seniority

index i has a job queue index somewhere between j         i —   and j =   i+   S,

and that every, union member has a uniform subjective prior over this range

defined in part by his seniority ranking. Then the larger is ô the smeller

is the role of seniority in the determination of the employment ordering.12
                                             — 17 —




I   take 6 as a measure of the (decreasing) extent of seniority rule.

      The voting and membership schedules are analogous to those above. A

union member with seniority index i has a subjective probability of

employnt, given the wage, of


                      i-kS
                             1
               =J                 [B - _______ )dj                                     (6)
                                         p*f(j)

The voting schedule is derived by maximizing the expected utility of the

median worker, who still has index i =                L/2,   with respect to the choice

of wage. The membership schedule equates the expected utility of the

least senior worker, who has index i =                L   — 5, to the utility of employment

in the nonunion sector. The equations for the vv and 1M curves, analagous

to (4) and    (5) above, are


                  [B -       w/p*f (j)                                  6p*f(j)
                                                                                  dj   (7)
                                                                    6
                                                                2

and

               1L {B -       w/p*f(j)}        dj][v(w) -     vi = - v                  (8)

              L—2 6

      We   are now in a position to pose formally the question raised at the

outset of this section. The responsiveness of wages to price changes is

given   by dw/dp*. If the seniority system contributes to the failure of
wages to adjust to international              competition     then we should find

d2w/dp*dd > 0. Alternatively, if this cross second derivative is negative,

then we must    conclude         that the seniority system actually contributes to

wage adjustment.
                                       18 —



       It   is tedious but straightforward to show that13


                    2
                   dw             dw
              sgn{} =

In   words, the seniority system (or more precisely, a marginal increase

in reliance on seniorityforlayoff decisions) contributes to wage

sluggishness in the face of increased international competition if and only

if for a given international price the seniority system also causes a

higher sectoral wage to obtain than would otherwise. This latter issue was

investigated in Grossman (1982), so the results and intuition for that

analysis will only be reviewed briefly here.

       An increase in the importance of seniority unambiguously shifts the

MM curve to the left. At a given wage the least senior worker, who

obviously can be no worse than last on the job queue, must have a greater

probability of employment and therefore greater utility the more considera-

tions other than seniority enter into employment decisions. A decrease

in     lowers the expected utility of a given least senior worker, and

ceteris paribus causes the union to contract.

       Thus, a sufficient though by no means necessary condition for the

seniority system to raise the wage is for it to effect an upward shift

in the VV curve. The voting, schedule shifts up if the initial median worker

experiences an increased probability of employment at a given wage when

     decreases. This in     turn requires that the probability of employment be a

concave     function   of place in the job queue.

       The reason as an foilows. From the perspective of the median worker,

the mean of his subjective probability distribution over his possible

locations in the job queue is L/2. This is true irrespective of the
                                        —19—


degree of reliance on seniority, and thus is perserved by charges in 5.

A decrease in (5 represents to the median worker a mean—preserving contraction

in the subjective distribution he holds over his job queue index. His

subjective probability of employment is thus raised by an decrease in (5

if and only if probability of employment is a convex function of level of

employment. Finally, if employment prospects are improved ceteris paribus,

then an upward adjustment in his most—preferred wage results.

    The probability of employment function is given by             B —   w!p*f(j).
This is a linear and decreasing function of 1/f(j). Therefore, the probability

of employment function is convex if and only if the reciprocal of the marginal

product of labor function is concave. For the CES production function this

condition is easily interpretable. If a is the elasticity of output with

respect to labor, then a necessary and sufficient condition for l/f(j) con-

cave is a < 11(1 + a). For small elasticities of substitution between
labor and the fixed factor the VV curve does shift upward in response to a
decrease in 5,   and   the seniority system does increase the union wage.
    For   the CES case a bit more can be established. It can be shown that

for 1/(1 + a) < a <    1,   although the VV curve shifts downward as (5 decreases,

the net result of the shifts in both curves is nonetheless an increase .in

the equilibrium wage. We can conclude in such cases that the seniority system

does contribute to. wage sluggishness. Recall that when a <       1 the wage falls

to partially offset the fail is p*. It is thus established that the

responsiveness of the       equilibrii. wage is greater the smeller is the role
played by the seniority       system.   Note that this result includes the Cobb—
Douglas   case, for which the wage response under complete seniority rule is

zero.
                                   — 20 —



     For more general production functions the seniority system need

not be the correct explanation for the failure of union sector wages to

respond to international competition. Indeed, under conditions such that

the probability of employment of the median worker would increase signifi—

cantly were the seniority system to be abandoned, wage adjustment in the

direction of sectoral price changes is greater under the seniority system

than it would be otherwise.



V. CONCLUSIONS

     In this paper I have investigated the casual argument that majority

voting in unions and the seniority system together provide an explanation

for the failure of union wages to adjust in response to intensification

of international competition. In the context of a formal model of a small

union sector embedded in a two—sector economy I have shown that the

elasticity of the union sector wage with respect to changes in the inter-

national price of the sector's output depends critically on the production

technology   in that sector. In   the Cobb—Douglas case   the long—run
equilibrium wage in the union sector is "endogenously sticky." A perhaps
surprising result   is that when the   elasticity of the marginal product of
labor schedule is   a decreasing function of the level of employment a

decline in the international price of the union—sector good causes the

wage rate in that sector to rise.

    The model was modified to allow the job queue to deviate from a

strict seniority ranking. By doing so I was able to isolate the role

played by the seniority system in the determination of the wage adjustment.

Sufficient conditions were derived under which greater reliance on the

seniority criterion for layoffs implies less wage responsiveness.
                                 — 21 —



     Welfare statements do not follow immediately from the analysis.
Here I have been concerned solely with positive questions of the effect

of international competition on union wages, union size and sectoral

unemployment. But the potential scope for trade policy is evident, if the

market distortions described here accurately reflect aspects of the real

world. n advantage that the present formulation offers for studying trade

policy is its ability to incorporate the effects of anticipated government

intervention on the wage demands set by unions. The normative questions

are left for future rasearsch.
                              FOOTNOTES



1.   See, for example, Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1974), Srinivasan and
     Bhagwati (1975), Corden and Findlay (1975) and Khan (1980).

2.   An exception is Calvo (1978). However, Calvo does not attempt to
     explain industry wage stickiness, focusing instead on general
     equilibrium resource allocation issues under the assumption that
     unions seek to maximize the urban—rural wage differential.
3.   The prototypical example of this occurence might be the United Auto
     Workers settlement of 1979 when, amidst increased competition from
     Japanese cars, the union negotiated a. wage pact calling for an
     approximately 35% expected nominal wage increase which translated
     to a small expected increase in real wages. At the time, the
     industry unemployement:rate was in excess of fifteen percent.

4.   It would be possible to model the bargaining process, as for example
     do McDonald and Solow (1981), but that would add further complication,
     and does not seem essential to the issues addressed hare.

5.   See Hall and Lillian (1979) for an analysis of efficient bargains and
     a discussion of conditions under which unilateral employment determina-
     tion is likely to arise.
6.   While this mobility assumption is somewhat extreme, it is quite
     coon in the contract theory literature. See, for example, Azariadis
     (1975) and Grossman and Hart (1981). It would be possible to relax
     this assumption in a multi—period formulation, with only minor changes in
     the results, if workers who leave the union to accept nonunion employment
     lose their position in the seniority queue. The some workers who
     are laid off will remain unemployed rather than leave the union sector
     in order to protect their future rents to seniority.

7.   In Grossman (1982) I investigate the conditions under which industry
     unemployment is greater when a seniority system is operative relative
     to that which results with a similar set of assumptions about union
     behavior, but with the addition of other criteria for layoff decisions.
     This is further discussed in Section IV below.

8.   This assumption is consistent with the observation that wage gradients
     in union sectors (and sectors with collective bargaining generally)
     are flatter than those in nonunion sectors. See Blàch and Kuskin
     (1978) and Freeman (1978).

9.   See Blair and Crawford (1981) for more discussion of the existence of
     a unique equilibrium in the context of the union voting problem.

10. Note that (5) does not imply the absence of a utility premium for
     workers in a monopoly—union sector. Ex ante all workers except the
     least senior have higher expected utility than that available in
     the nonunion sector. And once the state of nature is realized,every
     employed worker has higher utility than that available outside the
     sector. Thus,the free entry assumption is not inconsistent with the
     observation, by for example Abowd and Farber (1979), that union workers
     earn a premium, or that there is often a queue for union jobs.
11. This result would need to be modified if the unionized sector
     were "large," so that the allocation of workers into or out of this
     sector would affect labor's marginal product in the rest of the economy.

12. When =    0 the model of this section is exactly as in previous
     sections. The maximum allowable value for d is L/2, in which case
     all workers are identical, and each acts as if layoffs will be made
     by random draw. This is effectively the model of union behavior
     of McDonald and Solow (1981), Oswald (1981) and others.
                                                           -

13. Details are available from the author upon request.
                              REFERENCES



Abowd, J.M. and Farber, H.S. (1979) "Job Queues and the Union Status
   of Workers," unpublished manuscript.

Atherton, W.N. (1973) Theory of Union Bargaining Goals, Princeton
   N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Azariadis, C. (1975) "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria,"
   Journal of Political Economy 83(6), pp.1183—i202.

Bhagwati, J.N. and Srinivasan, T.N. (1974) "On Reanalyzing the Harris—
   Todaro Model: Policy Rankings in the Case of Sector Specific Sticky
   Wages," American Economic Review 64(4), pp. 502—508.

Blair, D.H. and Crawford, D.L. (1981) "Labor Union Objectives and Collective
   Bargaining," CARESS Working Paper No. 80—24, University of Pennsylvania.

Bloch, F.E. and Kuskin, M.S. (1978) "Wage Determination in the Union and
   Nonunion Sectors," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 31(1), pp. 183—192.

Calvo, G.A. (1978) "Urban Unemployment and Wage Determination in LDC's:
   Trade Unions in the Harris—Todaro Model," International Economic Review
   19(1), pp. 65—81.

Corden, W.M. and Findlay, R. (1975) "Urban Unemployment, Intersectoral, Capital
   Mobility and Development Policy," Economica 62(1), pp.59—78.

Farber, H.S. (1978) "Individual Preferences and Union Wage DetertninatiOfl
   The Case of the United Nine Workers," Journal of Political Economy
   86(5), pp. 923—942.

Freeman, R.B. (1978) "TJnionism and the Dispersion of Wages," Discussion
   Paper No. 629, Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Harvard University.

Grossman, G.M. (1982) "Union Wages, Seniority and Unemployment," Discussion
   Papers in Economics No. 21, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University.

Grossman, S.J. and Hart, O.D. (1981) "Implicit Contracts Under Asymmetric
   Information," Economic Theory Discussion Paper No. 48, University of
   Cambridge.

Hall, R.E. and Lillian, D.M. (1979) "Efficient.Wage' Bargains Under Uncertain
   Supply and Demand," 69(5), pp. 868—879.

Harris, J.R. and Todaro, M. (1970) "Migration, Unemployment and Develop-
   ment: A Two Sector Analysis," American Economic Review 60(1),
   pp. 126—142.

Than, M.A. (1980) "The Harris—TodarO Hypothesis and the Hackscher—Ohlin
   Samuelson Trade Model: A Synthesis," Journal of International Economics
   10(4), pp. 527—548.
McDonald, L.M. and Solow, R.M. (1981) "Wage Bargaining and Employment,"
   American Economic Review 71(5), pp. 869—908.

Oswald, A.J. (1981) "The Microeconomic Theory of the Trade Union,"
   Economic Journal, forthcoming.

Srinivasan, T.N. and Bhagwati, J.N. (1975) "Alternative Policy Rankings
   in a Large Open Economy with Sector—Specific Minimum Wages,"
   Journal of Economic Theory 11 (3), pp. 356—371.
