                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               PRIVATE PENSIONS AND PUBLIC PENSIONS:
                          THEORY AND FACT




                          Alan S. Blinder




                       Working Paper No. 22



                NATIONAL BUREAU 0? ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge MA 02138
                             June 1982


This paper originated as the W.S. Woytineky Lecture given in
Washington, D.C., on Decenfber 28, 1981. r work   on this subject
has been done in collaboration with Roger Gordon and Donald Wise.
The usual acknowledgment of intellectual indebtedness would be
trite here. It is more accurate to say      that I
                                                can no longer
remember which ideas originated with me and which with them. Mark
Twain said that only kings and people with tapeworina should use the
"royal we.'    I am neither. When I use   the   pronoun "we," it refers
to our joint research. But Gordon and Wise should not be impli-
cated in the uses to which I have put our findings. I am also
grateful for useful conurents from Gary Burtless, Glenn Loury, James
Morgan, June O'Neill, Joseph Stiglitz, and Larry Thompson.
Finally,   I am indebted to the Department of Labor and the National
Ucience Foundation, which have supported our research. The
research reported here La part of the NER's research program       in
Pensions. My opinions expressed are those of the author and        not
those of the National Bureau of Roonomic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #902
                                              June 1982




               Private Pensions and Public Pensions:
                        Theory and Fact



                           ABSTRACT


   An economic theory of public and private pensions is
developed, and the implications of the theory are compared

with some empirical evidence, of both the econometric and

casual varieties. Among the questions addressed are: why

are there private pensions? why have they grown so rapidly
in recent decades? why do they have the particular features

that they do? why does the government intervene by regulating

the provisions of private pensions and mandating a public
pension system? what are the effects of private and public
pensions on savings and retirement decisions?




                                Alan S. Blinder
                                Department of Economics
                                Princeton University
                                Princeton, NJ O85L
                                 (609) Lf52....14010
                                                          1.




1. Introduction
       The extraordinary growth of both private and public
pensions is one of the   outstanding   developments of the postwar
American economy. As late as 1950, only 59% of the labor force
was covered by social security; by 1975, 8% were covered.
Social security benefit payments were only $3 billion un 1980
dollars) in 1950; by 1980, they were up to $119       billion.

       Private pension growth has also been          explosive:
coverage doubled from 1950 to 1975.1 Contributions to private

pension plans increased from $2 billion (or $5 billion in 1975
prices) to $32 billion over this same period, and the fraction
                                                  by               2
of payroll expenses accounted for by pensions rose/about one half.
All this amounts to a major structural change in the nature of

employee compensation.
       Recently, there has been a great outpouring of public
policy interest in our nation's pension system. Social security
has been examined and reexamined repeatedly over the past decade.
Some sort of major overhaul is all but inevitable because the
    probably
system/is not financially viable as presently constituted, and
several suggestions for sweeping reform have been made. Recent years
have also witnessed important public policy interventions into


       1
       The percentage of tfle labor force covered by a private
pension plan rose from 16% to 33%. The percentage of private
wage and salary workers covered rose from 2% to O%.        See
}otiikoft and Smith (forthcoming).
       4Snecifically, it   was   3.l in 1951 ar: 5.5% i: 1975.
icc (ot1ikoff and Smith (forthcoming).
                                                             2.


the private pension system. The Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 19714 (ERISA) imposed a web of regulations on

private pensions. The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1977
raised the minimum age for mandatory retirement. Both of these
acts represent' substantial efforts by government to alter the
equilibrium that arises from a free market in pensions.
       Several sets of questions are raised by these
questions that provide the outline for this paper.
       (1) Why are there   private   pensions? Why have they
grown so much in recent decades? And why do the have the
features that they do? (Section 3)
       (2) What are the economic effects of pensions? On
the surface, this would seem to be a well-formulated question

for a publicly-imposed pension plan, but a nonsensical question
for pension arrangements that arise voluntarily through markets.
However, I will argue that the differences between private and
public pensions in this respect are not nearly as sharp as

simpleminded economic theory might suggest. (Section '4)
       (3)   Why intervene in the Dension system? Why should

wehave a publicly-imposed pension system (social security)
instead of relying on the free market? And why should we pass
laws to regulate and change the face of the private pension
system? (Section 5)
      This   is a long list of justions. While I will try to
provide tentative ansars to all of them, readers should interpret
these answers as working hypotheses whcii,    iven   wht we now
                                                               3.

know, seem plausible. Each and every answer offered here should he sub
jected to further theoretical scrutiny and subsequent empirical
verification or falsification.


2. What is a Pension?
       Before we   plunge   into the preceding list of questions,

it is useful to think at a fairly fundamental level about precisely
what a pension is. I find it useful to think of a pension plan
as a bank account with a number of peculiar features. For

example:
       1. The worker normally cannot withdraw money from his
account until lie reaches a certain age.
        2. The worker must leave his firm in order to start

making withdrawals.
        3. The amount of money that can be withdrawn may deuend

 not only on how much has been "deposited," but also on the
 life—cycle time patterns of both wages and hours of work.
 That is, most workers have defined benefit, not defined contribution,
                1
 pension plans.



        11n a defined benefit plan, benefits are related to
 earnings in some particular years (example: benefits might be
 a fraction of earnings during the last five years of employment).
 In a defined contribution plan (like TIAA-CREF), some portion
 of wages is invested in a fund, and benefits depend on the
 earningsof the fund's investments. In 1977, almost three-quarters
 of worker covered by private pensions were in defined benefit
 plans even though the inalority of plans were derined contribution
 d
 plans. (The defined benefit plans are, cn average, much larger.)
       Kotlikoff and Smith (forthcoming).
                                                               LI..




        Li.
                Only a small fraction (often zero) of the accumulated
balance in the account can be taken as a lumpsum payment upon

retirement. For the most part, withdrawals must take the form
of annuity payments. Thus use of this bank account is tied
to the purchase of insurance against longevity.
       5. A worker who leaves his firm too soon (before the
pension is "vested") may lose the entire balance in his account.
       6. Pensions are very often not "portable" from one
employer to another.

       7. Individual workers typically have no discretion over
how much is deposited into their pension account.

       While not every private pension plan has each of these
features, they are quite typical. These aspects of pensions,
all of which need explaining, have several fairly obvious
implications.

       First, items 1, 2, and 14 imply that saving in the pension
fund is almost uniquely suited to retirement purposes. Pension

wealth normally cannot be used for bequests (except for inter-
spousal transfers), does not provide a precautionary balance

that can be used •for a "rainy day' and probably does not confer
what might be called "King Midas henefits"--the power and

psychological satisfaction that some people derive from
accumulation of wealth. For these reasons and others, it is
unlikely that private pension wealth is a perfect substitute
for           furigible   wealth.
                                                               5.




         Second, items 5 and 6 imply that pensions create a cost

of changing jobs that would not exist         in their absence.

They thereby reduce labor mobility, arid probably not by accident.
        Third, items 2 and 3 strongly suggest that a pension

plan might distort the life-cycle pattern of labor supply,
including the decision to retire.

         Each of these suggestions will be considered at length
in Sections 3 and .        But, first, I conclude this section by
comparing our public pension system-—social security-—with the
list of stylized facts about private pensions.
         1. Social security benefits also cannot be drawn before
a certain age (either 62 or 65).
         2. A worker does not have to leave his firm to collect
benefits, but most workers will have to reduce their hours of
work sharply in order to collect.
         3. Social security is a defined benefit plan, similar

to many private pensions.
         tt.   Social   security retirement benefits are paid strictly
as annuities, though these are ourrently indexed annuities.
         5. Social security benefits are vested after a minimum
period in covered employment (now 10 years).
        6. Social security pensions are completely portable
within the covered sector (which by now encompasses the vast
majority of the private sector).

        7. Workers have absolutely no discretion over the level
of   contrIbutions" to social security.
      1ithout trying to addresG the chickeri—eg problem uivLil late, I
suggest that the main fact that emerges from this comparison is
ih Jrni1rity botween social security and pfivate pensions,
                                                                6.



 not the difference.



 3. The Economic Theory of Pensions

       Why are there private pensions, and why do they have the
features that they have?
       3.1    A   Modigliani-Niller Theorem for Pensions
       It is easy enough to see that in the frictionless and
rather barren world of standard neoclassical economic theory,

pensions uould simply be irrelevant. That is, np worker would
care how much (if any) of his earnings were deposited into the

pension fund; for every dollar accumulated in the pension fund,
the worker   would simply reduce his private wealth holdings by
$1; lifetime work patterns, and in particular the retirement

decision? would be unaffected by pensions.
       The "proof" of what might be called the neutrality of
pensions follows rather simply from five assumptions.
       Al: There is no uncertainty of any kind.
       A2: There are no taxes, no governmentally_imposed pension
system, and no laws regulating private pensions.
       A3: Capital markets are perfecc.
       ALT: Every worker is paid, in the form of explicit wages
(w) plus contributions to his pension fund (p), an amount
precisely equal •to the value of his marginal product. (Implicit
in this statement are the notions that pensions are defined
entrbiition   nlann   and tha.t the   ahor   market i a snot market.)
                                                            9.




       3.2 Reasons for the Nonexistence of Pensions
       Now I begin to add some realistic ingredients, and stir
the soup. The aspects of realism added in this section strongly
suggest not only that pensions are not    neutral,   but that pensions
should not exist! This may seem strange, since we know that
private pensions do exist. But it is worth recalling that,

for all practical purposes, private pensions were of minor importance in
the days before social securityJ A good theory should explain
not only why pensions now exist (and have grown rapidly), but
also why there were so few before World War II.


Imperfect_Capital_Markets
       Under the assumptions of the irrelevance proposition,
workers and firms are both indifferent among all combinations of
                               constant.
w÷ and Pt that keep w +          I Graphically, firms and
workers both have "indifference curves" that look like the straight
line AB in Figure 1. There are many real-world complications
that interfere with this simple picture. 'The first one I will
consider is an imperfect capital market.

       One type of imperfection is that the interest rate earned

on lcding may   be less   than that paid on borrowing. Another -type
       a
is that/person whose assets are below some lower limit (possibly
zero) may be denied credit. The basic point is that



        'For example, in 1939 there were only 659 qualified
 -:ivet. I::os:cn plans. Cr compareseri. in 1280 there were 6l6,6'42
soF ler e! See YljkrjFf aJ nith (forLLemieg) o'aver,             it
        iieiy that 'there were more ueneian plans i ri 1929 than in 1939.
The Great Depression bankrupted man-j llans. On      this, seeMunneil
Thor'hconirg, Ch. 2).
        9a.




B

    L
                                                                    10.



when capital markets are imperfect, pensions are no longer a
perfect substitute for private financial assets.
         To see why, consider the case of a worker who has Pt
deposited into his pension fund and seeks to borrow against it.
If he must pay an interest rate r' , which is higher than the
rate at which the pension fund is accumulating Cr), he will owe
     +   rI)R_±   when the loan comes due, hut will receive only
     +   r)R_t    from the pension fund. He therefore cannot borrow
enough to duplicate the consumption pattern of a worker who has
no pension .         In   more extreme cases, he may not be able to
borrow at all. Such a worker will not want a pension.

         So capital market imperfections can destroy the neutrality
of pensions. But this need not happen. First, capital market
constraints may not be binding. If the forced pension savings
are always less than what the worker would have saved on his
own anyway, then the pension remains irrelevant. Curve ACD
in Figure 1 is the indifference curve for a worker subject to
borrowing constraints. To the left of C, the constraints are
not binding. But as the pension grows bigger it creates more
and more burdensome constraints on his consumption, and so
becomes progressively less valuable. So tTS.iall.     pensions      remoin
                                                            -
neutral, but "big" ones are not.

         Second, however, and more fundamentally, the
size of the pension plan is a choice variable negotiatcd between
the worker and the firm. One would expect wcrkers to shun
rfl:1 on Hans that push them hn7ond          nt C.   Th   rd ,   we must

nalance those imperfections against the economics in transactions
                                                           ii.


costs and diversification that a pension fund can achieve for
a worker—investor, and the fact that pension funds can purchase
annuities on better terms than individuals can. These too are

capital market imperfections, but they enhance, rather than
detract from, the attractiveness of pensions. On balance, then,

capital market imperfections moy not be terribly important for
some workers.


Uncertainty
       The reader may have noticed that nothing in my specification
of a frictionlss world required that pensions he vested,
portable, or funded; these characteristics are irrelevant under

certainty. But vesting, funding, and mortality risk become
quite important once uncertainty is introduced. To keep things
simple at first, I ignore capital market imperfections and assume

risk neutrality. Pension assets present three types of risk: the
risk of death before benefits are received; the risk of bankruptcy

before benefits are vested and funded;. and the risk of quitting or
being fired before benefits are vested. Because of these risks,
the expected value to the worker of a l contribution to his
pension fund is only some number A    1

    If workers and firms have the same expectations, this is also

the firm's expected cost of a $1 pension contribution and uncertainty
does not interfere with the neutrality proposition. The worker's
                                                                   12.
indifference        curves and the firm's isocost curves would both be

as shown by AE in Figure 2 instead of AB: pensions would be
less valuable than straight wages to workers, but also less costly

to firms.

           But an    important      asymmetry enters if workers are risk
averse while firms are risk neutral.1 Then firms continue to
view X as the cost of a $1 pension contribution, but workers
view the value as:

                     x
                         w E OX
where 0 < 1                       is a risk discount factor that probably
gets deeper as the size of the pension grows.2 If so, worker
indifference curves will be convex, as in Figure 2; the contract
curve will correspond to the vertical axis; and             the "optimal

pension" will be zero.3

           An empirical point relevant to interpreting the time series
data     arises here. One of the outstanding facts of macroeconomic
his-tory is -that the business cycle has been far tamer in the
postwar        period than in the prewar period. The risk of bankruptcy
must therefore have been lower in the postwar period. It would


        1This is just a strong form of the eminently reasonable
proposition that workers are more risk averse than firms.
        2e will depend, among other things, on the covariance between
 the r1urri on the pension contribution and the returns on other
 risky assets held by the worker (including his human capital). If
 this covaniance is negative enough (for example, if the major risk
 is that his wage in alternative employment might rise, inducing
 him to leave the firm before vesting), then 0 could exceed
 unity.   I assume that this is riot the case in Figure 2, but the
 argument that follows does not rest on this assumption.
        3Nte thai: the source of the nonexistence of nensios
         not urlcerLainty, but an asymmetry arising from risk
            fsynmer'y COUJ d arise for other reasons as well.
            nrTnc:fie:c
               c ci CL eld be nore ctir:yLiC dhut cbs firm's
                                    di     in   iL          tu nic Ce Ch
          e           it raj
                                                  n'r
                                      ,



         Tfl
                    ,

               w1.l sUr7.ve.
                                   do ts plnrr on th      a upticn that
                                                      Th'-
           ze-l uroblems in L-trc-t the : rm can influence the probability
u
oF JtL        survival and 1)otn parties can influence the probability
         b separation prior to vesting.
                      12a.




               J•(1




    t -----N
0
                                                                   13.




not surprise me if perceived bankruptcy risk had fallen
steadily over the period, say, from 1950 to 19714.           If so, then e

was probably rising.          If these surmises are
correct, then the principle reason for not having a pension
plan was growing weaker over time. This may be one factoi

contributing to the postwar growth of pensions.
           3.3 Reasons for the Existence of Pensions
           But surely we can do better than this, and isolate some
affirmative reasons why workers and firms would want pensions.
I start     with   the workers, and with some obvious tax incentives

favoring     pensions.

Tax Advantages
        First, and most important,by placing a portion Pt of
total compensation into a pension fund, the worker can defer
taxes.      Especially, for   workers car
from retirement, this deferral can amount to an enormous saving
because assets             in a pension fund accumulate at the tax-free
rate of interest, r, while savings in standard financial assets
accumulate, at the after-tax rate of interest, r(l-T). (Here t
is   The   income tax rate prior to retirement.) Specifically, $1
of earnings that is taxed, and then placed in a bank account,
grows to (l-T)[l ÷ r(1_T)]t at retirement. But l that
is placed in a pension fund and       taxed   (at rate T')        when
                                                                    14.



it is withdrawn grows to (1-T1)(1 +        r)R_t
   Second, when the tax is finally paid at retirement, no payroll
tax is due and most workers will be in lower tax brackets than

they were during their major earnings years. So i' < -r for most,
workers and some of the tax is not merely deferred, but actually
rescinded.

   Table 1 indicates the tax savings from a pension fund
for various values of r,       -r
                                    ,


and R-t under the assumption that Tt =          T   —    .10.   The tax

advantage of pensions is often quite impressive.
          Putting this factor into the context of the previous
discussion, the worker's marginal valuation of a $i pension
contribution rises to:
                      kOX
where some sample values of k ,         the tax factor, are given in
                                     than unity,
Table 1.     Since k can be much greater /       can now be
larger than 1.0 for workers who are young or in high tax brackets;
and it is certainly quite possible that                 > X. A demand
for pensions will arise whenever kO > 1 , which will happen
when workers are highly taxed and not too risk averse.1

          Figure 3   shows how an optimal pension can he determined
in this case. The worker's indifference curves, which looked
like AD before the tax distortion entered, now look like AF
instead. The outimal division of total compensation between
    and         will now  be defined by a tangency between an
indifference    curve like AF and an isocost line like AE.


        1The average age of ernrloyees has an ambiguous effect.
On the one hand, young workers have higher' k, ceteris paribus.
But on the other' hariu they will be farther from the vesting
and retirement ages and hence will have lower 0.
                                                    Table 1
           Accumulated Vaiue at Retirement of                  $1   Savcd in a Pension   und
                      Relative to that of $1 Saved Outside a Pension Fund
                                                               —
              1                                                                                          I
     T;r                                r=4%
                      —__________ __________—_____————
                                                                                  r8%
                                                                                    —._____________
                                                                                                    r12%
   iatc
                                                                                                             =             T   .20
Ycsto                    =    .20               r    =   .40            r   .20            r   =   .40           .20


    10                 1.22                     1.36                     1.31              1.58


   20                  1.32                     1.59                     1.52              2.12
                                                                                                                       1



    30                 i.2                      1.86                     1.76              2.87

    40                 1.53                     2.17                     2.05              3.89

  ___— _______ _______ _______ ______-                                                                                           J
                      1—T+0.1           r   1 + r          R—t
Computed as       C                 I               —
                        1—T             L (1+
                                                                                                                                 H
                      is a.




              c'" A

          3




      I




\Je
                                                                16.




Figure        shows what the resulting "contract curve" might look
like. It no longer lies along the vertical axis.
       Once again, some pertinent empirical observations can be
          for very high income
made. Except I workers, the tax distortions favoring pensions
over straight wages were negligible prior to World War II simply
because the income tax was negligible. This is a major d*fference

between the prewar and postwar periods which helps explain why
pensions were absent before World War II and blossomed thereafter.'
                         income and payroll
In addition, typical marginal/tax rates on earnings have
increased over the postwar period, thus exacerbating the tax
advantage. More importantly, nominal interest rates have
increased phenomenally. You can see in Table 1 that tLe tax
advantage of pensions is greater at higher nominal interest
rates. Finally, it is fascinating to observe that the growth
in private pensions seems to have slowed during the second half
of the 1970s--just about the time that Individual Retirement
Accounts (IRA's) enabled workers to avail themselves of the
same tax benefits without formal pensions.2

Pensions and Labor     Turnover
         The tax structure can explain why   workers   might demand
nension      plans. There are also, however, motives for   firms to

    In  addition, i92 amendments to the Internal Revenue Code
clarified the conditions under which pension contributions were
tax deductible business exponsos to firms desnite rot bing taxed
a pe:o al Tine rrs            to d SOUl t m     r    at hLOh nsv
nonsiori plans weie beis E:dL1I.                  ll (                P.

         2
         I would not want to push this point too had, though.
EP\ISA, with its higher fiduciary standards arid burdensome
administrative reqmirernents. came in about the same time.. Growth
of real wages also ended at about Lhis Lime. /e have more
 oianac1ons than we know what to do with.
                                                          17.



supply pension plans, that is, factors which effectively reduce
the marginal cost of pension contributions below X
       The basic premise is tha.t firms have strong incentives

to discourage labor turnover, especially among experienced
workers. There are many justifications for this premise. For

example:
       1. Transactions costs in recruitment and hiring make
it desirable to have low quit rates.
       2. Firms may have difficulty in estimating the ability
of workers outside the firm. Since employers have greater
knowledge about their own workers than about prospective workers,
there is a cost saving in keeping workers attached to the firm.'
       3. Some jobs involve fiduciary or other types of
responsibility. One way to increase the incentives for a worker
                     to
to be horet (arid not/shirk) is to set aside part of his wages
in a pension, to be paid only if the worker stays on the job

long enough.2
       J.   Firms may invest in workers, teaching them skills
that are specific to the firm. Workers must then be induced
to remain with the firm long enough for the firm to recoup its
investment costs.



       'On this, see Stiglitz (1975) and Lazear (1979).

       20n this, see Becker and Stigler (l97).
                                                 18.



Each of these phenomena leads to essentially the same conclusion:

every worker represents a piece of (human) capital owned by the
firm; if he quits, he destroys some of the firm's capital)
Firms will therefore have an incentive to draw up a compensation

scheme that reduces mobility; and pensions are a convenient way

of doing this.

     For the sake of concreteness, I will adopt the fourth

item on the preceding list, and assume that firms want to reduce

labor mobility because experienced workers have specific human

capital that is valuable within the firm but not outside it.

As has been well—known since Becker (1964), the worker cannot be
expected to bear the costs of these investments in human capital.

Instead, the firm must bear the costs by paying the worker a total

compensation W that exceeds his marginal product MPt at
young ages. This is shown in Figure 5, where the W profile
is above the MPt profile from age 0 to age
     In order to recoup these costs, the firm must assure

itself that it will have the services of the worker for a good
number of years. Since long—term labor contracts are unenforce-
able (and sometimes illegal), the firm must provide a financial

incentive to persuade the worker to remain on the job. One
way to "buy" the desired insurance from the worker is to pay


        1
         Much the same can be said the other way around. Because
of transactions costs, search costs, etc., a firm imposes a
capital levy on a worker if it fires him.
                                                           iBa.




                                        Comp.i1sory   rezirrnen
                                           =   total cornpensaton
                                               = w
                                                       Pt

                                        vIP on   this job


                    Pension can
 Pension is         be vested in
'nor.—vested        this r?.nge
 here


                                                       t     age
to             ti                  tz




                           Figure 5
                                                                         19.


part       of the worker's total compensation,           into   a pension
fund which remains non-vested at least until the firm has

recouncd its investment costs, that is, until the               age    t1
at    which :1
                     1
                                      rt dt   0
                      f    (Wt_NP)e
                      0


             At this point the firm could vest the pension, and start

to pay the worker his marginal product (that is, follow profile

       up to point A, and then jump to profile MPt), effectively
converting the labor contract into a spot market for labor.
But there are strong incentives on both sides not to do th3s.
Since the trained worker is worth more inside the firm than
outside it, there is a rent that can be gained (and shared)

by keeping the        worker in the firm. The      firm still wants to buy

    insurance    against   quits to protect its capital. The worker may
also want to buy insurance against being fired, because his
marginal product outside the firm is probably far lower than
his marginal product within the firm.
•
             The gap between the workers marginal product within the
    firm                    and his marginal product elsewhere

    opens        up the possibility for the fsllowing sort of bargain.
The worker essentially "posts a bond" that he will not quit by

accepting a total compensation rate,                =     +      ,    which   is

    less than MP in return for a promise that the firm will pay

                         hc
                   UI) u cil
                                 ennorid          rct r;in b
                                      zo riJ.sn ir'. ex::: ? btwen
    exceeds
    t0  and   t1, so long  as h                         trnt
                                                          atifid On
    smrlemed views f the secfic human cenital rrohlem, any paths
    that satisfy the constraint will do. However Hshimoto (1981)
    .rgues that uncertainty and asymmetric information (the firms knows
    the worker's productivity in the firs, the worker knows his alter-
    native wage) can remove this indeterminacy.
                                                                  20.



him more than MPt later in his career. (Thus, in Figure 5,
compensation is below MPt until age t2 and above MPt
thereafter.) Workers are encouraged to stick to the bargain
because their wage in alternative employment                is even lower
than W .          Firms, once they have received this loan from the
worker,          have a financial incentive to renege on the bargain.
But workers can easily be protected by seniority rules that
prevent the firing of experienced workers except in the dirost
of emergencies. Besides, firms that want to write long-term
labor contracts in the future will not want to acquire a bad

reputation.
          There is one    further    important aspect of this compensation
plan. Under competition, the present discounted value of the
Itoverpa\rments? that the firm makes after age t2 must be
      equal to the present
exactly                              value of the "underpayments" it
makes between t1 and t2 .             That   is, if R is the age at
which   the worker retires:
              R
              r
              .' (t_MPt)e
                            -rt dt     0
            ti
      But a problem arises in enforcing this equality: the
worker may not want to retire at age R . (Recall that he is
being paid more than his marginal product.) If firms allowed
workers to stay on beyond R, they would lose money; so some
mechanism  must be found to mduce retirement at R (or earlier).
The   simplest way to do this is to include a compulsory retirement
                                                               21.



clause in the contract. A slightly more subtle way is to make
receipt of pension benefits contingent on leaving the job, and
not offer actuarial increases in benefits to those who stay

at work beyond age R.

       To summarize this story, I visualize an implicit long-
term labor contract in which the firm agrees to "overpay" the
worker in his early years, "underpay" him during his mo3t
productive years, and then once again "overpay't him in his later

years. The firm keeps the overpaid young workers on the job by
paying part of their wage into a non-vested pension. In
mid—career pensions become vested, but "underpaid" workers stay
with the firm because (a) their specific skills are not
transferable outside the firm, and (b) the firm makes an implicit
promise to overpay them again later. Finally, the firm must
terminate workers at some point so as not to pay lifetime wages
that exceed lifetime marginal product.
       Notice how this rather plausible story violates several
of the stipulations of our Modigliani-ililler theorem. First,
uncertainties about quitting or being fired are central to the

argument. Second,         often diverges from MPt.   Third,   there

is either compulsory retirement or the worker must leave the
job in order to collect   his pension.
        What makes this all work

is the underlying supposition tht a long—term contract such
as depicted in Figure 5 raises labor productivity. In terms

   cu: ca.r'li?r dicuricr. üf ctimal tradeaf bt:een pnsr
contributions and straight wages, we can conceptualize this
                                                                    22.


effect   as a reduction in costs. If, as seems reasonable, there
are diminishing returns, the firm' s isocost curves will now be
concave, as shown by AT in Figure 6. (AE is the old isocost.)
The optimal pension size will now be determined by a tangency
such as ointB, where the slope of AT (henceforth called XF)
is equal to .           Presumably, the optimal pension is bigger
on account of the productivity effect (compare points G and B).
       The model, makes one other interesting prediction about
the nature of pension plans. During the interval between t2
and R in Figure 5, the firm is paying workers more than their
marginal product. It would like them to leave, but cannot fire
them because of seniority rules or for fear of damaging its
reputation. One thing the firm caii do is offer workers an

incentive to retire early by putting an early retirement provision
into the pension plan which reduces benefits by less than the
actuarially fair amount.


Empirical    Ividence
         How does this scenario hold up empirically? Very well;
I think. For one thing, private pension plans generally make
                             —-sometimes as long as 20 years-—
workers stay with the firm for a considerable period/before
vesting their pension rights, or rather did so before ERISA
                                       or 10
established m.a>:imurn vestinp per1o of 5/ years. Thus pensions
traditionally have been used to reduce labor turnover. Further-
more, i investment in specific human capital is the major
motivotori   for reduoir turcvcr (a I have
             22a.




ft



     a   P
                                                             23.



supposed), it is difficult to imagine the investment period

(to in Figure 5) being more than a year or perhaps two.
If this is so, then time t1 in the model should be no more
than 2-'4   years.   Yet it had been common to make workers wait
 10-20 years or more before vesting. Thus the vesting age

exceeds t1 , as suggested by the model.
       Another fundamental precept of the model is that the
wages of experienced workers are far higher in the firm than
on the outside. In a detailed empirical study of the wages of
older men, Cordon and I (1980) found strong evidence in support
of this notion. We had a large longitudinal sample of white men,
which, after some cleaning up of the data, offered almost 16,000
observations on men between the ages of 58 and 67 in the years
1969, 1971, and 1973. Of these, about 10,000 cases were
working men (and hence gave wage information) while 6,000
cases were retirees. We made an econometric correction for the
selectivity bias inherent in the problem,1 which turned out to
be important, and estimated that a worker would suffer a
substantial wage loss if he changed jobs late in life. The
following example is indicative of our results. Consider an
industrialworker with a .5—year work bistorv the last 20 of
hioh have been spent with his current emnloyer. According to

       1Specifioally, workers that randomly draw "goo&  wages
will tend to stay at work longer. Hence, as the sample ades,
wage rates for the working population tend to grow relative
to potential wages among ret 2ees.
                                                                        2L.




our estimates, if he changed jobs today his wage rate would
decline about 2% (assuming neither job had a pension).
Interestingly, if he was covered by a pension plan on his current
job and switched to a job without a pension, the corresponding
loss of wages would be 3%. These are large wage losses which
create strong incentives to stay with the current employer.
         Another crucial part of our story is the hypothesis that

wages exceed marginal products late in life--and probably by
increasing amounts in older ages. Here, our empirical efforts
were less supportive. While our estimates ratified the basic
qualitatmve conclusion, we obtained a rather small quanttive

effect. Specifically, we guessed that, in jobs with mandatory
retirement, the second cro3s±ng point in Figure 5 (age t2)
came 10 years prior         to the mandatory   retirement age (age R)——an
arbitrary choice needed to define an empirical variable. We
then presumed (a) that the variables in our equation (experience,

education, occupation, etc.) measured MPt, (b) that W
at age t2, and (c) that the divergence of W from MPt subsequent
to age t2 was linear. Our econometric specification offered an
estimate of the rate at which the two paths diverge, which
         cuL to be                               •
                                                                error              1
turned        4-
                         only r'u.3)C'per year (with standard           0.15-a).

This would lead         to a mere 3   3% gap Letween W and MPt at
retirement         age--a rather small difference.

                    ordindri lea5t suar'.   cstimce wes e.bout 0.5%
per   ye6r.
                                                                       25.


          However, there is lots of casual evidence suggesting
that firms want to encourage older workers to leave the job.

For example, virtually every private pension requires that the
worker leave his job if he wants to collect benefits. For
workers who elect to stay on the job anyway, few private pensi.on

plans offer fair actuarial increases in future benefits as
compensation for the loss of current benefits. Often there is
no increase at all. Lest this financial incentive not prove

sufficiently strong, about 60% of pension plans have a compulsory
re-Lrement provision. 1    Thus staying on the job past age
                                               .

                                                                            R is
either    prohibited or discouraged, as the theory suggests.
          On -Lhe        other   hand, most private pension plans allow
                            2
early retirement.                Indeed., plans typically encourage early
retirement by not reducing benefits actuarially for those who

opt for early retirement. Consequently,, the present discounted
value of pension benefits is often decreased by staying at
                 .
work. 3              .

              This is just what we would expecc firms to do if

exceeds MPt              for older workers,    as in Figure 5.


L1,   The Economic Effects of PensiorL
         Section 3 began with a frictionless wc;ld in which the
existence or nonexistence of private pensions was only a bookkeeping
          1
              See Skolnik (1976).

          2Specificall.y, in 1977, 6% of all planis, covering 82%

retr'nt——sencinelly
( f on't'hcom
                             e 5)   t
of all workers with pensions, had some rrovision for early
                                       1 9.           See Yc
                                                          r)C Srnitli
       3For exmpi? Lazca.r (1981) found                that this
                                                     was true in
a study of the prcv sions of 2Lt1 cf the largest penscn               p1ns in
tL  country. 11c gave this feet, however, a cii fferert interpretation.
                                                                     26.



detail. Pensions were neutral. But once we             brought    such

factors as uncertainty, risk aversion, capital market imperfections,
taxation, and specific human capital into the model, reasons

for having pensions appeared. Pension benefits became imperfect
substitutes  for straight wages, forced pension saving became
an   imperfect substitute for voluntary private saving, and pensions
could   alter the lifetime profile of labor supply.

         4.1 The Use and Abuse of the Envelope Theorem
         But   something seems amiss here. Pensions are           voluntary
arrangements entered into by mutual agreement of workers and

firms. How,     then,   can a pension alter anyone's saving and labor
supply decisions? Pensions should be "optimized out" and hence

incapable of "affecting' any       other      endogenous variable. Saying
that a private pension "affects" an individual's savings
seems, on the surface, about as meaningful as saying that a
person's purchases of pastrami affect his purchases of sauerkraut.
In particular, if we make the following assumption:

         A6: Jobs    vary   in the mix between straight wages and

pension contributions, and       also    in the nature   of   the pension
plans; but there is     a   full range   of   choice for every worker.

then   the I4odigliani—Miller theorem for pensions still holds
at   the margin even when all the previous assumptions (Al-A5)              are
relaxed. If AB         holds, then pension plans will be adjusted
to   mar ),          1 a SIuiri ill FiguLe 7; hence pensionc will be
irrelevant     (at: the e!ar*ri)       q-
                                                                           27.


           It   is easy to see that this is so. Suppose there is a
 continuum      ofthat offer the same total compensation per
                       firms

hour, W , but that package it differently between straight

wages, w, , and pension contributions, Pt . In such a market,
workers    will asign themselves to the firms whose wage-pension
packages coincide precisely with their own preferences. Optimal
sorting means that every worker locates himself in a firm with
a pension plan that makes the marginal dollar of                 Pt precisely
equivalent (to him) to the marginal dollar of                 w (i.e.
He will see to it that his               Pt stream is not so large that it
makes him   subject to             binding capital market constraints that
force   him to curtail             consumption early in life, and he will
select a firm whose compulsory retirement date (if any)
corresponds to his own preferred retirement date. Thus                 in full
equilibrium             =      =

          If    a fl   the irn portarrt Drovisions of the pension
                                                                     plan
(benefit levels, retirement date. etc.) can he chosen ontimally
by the worker subject only to actuarial fairness constraints
imposed    by    the firms, then the pension plan will          be irrelevant
to_other_decisions since, at              the margin,   there will he no
difference between pension contributions
                                                        and straight wages.
self select ion by workers will insure that                     1 for all
workers,  and free bargaining will insure that   =       for
all workers and fixms who contract with each other.
        The importance of assumptin AS then. is quite clear.
hut e hc u 'i not be cCduc2d bytL cai elop: thec:eo. The
fact is that AS is not a good approximation to the cho:ices
                                                                 28.



actually available to workers. Workers do not have complete freedom
to choose their pension plans for several obvious reasons:
          1. Heterogeneity: Both workers and firms differ in ways
that make their       optimal pension   plans differ. Some workers are
more risk averse than others. Some want to save more for their old

age.   than others.    Marginal tax rates and age obviously differ.

Expectations are heterogeneous among workers and among firms, and
may differ between a worker and his employer. Firms differ in the
amount    of specific human capital      they require, and in other respects
listed on page 17. The list could go on and on. Clearly, each
worker and each firm ili have a different concept of the optimal

pension.
           2. Transactions Costs: Real resources are involved in

setting up and administering a pension plan. These costs are largely
fixed costs. Therefore it is simply impractical to tailor a

pension plan to every worker's specific needs. Furthermore, if
pension funds are to avail themselves of the advantages of portfolio
diversification and economies of scale in purchasing annuities,

they will    have to be    of substantial size.

          These   cs;ects u                          often lost
                              the real world, which are   so

sight of in economic theory, imply that any particular worker will
have only a finite number of choices. Only by luck will hi own

O)LJjh1L       plan be among these. Most workers will have to
           pension
cco amo 1 ans that are suboi..timal in one or more respects.
For c'amin. the hes availah e   an may recuire him to save a
       more t1n he wants to or to retire a little earlier than he
                                                                                29.



would like to. Any such departure from his optimal ilan implies
that             1 for him, and exacts a cost in terms of attainable
lifetime utility.1 Yet the worker may still prefer to accept the
pension plan rather than reject it (if he has that choice) because
of the infra-marginal benefits from the plan. That is, the
worker      may be better off with the      plan than without it, even

though      a different plan would he better still.
       For example, consider the worker whose indifference curves
have the shape indicated by II in Figure 7. Find the point (W in
the diagram) where the slope of the indifference curve is unity.

This worker would like to find a firm whose technology gives it an
isocost curve that looks like AF. But maybe none exists. Or,
even if one does, it may offer the pension indica-ted by points B
or    C instead. At B,      the worker's        > 1,   so he   would like a
bigger      pension. But he still prefers       B to   A (no pension).
Similarly, at C he would prefer a smaller pension since                          <    1,
but may still prefer C to A. He_therefore accepts the firm's

pension plan as given.
            In this sense, the characteristics of a pension plan——while

apparently open to free choice---retain some aspects of exogencity

to most workers Loosely speaking, each firm will attract a labor
force such that the             of its median worker2 is equal to its

own
        t
             .   This means that some workers will have XW          >   X
                                                                            F
and   others will have          < A.   .       close to the median worker,
                                           Workers
however, should      have   approximately optimal pensions (X Ar 1).
     'The recent de'7e oTment             cc er:i. 1ti , nlj h
                                af SO—cTJ... eJ t
allow workers to enoose some  cf the choractenistics at Jiele ,LXSiCfj
can he seen as a response to  this arohlem. 1-loweva , my impression
is that such plans are not jet prevalent.
    2Tt is not strictly the median : rker that calls the tune
because intensity of preferences also maLrers.
                   29a.




           1




               :
           F
     )re
£3
                                                               30.


          However, even this limited amount of optimality evaporates
once we recognize that the pension plan is only one of many
attributes of a job, and may be far from the most important of
these. In addition to the wage and pension, workers care about
such factors s fringe benefits, the nature of the tasks to be

performed, flexibility of hours, geographical location, and many,
many more. Given that workers and firms are heterogeneous, and
transactions costs of various kinds exist, the worker cannot
optimize    over every dimension of the job choice, but must choose
among a small number of discrete alternatives such as B and C in
Figure 7. Therefore, he may find that his optimal job does not
even have the pension that comes closest to being optimal for
him    (because,   for example, he prefers a job with an inad1uate pension
that inVolVeS less commuting time). In extreme cases, it is
even possible for a worker to accept a job where the pension plan
does him more harm than good. In this more complicated (and
realistic) world., even the median worker in each firm may not
achieve an    optimal pension (Xw    i) and firms may not be able to
balance pension benefits and wages precisely (XE.      1).

          The result of all this is that whenwe look at data from    the
real world,   we are seeing a market eilihrium1 in which some
workers   are on jobs in which they would like to see the pension



          11f labor markets are not in equilibrium, as they certainly
are   riot at any particular time, things are more complicated still.
Many   workers will not even he on t:he job that is best for them
when   all aspecte of job choice are considered.
                                                                 31.

 raised     because for them        >     other' workers are on jobs in which
 they would like to see the pension reduced because for them

        X, only a few workers       are on jobs in which the pension plan
 is approximately right     for them (       ); and X may depart
 from unity in many firms. These harsh realities         tell us that
 the   value of        cannot be deduced from economic    theory (whereas
 it must always be 1 in the frictionless world), but must be
 estimated empirically.

       Our empirical work suggests that these notions of
transactions costs, heterogeneity, and discrete choice may be
important.
            First, our estimated wage equation took the form:
                  log(w., + XrP.
                             IJ it
                                )   f(X.;)
                                       iL    + E.4
                                                1L
where      is the marginal valuation parameter just discussed,
X1 is a vector of determinants of marginal product (like
age, education, experience, etc.),    is a vector of Parameters,
and c.it is a stochastic error term. Our empirical estimate of
    was on1 0.52 (with standard error O.ll)—-a surprisingly
low number in a sample of men aged 58 and older.1 it
                                                     really
suggests that workers do riot succeed in "op1imizing out" their
Pension plans.
       Other interesting findiags suggest, however, that some
considerable sorting does go on. According to our empirical

        1
              is, o CC)ur'se, the OS51J)Lity that: errors—in—
            There
varj.c; bias  in
SOP Cdcfl indvdua1
                  severe n this case !e cei te esl:iseLe .
                        from data th:t ecrc ometsrie
                                                                         32.


                                                  substantiallY higher
wage equation, workers with pensions have
wages than workers on jobs without pensionS, even after all the
obvious determinants of uaes (education, age, occupation,

health, etc.) are controlled for. In addition, our empirically—
estimated resrvatiofl wage equation implied that workers with

pensions differed systematically from workers without pensions
in their labor—leisure preferences. Having a pension seemed to

serve as a proxy for a propensity to want to retire around age 65.
Workers with pensions really seem different in some unmeasured
       1
way.
           The tentative conclusion——and here I really do want to be

tentatIve--is that the optimal sorting procesS that brings the

envelope theorem into play probably is operative in the real
world; but it is nowhere near complete.          Hence most workers end

 up with tsuboptiniall! pensions which may, therefore, affect their
 saving or labor supply decisions.          It is to these decisions

 that I turn next.

           .2 Pensions and Saving Decisions
        I begin my analysis of the saving decision in the simple
                                  theorem holds, and build from
 case where the Modiglani-Mlller
 there. Thus assume initially that pensions do not affect the
 lifetime pattern of earnings in any way (including the retirement
 decision), that there are no capital market constraints or tax
 distortions, arid that saving is motivated solely by the desire


                                        in th2 Paro
    iame Ioigan jnfoJr oo that pooplo more              d7 of
  Income Dynamics who have pensiOnS are     likely to plan for
  retirement.
                                                               33.



to finance retirement consumption. It is easy to see, under
these circumstances, that each dollar of pension savings must

displace exactly $1 of fungible saving. Hence private (funded)
pension plans have no effect on national saving: the worker
saves in the pension fund and dissaves outside it. But social
security, because it is unfunded, will reduce national saving on
a dollar-for-dollar basis.
          Figure 8 tells the simple story. Line BBis a budget
line for a consumer who lives two periods. Point E1is his

endowment point, corresponding to earning y0 jn period 0
("youth") and y1 in period 1 ("old age"). Point E2 is the
endowment point in the   presence   of a pension which withholds
y0-x0 and earns the market interest rate, r. Clearly, the
individuals optimum point, A, and hence his consumption in

each period, c0 and c1, cannot be changed by the pension.
         Now for some complications. First consider a constraint
on borrowing that makes points on BB to the right of the endow-
ment point unobtainable. There are two possibilities. Figure 8
depicts a case in which pension savings are inframarginal.
The workr does not want to 'ocate to the right of E2 , and so
the capital market imperfection is irrelevant. For such

individuals, the simple story remains intact. Consumption decisions

and utility are unchanged by the pension.
         But Figure 9 shows a case in which the pension imposes a

binding  capital market constraint. The individual's optimum
point   moves fron A (an interior maximum) to F2 (a corner), as
a   result of the perisiori Notice tbar total saviug increases
               33a.




\ rO-/.L



 B


CI




           B     0
                                               314a.
             C'



                              (\3\ \\N V\
                  \\
                         N.




                       c, '           0
                                                           0




                                  ( cceO\v(v
        B
t\I -



        C'
                                      C


                                           -
                                                 k     I   H


                              I (_)
                                                                          35.


Nonetheless,              retirement consumption still rises owing to
what is, in effect, a TLumpsum payment equal to DB in the figure.
          Panel (b) portrays the corner solution where the pension
forces the individual to save more than he otherwise would.
This time, c falls to             and saving rises. c1 rises to
hut utility may rise or fall, depending on how large the pension
is.     (In the diagram, utility rises.)1 The critical thing to
notice is that if       the   pension contribution were $1     bigger,
c0 would be exactly $1 smaller; that is, private fungible saving
(which is constrained   to zero) cannot change, so each dollar
of    additional pension saving translates into an additional
dollar of total private saving. Expansions in private pensions,
then, raise national saving while expansions in social security
have no effect on national saving.
        Thus even before bringing in some other interesting poss-
ibilities--that pensions might change the retirement age, that
some saving might be for bequests or for precautionary motives,
etc.——we see that theory cannot resolve the issue, rfhe impact
of both private pensions and social security on national savings

is an empirical issue. Several points are worth             noting in this
context:
          1.    The presence of      a governmentally-imposed social
security       system makes it that much more       likely that the forced
savings    inherent in private pensions might   not be inframarginal,
and might subject      workers to binding capital market constraints.

          This ii lustrat s au aIie pctnt .            A wr']o:   fliC gi:i
from   a pension    plan that   is    suhoptinal.
                                                            36.


Thus full displacement (at the margin) of private fungible savings
by either public or private pension contributions is made less
likely by a large social security program.
       2.   Social security wealth is quite large for the typical

individual. Gordon, Wise, and I (l981a) found that, for a typical
white man aged 60-65 in 1971, social security wealth amounted
to about 7% of life-Lime earnings. By comparison, private pension
wealth amounted to only about l% of lifetime earnings, and all
financial assets (including life insurance) averaged about 3%
of lifetime earnings. Thus social security wealth was, on
average, twice as large as financial wealth.
       3.   The tax distortion favoring pension savings is quite
large (as Table 1 showed),suggesting an income effect which is
hostile to saving (Figure lOa).

       Now for some further complications. First, a pension plan
might induce the worker to retire earlier than he otherwise would.
I have already suggested in Section 3 that private pensions are

likely to have this effect. If so, workers will put away more
money for retirement. Many people have also claimed that social
security induces early retirement. My reasons for doubting this
claim are explained in the next section. O hiorice, however,
this possibility militates against displaoement of private savings
by pensions.
       Second, there is the bequest motive for sav.ng. If
pensions entail an income effect, as I have suggested they do,
orkerb itb a bequest motive ma be induced to raise thair desired
beruet, and c.nce to reducc their private furigible saving by
                                                        37.




less than the previous analysis suggests. As is well known,
Barro (l97) has argued that this effect is so strong that social

security has no net effect on national saving. We need not take
the argument to extremes, however, to realize that it, too,
militates against full displacement.
       Third, in a world of uncertainty in which a need for
financial assets ma.y suddenly arise and borrowing possibilities
are limited and expensive, iliiquid pension wealth may be a very
poor substitute for private fungible wealth. This again leads
us   to expect that $1 in pension wealth offsets less than $1 in
fungible wealth. In    the case of social security, however, there
is   at least one factor that points in the opposite direction:

social security provides indexed annuities, which are virtually
impossible to buy or the private market. For this reason, $1
of social security wealth may be "worth" more than $1 in private

retirement savings.
         For all these reasons, and others I have not mentioned,
theory will tell us little about how much private fungible
wealth "should be" displaced by $1 of social security wealth cr

$1  of private pension wealth. But we should not be surprised
if displacement is rather small.
    Before considering the econometric evidence that we
have obtained, it 15 worth looking at the stylized factb.
Comprehensive nationwide   data on private pension contributions
hy employers are   available 10 the national ineome accout

for   the years i9'48—l979.
                                                                    38.


          as a fraction of disposable income
and are depicted/in Figure 11. This was a period of great change.
In 1948, pension contributions constituted only 11% of personal
saving. By 1979, they accounted for 64%. Yet over this 30-year
period the ratio of personal saving to disposable income (DI) showed
no trend.            Over the first five years of the period (1948-1952)
it averaged 6.02%; over the last five years (1975-1979), it
averaged 6.33%. As the ratio of private pension contributions to
DI rose from 0.84% to 2.94%, the ratio of private nonpension
savings fell from 5.18% to 3.39%. This crude look at the data
certainly    makes us     think seriously about dollar-for-dollar
displacement    as a serious possibility.
                contributions (excluding Medicare)
          Social security/also expanded rapidly over this period,
rising from o.g%     of   DI in 1948 to 64 % of      DI in 1979. Yet,
private    savings did not fall. At least at the level of crude
empiricism, social security does not appear to have displaced
private saving to any great extent.'
          Now the previ.ous two      paragraphs   hardly constitute a serious
empirical look at the displacement issue. Gordon, iise, and
myself (1981a) set out to see what could be learned about the

displacement of nonrension savings by private and public pension
saving from a large cross-sectional samole of people near
                                                                than
retirement ase. But, the task turned out to be far more difficult/ we



          'This ou1d appear     to   contradict   the well—known time
se.ries   results of cidsteiri (l97, 1980). In fact, Feldstein's
results ars open to serious question (see Leimer' and Lesnoy
(1980 • 1981)) . And not even Fel cisLein has aiirported o find
  c:m icrcnt in the sostiar reri ad
                                                                  38a.




C C)
                                                              / '/


 Lj D
                              (W
                               r;
                        'C\
2

 iC)
                                                         c

 0
        ti   L-   1V•         ? (;; l.        t'( L (   L. ?' ?     7? L)


                                    f '5\rf
                                              ii
                                    )
                                                           39




imagined. Frankly, I think we failed to measure the effects we
were interested in. But the reasons for our failure are instructive.
       Our vehicle for investigating individual savings behavior

was the life-cycle hypothesis (LCH) of Nodigliani and Brumberg
(l951). Under certain simplifying (but quite standard) assumptions,
this model    can   be written as:
                                 T
         (A+Y
           t t )(l+r)___
                          —t     z
                                j-t (l+) 1
                                           N.   +   B
(   -\
             (A 0 +Y 0)          T
                                      (l+)1N. + B
                                 =0




where t is age, At is assets, Y is the discounted present
vaiua of earnings from age t f r rd (human wealth), N is the
number of adult equivalents in the household ]-ien the head is
age t , B is the number of adult equivalent years of consumption
planned for the bequest (assumed to depend on the number of
children, but not to very with t), and i is a constant embodying
both discounting and any desired growth trend in consumption over
the life cycle.
       The interpretation of (4.l) is straightforward. The
lefthand side is the fraction of original lifetime resources
  at remain a;aiiable at age t. The denominator of the righthand
side is the number of aduit equivalent years of consumpcion
 rro1)opl discounted arid eiri000yine any desired trend) in the
        o cot .re I e cod e ; end the numerator is •uhe correspondin
              eo t fcr.;or .          ( i      just
   nrt mci 1ifc1:imc niann n.
                                                                   '40




         Our original idea was to investigate the effects of private
and public pension wealth on private fungible wealth by disaggregating
At into financial wealth (A), private pension wealth (PPW),
social security wealth (SSWt),         and net holdings of real estate
(REt),   and then estimate the    displacement parameters           and A2
in:
                        T
                            (i+p)'N.1 + B
('4.2)   A +      = -——                      (A0+Y0)(l+r)
                                                            —
                                                                X1SSWt_X2PPWt_A3Rt
                            (1+u)'N. + B
                       i0          1



Our experience in trying to estimate (14.2) was sobering.
                                   likeliheod function was amazingly
         First, we learned that tThe
flat considering that our sample had over 4100 observations and
that there was plenty of variance in all the independent variables.
The data had very little ability to pin down the parameters of
the life    cycle theory, even though the theory was very tightly
parameterized,    leaving few           to he estimated.
                                coefficients

       Second, the ability of the estimated model to account for
cross—sectional differences in asset accumulation was trivial,

as    indicated by the large standard error of the regression        and
the miniscule
       Third. we allowed for the posihility that——contrary to
what would he exuected from the LCH—-the planned consumption path
declined abruptly in old age. We did this by replacing N1
in the numerator of the ratio in (4.2) by 1N1 , where -y 'ias a
                                                         '41.



parameter to be estimated. The point estimate of y     was   0.'4S

(with standard error 0.19), suggesting either that the marginal
utility of consumption shifts down sharply in old age or that
people are not saving enough to finance their utility-maximizing
consumption streams. Frankly, I lean toward the latter
interpretation
       In brief, instead of using the LCH as the maintained

hypothesis and learning about the effects of pensions on private
saving,   our results cast serious doubts on the validity and
usefulness of the LCH itself. It may be tha-L economists have

accepted this theory too readily.
                                   point estimates of
          I have not yet mentioned the                      and >2
We estimated    = 0. 39, meaning that each $1 of socia' security

wealth displaces 39 of private wealth, and so increases the
ridvdua±'s total wealth by 61. (nut national savings falls
by 39, because social security is not funded.) But the
standard error of this estimate was a whopping Q.145, making rt:
easy to resist any temptation to draw inferences about social
security. This imprecision was further evidenced by the fact
that minor vniationson the basic model led ta wildly different
estimates of      .  The parameter is simply not well pinned down.
       The estimate of X2 , the displacement parameter for private
perlsions,was even worse. The point estimare was —0.30 (standard
        i. 5 , meaning itiaL edch $1 of private pension welth
Le=dn to 31i more in private furigible wealth. The )
 ote         for i:1 cs1aL   a althl ta*nec 1he nc:nr           en
                                                                   L 2.



        It is worth dwelling on these perverse, findings for a
minute. We. certainly do not believe that, holding everything
else constant, a rise in pension wealth or in the value of real
estate leads to a rise in financial asset holdings. The problem
is that, try as we may, we cannot hold everything else constant.

There are pervasive positive correlations among all assets in a
cross section of individuals. Econometric techniques try to
break these simple correlations by partialling out pertinent
variables. Chief among these is lifetime resources, and cur
proxy for   thi.s   elusive variable was better than most. But even
ours   may not have been.   good enough (for example: we   had   no data
on inherited wealth).
       A second unmeasured variable is the "taste for saving,"
which probably differs substantially across individuals. Even
holding lifetime resources constant, people with a high taste
for saving will have high A and high             and high REt
leading to negative estimated      and        in economeLric models.
We. are not the first empirical investigators to humn our heads
against the wall over this problem. And we will not be the last.
       On balance, we found very liti]e evidence to suggest
important displacement of private nonpensicn saving by either
public or private pensions. But, far more significantly, our
research raises questions about whether economists have been
posing this question in the approrriate way. It may well he
that the life--cycle theory, tor all its appeal, is not what
nvc':rs:n:ividnai navrsn ecisinn . Sd'''ir tor       uesLs
  for
or 4nsurance       against unforeseen contingencies seem to be the

leading comoeting hypotheses, and they deserve a fuller airing.

           14.3Pensons and Retirement     Decisions
           I have already   noted reasons why a private   pension plan
might alter a worker's life—cycle pattern of labor supply arid,
in particular, his retirement date. The same arguments would
seem to apply, with even greater force, to governmentally-imposed
pensions like socaI security. In this section I consider what
simple economic theory has to say about the retirement decision
in   the   presence of public and private pensions, and summarize
some of our empirical findings.

Retirement      Decisions with No Pensions
          highlight the effects of pensions, I begin with a case
           To

in which there is no pension. Figure 12 is a standard labor--
leisure choice diagram with only one wrinkle, which I add for

greater    realism. I assume that the     individual has only   limited
ability to vary his hours, so that       points on the dotted   portions
Df what we normally think of as his budget constraint (AD) are
not availanle.1 The height a represents the annuity-equivalent

of t1e worker's assets; and the slope of BC is the after—tax

wage,       Several indifference, curves are shown in the diagram;
1    aume the higher letters       indicate older ages.

               things nay hapeen as the individual ages. First,
           Three

aging    may cause the ind ffeie.nce map to shift in a way that is

           11n fact his choices are probably even more limited than
this. Tie may be able to choose among only a fe1i isolated Points
on BC.
                1-t3a.




       IL
LL.

       6

      :-
            b
                                                                     14tt.



unfavorable       to work, as shown in the figure.1 Second, at
probably rises over time.2            Third,        may fall. Each of
these factors shifts the worker's optimal choice toward shorter

hours.     Eventually, some workers       find that the best choice  is
to   jump abruptly    to   point A,   that is, to retire (see indifference
curve     cc
         I I ).

          This analysis is quite simpleminded. So are its observable

implications.   It leads us to expect that workers are more likely
to retire if they are older, sicker, have more assets, or have
lower wages. it also implies that retirement will probably
come later in jobs in which wages do not fall late in life
(professionals?) and hours of work are more flexible (i.e.             ,     point
B is further to the right). You probably did not need a diagram
to convince you of any of these.
Private Pensions
       Things get slightly more interesting when we acid a private
pension. First assume that, once the worker reaches the age of
eligibility, the pension plan offers a fixed annuity, b. Figure 13
shows the budget constraint that becomes applicable on the day
of     gihility. If he stays on his min joh he does not receive
ttie pension benefit b. So his budget constrant is the relevant
port on; of TAD. To collect h, he must leave his main job, hut
        t rtire from the labor force. I assume that the
•lterriati'e job avai able late ii ife offers the option of working
fe;iec hours , but ays I coer uagu ,       ThIs is indicated h
                                                .



       This need net be       for 6 Li workers .          Some   never' retire
I am dealing here with those that do.
          2Because a is as equivalent annuity, it will rise with
age even if the 'scfbcr       SãVCC   nothing
                            414 j




,       F




                     (1
                 I    '4;




    F       t3
the relevant   portions of TEHC. The   effective   composite budget
constraint is CFH plus the   isolated point E.
        As the indifference curves shift through time (and
                                                           at
rises), the individual may, depending on the position of GH
arid the wage w , step down to a lower paying job and work
shorter hours (an optimum on segment FH). Or he may retire from
the labor force completely (point L). Clearly, complete
retirement is more lakely (a) the larger the pension, (b) the
larger the gap between W and w , and (c) the higher the
minimum hours of work on the secondary job (the further to the
left is H).
       Now  let us corinlicate the nature of the pension plan.
In many plans, an additional year of service raises the pension
benefit. Thus a worker eligible to draw an annuity bt today
may face a choice between continuing to draw bt forever if he
retires today or drawing some higher annuity, bt+1, if he works
another year. In that case, he gains b but loses the actuarial
present value of the annuity htv_b beginning next period if
he retires today. If bt+1_b is big enough, there is an
incentive to stay at work.
       In other pension plans, bt+i may not depend only on
whcther you work today, hut also on how much you work. For
example, some defined benefit plans fix the annuity as a fraction

te ma:ina1 i oturr1 Lu        f
of average earn ings over chc last, say, 5 years. In this case,
                                                    j
                                       ii a-cJ t:c nensien,
                                                                            46.


and the incentive to remain at work rises commensurately.
Figure.      offers an example of what the budget line for such a
pension   might look like. In the figure, it is assumed that
benefits are based on earnings in the best five years of the

worker7s ca.rcr and       that year   t becomes one of the best five
years when leisure. falls below L* .              The effective budget

constraint   becomes CYFI1 and point E .              Compared to Figure 13,
this    change in the budget constraint obviously ehcourages more
work.
          Figures 13 and 14 make clear       that we    have   quite a few

possibilities, depending on the precise nature of               the workerts
indifference curves and the exact wages arid hours available on
the tWC) jobs. Ue cannot even tell whether, other things equal,
a worker with a pension will retire earlier or later than a worker
without a pension. In situations like Figure 13, pensions
encourage retirement. In situations like Figure       pensions
discourage retirement.
                    should recall our earlier analysis of pensions
          But here we
(Section 3). An employer concerned with labor turnover, I argued,
is likely to design a pension plan that discourages retirement
that comas "too early" (say, while the worker' s marginal product
is still above his wage) but encourages retirenent later (once
the    worker's wage    ha.s risen above   his marginal product). Hence
workers may find that their pension plan confronts them with a
situation like Figure l at        (so they stay on the job arid
oor] iC.)fleL iiOUFJ) dO                    1.2   '11 7 (c           they
                           46a.




C

                 -     \




         s1t.t_ tA-[



                                  C

     L
    Fc
                                                                 47.



retire). An example of such a plan would be one that bases
benefits on earnings between the age of vesting and t2 (refer
back to Figure 5 on page l8a) and then offers no actuarial

compensation fcr postponing retirement beyond t2
This would seem, by the way, to be an efficient employment
arrangement in that it inducee greater labor supply during the

years when liPt is higher.

Social Security
       In adding social security to the analysis, I first deal
with a worker who has no private pension. Later 'I bring both

pieces of the puzzle together.
       It is often stated, and wZdc,ly believed, that social

security provides strcng work disincertives for workers over 62
years of age. But Gordon, Wise and I (l98),in studying the
actual budget constraint created by the law, discovered that this
conventional view is almost totally wrong. Let me explain.
       The conventional view that social security' discourages the

work effort of older workers is based on two perceived problems
with the law. First, benefits are subject to an earnings test
which implicitly-taxes earnings beyond an exempt amount at a 50

percent marginal rate. Second, actuarial adjustments for those
who defer benefits are believed to be insufficient, so the
expected present value of social security benefits declines the
longer one stays at work. According to the conventional view,
the social security law sets up a budget constraint like that in

Figure 15. Here TABD 5t   the   b'.'dget ronstraint without oc'ia1
                                                                     Li7a.


NC f\
               N




        -- -
                   .        N
                                -
                                     N
                                                        "-




                                                    N
               -   p
                       .'                    -   - --
                                                        N
                                         -



                                (_
                                                            'N

                                                                 N




                                                                             Le-r
                                                                                    4 8.



security.        Distance                   1S   the potential   social security benefit,
which can be received as long as hours of work do not exceed T-L0.
(The law exempts a fixed amount of earnings, X, so L0 is X/Wt.)
At higher hours of work effort, the earnings test becomes operative
making the putative net wage only                          (segment BC). Finally,
beyond point B, earnings are so high that all social security
benefits are foregone and the effective budget constraint reverts
to BD.

           If   TECBD really were the budget constraint, social security
would provide work disincentives for many workers.                         But it    is not.
           What's     wrong with this conventional view? First of all,
those                                       hence lose benefits
         who work to the left of point C, and
to the earnings test, are given compensat ion in the form of
higher potential benefits in later years. Legend has it that
this compensation for deferring benefits is less than actuarially
fair.      For workers between the ages of 65 and 72, this is true.1
But for workers between the ages of 62 and 65, the current law
often    provides      compensation which is more than actuarially fair.
That is, those who defer accepting benefits are given in compensation
a real annuity which has an internal, rate of return above the
real interest rate. 2 Notice that precisely fair actuarial corrccton
would mean that the effective budget constraint would continue

           1Those over 72 are not suejecL to the earnings test, and
so the                issue doEs not arise.

                      to   Mc l 77 amend-ents , actuaria.l            cCmDensat :ion   took
ef
thc I Of

roLe——it
           0
       cr,r [P    1
                      nO
                       r
            was acre than
                           1   (   r         rj
                                                                       (
                                                                           I




                                         eetuarsa ly fair weeri flOTS) na J i:a teswc'ce
low, but less -uhan cc                 tuar. ally F a ir when oem i.na Ii rates were high.
For further details, see Blinder, Cordon and Wise (19800 19 iJD)
                                                                     p4g.



beyond point C, as indicated by the dotted line in Figure 15,
because benefits reduced b the earnings test would be given
back in subsequent years. With such a budget line, social
security provides an income effect hostile to work—-but only to
the extent that lifetime benefits exceed lifetime taxes. (While
this has obtained until now, it is unlikely to remain true for
very long.) Nore important is the observation that social security
creates no substitution effect, and hence no tax distortion.
        Now consider the other aspect in which the conventional
view errs. Students of the sys-Lem have failed to apprecate
that, from its early days, the social security benefit formula
had mucb in common with the private defined benefit plan depicted
in Figure ]i-. Specifically, one' s entitlement to social security
benefits has always depended on covered earnings in some
particular years. For example, in recent decades the earnings
base has been defined as the best N of the previous N+5 years,
where the value of N has varied from year to year, hut has
been as low as i and       22 in 1981.
       That this effect sets up a convex kink as in Figure lL is
easy to see. Suppose Y is the lowest earnings igure now
included in your earnings base. Once your current hours of work
exceed   Ut     each addit local hour cf work pay: an add:i.tional
re-LOOn   in me form of mmgreu tuca soco security cenefets
                            base
because it raisan tha osociege'. Ocodon, Wise and I (l?Oh )
compu cad this mp1ici L   .:age   subsidy for a. sample or men woo
                                                            so.

reached age 65 in 1975. At a 1% real interest rate, the subsidy
averaged 5% of the wage rate for a married man with a spouse
benefit, or 26% for a man alone. The 1977 amendments reduced
this effect somewhat by indexing old earnings figures. Gordon,
Wise, and I estimated that if our sample of 65 year olds in 1975

had been subject to the post-1977 law, the average nercentage
wage subsidy would have been 36% for those with spouse benefits
and 16% for those without.
       Thus, for a worker between his 62nd and 65th birthdays,
the typical budget constraint does not look anything at all like
Figure 15. instead, it probably looks like TEFG in Figure 16.
(Figure 16 assumes, for simplicity, that actuarial correction is
exactly fair. ) Once hours of work pass      , the effective
                                           V1
                                                t
wage rate jumps abruptly.
       For workers over age 65 things arc more complicated since
actuarial correction, while no longer trivial since the 1977
amendments, is certainly less than air. Figure 17 shows two
possibilities, depending on whether        is above or below the
mount of exempt earnings, X. If Y0 is below X , the
effective budget: constrairt ia TEFCHI. Apart from income effects,
it is hard to see where work dis±ncentLes might arise. The
only segment on which social seocriy miget lower the effective
wage is OH, and even here things could go the other way. If
is above Z , then the eifect ye budget constraint is rITCfhi
on which e h'rce de in ito i a ric ( ec' noe C -ir'-' -1
earnings test     the no L wage ni..t u1 oJ 1 hrJ'ieVer , the
                                                   50a.




-

    N

        N
        "N




                       -
                   I




                                               E




                   -                      -í              (r
             rf12 i


             —--           ------, - --
                     Sob.




T]




 1:)




              .t.
       t,I \! 'S




                    51a.
                                                                        51.



possibilities for substitution effects         hostile to work effort
seem quite limited.

Social Security_with Private Pensions
       By now you have probably read enough to shy away from a
comrlotc taxanomy of the variety of possibilities that arise for
a worker with both a private pension and         social   security. I
certainly shrink from the task, and so will deal with just one
case that I think is of        considerable   importance. Think of a
worker between 62 and     65    whose private pension looks like the
simple one in   Figure   13.     (His boss wants him to quit.) Then
the   budget constraint created                          if he
                                    by social security for him
stays on his main jcb is TtFG, in Figure 18a. If he quits to
take a secondary job, his budget constraint will be TEfg instead.
Because w is lower than          the slope of Ef is less than
the sLope of AF and point F must come at lower hours of work than
point f. (Each is the point where the exempt amount of earnings
is achieved.) This leaves two possibilities, as shown in Figures
18a and l8h. Figure 18a is meant to represent a tvsmallT
private pension; the two buiget lines cross (point Q) somewhere
on ecgrrftnL AF. The composli a budget constra irit facin., the worker
is therefore TEQEC and the worker has these possibilities:
        (a)  a corner solution at E•--•full rot irement;
        (b) a tangency on 5cr nt OE--prtial retirement on a
              coca cny ion
        (c) a tarn?enuy to the left of point Q—rena-iri:inr on his
             IO:OflT
                        51a.




c-f




      --   '>




                    t

                T
                                     L_j
                                cN   '1

                                     —7




                            -
                 -
            --
       1,




rf-
 -4-
                 I    I--

                     C-.

                                           Cu




 —1-
                                                                         52.


          Look at this diagram, and think about what indifference
curves    in this space might look like. It seems quite plausible
that a worker might jump at some age from a tangency on GF
 ("fuiltime work") directly to point F (complete retirement)
without    ever    spending time on FQ    or   QE. Certainly, tangencies
"near" F or Q       are   ruled out if   indifference curves   are convex.
             other possibility is that the pension is so "bigt
          rIhe

that   the two budget lines cross somewhere on segment CF. This
case   is shown in Figure 1Gb. The composite budget constraint in
this case is TEQC. it would ahpear that jumping from fulitims
work directly   to retirement is even more likely in this case.
Notice that at point Q the wage drops from well over        to
Since       is likely to he quite a bi.t lower than \J , this could
easily represent a halving of the wage rate.

       But, of course, Figure 1Gb represents only one of a
variety of possible composite budget constraints. The nature of
the social security budget constraint depends on family structure,
the earnings history, age and other factors. Private pension
provisions       vary enormously. The real lesson of this section
is that, for workers covered by private pension plans, we have               rio


hope of araling their labor supuly decision Ly apr:copri etc

econometric techniques until wek now same. of the details of
their plan (how are benefits defined? what is the age of

eligibility? are there actuarial rewards or penalH cc for
postponing retirement? etc. ) Just kriowrig that The worker
              doec nct aver. trd 1 ur .rn)r La    rawa or ieer;
likely to retire ,        thaugh   o       i aris there ic a hint that
                                                                                53.



retirement       would be Jess        likely until    some age (perhaDs the normal
retirement       age) and more        likely thereafter.


Empenicel_Evidence
          This    theoretical discussion provides the background for
the   empirical work on the retirement decision that Gordon and
I (1980) did. Here are some of the lessons we                    took   from 'the

theory,     and which guided the design of our empirical work:
          1.Private pensions are quite likely to encourage retire-
ment at or before the normal retirement age. Sone will discourage
early retirement; others will encourage it.
       2. At least so some eten-L. workers self—select into
jobs with pensions that suit their preferences, and hence
vo1untan3J7 subj ec-L themselves to the incentive structures set
up by these plans. There is thus reason to suspect that people
with and without priva-Le pensions have different tastes.
       3. Social security creates a complex multiarmed budget
constraint (especially when it interacts with a private pension)
which distorts labor—leisure choices in many ways. However,
if the ecrker is free to vary his hours, these distortions are
very unlikely to encourais conrIete                 retirement   if   the   worker
understands the co:rplco:i ties of  law. For this reason, we
                                              the

didc'i to concentrate on the retirement decision, ]eaving the
more d ffcult hours-of—work decision to more intrepid
econornetrici ens.

                                                        -                            ii)
houss    decision .      Se    Blinor , Gordon      and Wise (177 i )   .
                                                                            Subsequently,
di. '2I €:OL iO'i S v C ';'Olj''LC 0 VOICo.
                                                                                S LI..




          .        are more likely to retire completely from the
                  People
labor force tha.n to step down to a secondary job when the gap
between their current wage,      and their alternative wage,
is levee. s noted earlier, we estimated this gap to be quite
large. Je think this helps explain why, in our sample of men
aged 52—57 in 1973, 60s were fully retired, 3% were working
fulltime.  (35 hours mer week or               more), and only 6% were working
short   hours
          5. Firm-specific human capital provides one important
reason wuV              —
                               migho be large. 1L also provides one
important rationale for pensions. Thus we expect     w                      —



to he raruicularir large on ohs with pensions. Our empirical
work verified this suposl.tion.
        The model we estimated was a frictionless utility—maximization
model , in which utiliry functions differed across individuals
(thouul all were CES) and social security was assumed to be
irrelevant to the r'ctiromont decision. We then added to this
model some ad noc variables meant to "pick upu any effects of
social security that e'e might have ignored.
       The model was quite successful in separating retirees
from workers. The samrle itself (all white men) ranged in age
from 50 to 57 and was nicely divided between workers (about 10,000
observations) and retirees (about 6,000                      observations). The



                  the   "if—I—had—it—to—dc--over—again" department,
nn
            r.v''L
              T
                                     irk
                                                 ;o Pieves
                                                 Low oor
oon'ionecnt a,' suic m' , aince it enabled as to tr:iL 'r the
                                                                and l——

ut ilitv function into a ee servet Jcrj wage ience ion end then simply
compare   'rb( YC'          J 1100    ''C Lu the          irarke 'sage. however, I
Iiavepr eve Ccuoo'oe hou': it :',          'Ca S 0 SIC.
                                                            55.



model assigned a probability of being retired, P, to each
observation. We defined a retiree as "correctly classified"
if     >   .60, as "incorrectly dlassified" if P c .110, and   as
"not classified" if .'&O c p1 c .60. Similarly, a worker was
"correctly classified" if        .110 and "incorrectly classified"
       > .60.   By this criterion, the model correctly classified
77% of the observations and misclassified only 12%—a-even when

data on actual wage rates (which are available only for workers)
were ignored.

       The main social security variable that wri added to the
model was the ratio of social security wealth to lifetime earnings.
The idea was that scme workers who t:ould like to retire might

be liquidity constrained and forced to postpone retirement until
they reached 62. At that point, the availabilitj of social
security benefits would "induce" retirement. (Note that if this
story is correct, social security actually made these workers
postpone retirement.) This liquidity effect should be strongest
for those whose social security wealth is largest relative to:
their lifetime earnings. The empirical variable obtained the

theoretically correct sign, but an economically unimportant magnitude.
       The other way we "looked for" hidden social security
effects was to allow the utility function to shift (for no good
reason) at ages 62 and 65, the ages of eligibility for partial
and full benefit3. In fact, the data did not want to p1t in a
shift at age 62, but did put in a small one (a 6% jump in the
reservation wave) at ace 65. This ii;ht he a social recurity
                                                                      56.


effect at age 65. However, it is worth pointing out that the
one bad mistake made by our model was that it "retired" many
65—67 year olds who were still at work. Missing important             work
disincentives        from   social   security would have led to the
opposite error--keeping aL work those who actually retired.
         Allthings considered, the empirical work did not give
us any reason to reject che theoretical supposition that social
security does not encourage early retirement.
       Estimated retirement effects of private pensions were

inane interesting. \Je used our model to compare a. worker with a
private pension to an otherwise identical worker without a pension.
The estimates suggested that a aorker with a pension (hut no
mandatory retarement clause) is very siiahtly less likely to be
        58—60 slrehtiy more iskely ye be retired at ages
retired at ages/I 2iIirlfhiuch mono likely to be retired at
ages 65—67. These findings seem to conform with the            underlying
theory  of pensions outlined in this paper.
        Several other findings of the model bear on issues raised
by the theory. First, the estimated consumptionleicure
indifference curves were very flat, suggesting a huge wage
elasticity to the retirement decision. Second, and quite
surprising to um, the estimated income effect on labor supoly
was quite small. This throws cold water on what had previously
been my personal favorite explanation of the trend tcuard ear] icr



      11t also suggests a huge elasticity of hours of work with
         i
ye coe-t to wage rates .
          acL ncr:d
                 -
                          Flat indifference curves are eonsistet
wunYerm eiiior wasIm Lu1J LJJIC ca i!u aL alL.   055) 50.0
that   data on   hours of work is:! eyed no role in the estimation!
etirement: the income effect of rising rcal wages. I am not
yet ready to dismiss this explanation because other      evidence
doessupnort a strong income effect on labor supnly. But it
must be admitted that the early returns are not encouraging.

5. Wh' Gc'vernment Intervention?
        So far in this paper I have developed some positive
economics of pensions. In this concluding section, 1 turn briefly
to sornu normative questions. What, if anything, does the theory
have to say about the many ways in which the. government intervenes
in the naISiCn system? Can these interventions be rationalized?
I start with two important provisions of UJSA.
5.1 Why Imnose Fundinc Peauirements?
       ERISA   enforces minimum funding recuirements for private
pension plans. This may seem strange since several finance
specialists have pointed out that there is a tax advantage that
encourages overfundin of pensions. i In fact, 4arge corporations
                                             many

apparently have overfunded their pensions.2 Why. then, would the
overnment    bother with minimum funding requirements?



       Ses    mack   (1930) alid iepper (l98i
              ri     fl 97)
                                                                     58.


        The answer,   I think, is obvious. A number of firms          had
either gone bankrupt, leaving insufficient assets to pay off
their unfunded pension liabilities, or had otherwise reneged
on their pension obligations. This prompted Congress to act
Indeed, since there is a tax advantage to overfundirig, one does
suspect that underfunders may he seriously contemplating
running out on their pension liabilities. Thus we can think of
funding requirements as a type of consumer protection legislation,
and with this advantage: for "honest" firms, the legislative
constraint will he nonbinding, and hence costless. Not a bad
polacy, it would seem.
       Of course, the usual economist's response to consumer
protectlon legislation can be invoked here: why not just require
firms with unfunded pensions to label them as risky assets ("Warning:
This pension may be hazardous to your financial health.") and
let the market take care of the rest?2 The question carries
its own answer: anyone who is not an economist finds this
suggestion utterly absurd!
5.2   Why lmrose Vesxin, Reauirements?
        EkISA also imposed maximum periods of time that can elapse
be-fore vesting. It is much harder to defene this provision.
The model presented in Section 3 assgns an important and useful
role to pensions which are not vested immediately. If firms must

       I.
             iarc background     o th i          c earn Ic. a f rror star' ice
sac dunctt ( ar,:hcc'           ccc s
       Of course, a -true faa-c- marketeer aesid rio-i: eve-ri manda:e.
the lahclli:gr cquirc:sente .     The   rca]:et 'ear: t eke care of Ii :at too
                                                                  59.




pay for specific human capital formation, then a nonvested pension
is a way to tie the worker to the firm long enough for the latter
to recoup its jnvestment. Banning such arrangements will inter-
fere    with specific   human capital formation and harm economic

efficiency.

5.3     Why   Limit_Mandatory_Retirement?
          The Age Discrimination in Employment Act limited the
right of firms to impose mandatory retirement ages for their
workers, and there h-as been discussion of banning mandatory
retirement entirely. Everything I have just said about vesting
applies with equal force here. I argued in Section 3 that
mandatory retirement may be an integral part of an optimal
labor contract. Disallowing such a provision may make the
whole optimal compensation scheme unravel.'

        The vesting and mandatory retirement issues are related
to the "time inconsistency" problem so much discussed in recent
macroeconomics.2 At the beginning of the contract, workers and
firms might both agree that a period without vesting and/or
a mandatory retirement age are part of a Pareto optimal
compensation package. After some time has elapsed,
however,      the worker may be able to reap a windfall gain

by    immediate vesting or by ahrogatirLg the mandatory


     'For a different model leading to the same conclusion,
see
(as
            (l79) Two obser•vatiori temner this conclusicn: First
       Lazear
      iaVc: alrcadj       ,        ]::cinirn:; (JCi   LO          :io
plan) ran oe us-J to in'Lce. [ci: i erc Li dfl 1c.c7 rEt Limcflt is
banned. ccond, the rrendatc;ry ratc:menL ccnstrajnt may be 1inding
only    for o mincrN.y of :kc
        2The seminal paper was Kydlend and   Prcscott   (19 / )
                                                             60.



retirement  clause. The standard way out of time inconsistency
problems is "precommitmont," and recent legislation has interfered
with the freedom to write contracts with precommitment.

5. Why        Social Security?
           Have
       The private economy is perfectly capable of generating
pension plans, and does. There are no apparent externalities
involved in having a pension.1 Why, then, should we have a
publicly-imposed pension scheme?
       I   would like to begin by suggesting two good reasons having to
do with redistribution of income.   The first pertains to redistribu-
tion across_generations. We must not forget that the social
security system was a child of tie Great Depression. :f we
ccmceptualze the Groat Depression as a terrible random event
that severely damaged the economic ueii-being   of several

generations,then it makes sense to transfer
income from generations yet unborn to the generations that were
damaged by the.. Depression. One way to do this was to start
an unfunded social security system.
       The people who retired in -the earl.y years of the social
security system (say, those who reached age 5 in l9tO) were 5L
or so when the Depression began. For them, the Depression
represented a huge and irreparable loss of lifetime income.
It is not something they could have been expected -to have prepared



       iut ee Aro;cLt        lt;eT (121)              d cf
externel ity relating to labor turnover is identified and analyzed
                                                                61.



for, nor suhsec1ucntly made up for. The social security system
made huge transfers to these people, who had contributed very
little but drew substantial benefits. It thus transferred some

of their DCDrCSSIOri losses to unborn generations. \'as this

bad social policy?
        Moving down a generationor so, people who reached 65 in,
say, 1960 wcse 30 when the fleuression started—-just entering
their peak earning years. They too suffered huge losses of
lifetime income, and received huge transfers from social security.
       It takes a long isme for Ilie "s tart upti period of a
social security system to end. Dvei the cohorts that reached
age 63 as late as 197U—3975 were victims of the Great Depression
to a significant degree. These people were only 19_214 years old
when the recession bean., but were 29—30 when it ended. The
incidence of unem1oymcnt must have been particularly severe for
them, depriving them of work exuerierice that would have been
valuable in their subsequent careers. Most of these people also
received large- lncome transfers from social security. Only when
the system IS fully mature will intergenerational transfers sto.
By this time, most of the peeple damaged by the Great Depression
will have died, having received a lifetime wealth increment from
social security.
    Thus    comrensaticn   for the Depression can provide an intellectually
defensible  case for a rublic rension system and, in
articwiar, for an unfunded public pension sjstem. Whether

        'But every time sobstaritial Iricresec in benefits is made,
it is as if a med ?j11J cyst,:;.t i         The sut of the system
                                             'Lsa 'a. "
thut    eric   n     c fl ' s  ra       Liriçlit in 1972 wili not
                                               iii
                                                            -


"rraure't   until   after 1 he   year 2020
                                                               62.


this rationale actualy had much to do with the establishment of
our social security system is more debatable. A plausible view
is that it contributes to the explanation of why social security
began when it did, but not- •Lo the explanatcn of why social security
exists at all. However, I think the redistribution—across--
generations argument goes a long way towad evsi =inng why he
system is not funded.
        The second reason for having social security has to do
 with iePistrihution within an age cohort. It is well—known
that the social security benefit formula is redistributive--
people with lower lifetime income earn higher marginal (and
average) returns on their social security contributions.
Though the benefit formula has changed many times, this redistrihutive
aspect has been present from the earliest days of the system.
       I neecJ not outline the case for equalizing redistribution
of income. No one who now opposes redistribution will thereby
be persuaded to change his mind. But if redistribution is
accep Led as a legitimate function of government,   as   I think it
should he, then a rationale for a public pension system appears.
Surely, we cannot expect private pensions to redistribute income.
But why use pensions at all? Why not redistribute by programs
like progressive taxation and transfer pajmnts, and make
social security distrihutionally neutral?
       There are two answers to this question. First, people
from lower econonci.c strata have worse mortality experience.
Sicc they Co nut l1u as long on aucrage , lower' irccue groups
have to he gi 'en a hi gger' e.nnu ty nor Collar or "ocrnribut j0fl
just to mehe the system soteanially feir. leccal social
                             the
security   is virtually/only mechanism we have, to redistribute
lifetime income. All other redistributive devices, at least
in part, take from the transitorily rich and give to the
transitorily poor. Thile current income and lifetime income
arc surely positively correlated, that correlation is far from
pcrf act. If \..YC     take it for granted that what we want   to
redistribute is lifetime income, then a redistributive social

security   system has        much to recommend it 1

   Of course,         this view of how social security redistributes income
sees   only the       silver lining and ignores the cloud. For one thing,
the  income concept redistributed by social security—-earnings in
coveocci employmsntis far from ideal and leads to certain
distrihutionel. anamolies for example, "double dippers It who are
rich in a lifetime sense may nonetheless take much more frcm the
system then they contribute). Another problem is that social security
does more than just redistribute from those with high earnings to
those with low earnings, it also redistributes across demographic
lines in ways that some people. view as capricious. (For example, it
 subsidizes oneeanier families through the spouse benefit.) Many

of these redistributions would not necessariiy be applauded by
a concave social welfare function.
    A third argument for social security has nothing to do with
redistribution, but rests on the idea that pensions are a desirable,
but highly risky, as set. According to this argument, workers would
like to •:ici themselves ci the risk of poverty due to longevity.
But a private pension plan organized by the emnloyer only allows
t e uo hoe to ore       Jo ri oh for ntb risk: Jo risk t!ot
      'e would all like        :eistn Thute lifutime utility. Lifetime
 ncorl   i  an    1 f  t o
                       ncr       for 1 r 1ct r' il               c or
.rieJ udinp ims'.r.ec i ono in tIe capital market However, lifetime
                                                                    1


income i.e nrobebly a hotter proxy than current income.
                                                                 6i.
the   firm will go   bankrupt.   A public pension scheme eliminates

these firm--specific risks and provides a safe asset.
   This rationale for social security may not be very persuasive,

however. First, if     the company funds   the pension plan completely,
hires   an insurance company to administer it, and vests benefits
promptly, then the workerts pension benefits are well insured
agoins-!: the risk of bankruptcy. Second, even if these steps are

not taken, the risk argument provides an argument for publicly-
supported pension insurance, not for mandatory public pensions.
      A fourth argument for social security is that a mandatory public
pension scheme might correct what otherwise would be a market
failure. An ingenious argument ho this effect has recently been
made by Eckstoin, Eichenbaum, arid PelecI (1982). In the context
of on overlapping generations mode:L in which individuals have
private information about their survival probabilities, they
establish, first, that a free market in annuities need not lead
to a Pareto optimal outcome and, second, that the market equilibrium
with a mandatory social security syeterr may Pareto—dominate the
free-market solution. This argument thus provides a potential
rationale for social security based solely on efficiency considerations.
       Finally, I conic to the rationale for Social security that
I im:rgirie is most important in the public arena, but that economis'
have so much trouble with: paternalism, pure and simp1e. One
reason for the establishment of a mandatory, nubile pension
system was the poli-t:ical judgment that people were not proveding
"enouph" foI-Lhelr own retirement. That -Lb :1 s Sta.       c iron-
si ten-i: with the theory of reveeled preference has not diminished
      force ir the world of affairs
                                                                 65.



6.    Summary

         I began this paper with an ambitious list of questions to
which I promised tentative answers. Here, as tersely as I can
put   them, are the answers suggested by the theory of pensions
developed here:
        1.    Why   are there private pensions? Because of tax
advantages,     and because pensions are a useful device for reducing
labor turnover.

        2. Why have they groc.n so much in recent decades?
Because the tax odvantage arc a postwar phenomena:, and have
increased    over time, while the risk of pension fund bankruptcy
has dcc] med..
          3. Why do they have tb-c features that they_doi
 Many of the salient features of private pensions can be
 rationalized as part of an optimal long-term labor contract in
 a.n uncertain world in which labor turnover is costly (for example,
 because firm—specific human capital is important).
         14 How can rivate nunsioms "affect" other economic
 decisions? Because—-owing to heteroeneity, transactions costs,
 and discrete choice——many workers cannot ontirnize their pension
 plan. This makes the pension at least partly exogenous.
        5. Whet crc the cfects of pensions_on savings end retirement?
 Theory does not necessarily support the obvious supposi-Liom that
 pensions lead to early retirement; it suggests that private
 pensions are more likely to have this effect than scolal security.
 bar boa üeo:., tell us Law mu oh a Is lacamcnr o       I -.' a c un ci bie

 sdvings by public end private pension we should expect
                                                                         66.


             5. Have_recent
                —-          rublic-policv_intveticnsintheriva.te
                                                 and   other fiduciary
pens ion systems made sense? Minimum funding /rccuirements can be
rationalized        on grounus of consumer protection. But limitations

on the       vesting    and mandatory retirement provisions that may arise

from free bargaining probably impede the abill          :y of workers and

firms to formulate optimal labor contracts.
             7.   Why   do we :oaarndatory_social scour it7 system?
Totransfer income to the generations damaged by the Great
Depression; to redistribute lifetime income within an age cohort;
to 'oid cfr veYoi e for retirement saviots; ant because Conzress
(iaternalstcalJv) tecoded that eoe1e were fl•L                   enou1s
for   their own retirement.
         In olcsin0, I ucold like to ca3 1 attention to an
 important s lizod fact and pose one more question. The thot
 is a simole and compelling one: prior to the advent of cn1
 secur:Lty, the private ension system in this country w:s
negligible; for one reason or another the prcva:e market had
not produced Oer:.sic SIC. The          is a profound coc: Was
the nonexistence of private pensions a case of market failure,
which the social security system then corrected? Or is the
whole private pension system the rroduct of a tax ditorticn
that berne important only after World War II? I suggest chat
the aner to this question is terribly important to our actitudes
to'.ard the pension zy ten. dut I do not pretend to hrcn•2 The
all 3.5Cr.
                                                                  6.



                              BIBLIOGRAPHY


Richard   J. Arnott and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Labor Turnover,
         Wage Structures, and Moral Hazard: The Inefficiency of

         Competitive Markets," Econometric Research Program
         Research Memorandum No. 289, Princeton University,
         September 1981.
Robert J. Barro, RAre Government Bonds Net Wealth?", Journal
       of Political Enonorriv5 82 (November/December l97)
         pp. 1095—1117.
Gary   S. Becker, Human    Canital: A Theoretical and Empirical

        Analysis, New York, Columbia University Press, 196,
                   and George J. Stigler, "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance
         and   Compensation of Enforcers ," Journal of__Legal Studies (3)
       19Th, pp. l-2C.
Fischer Black, "The Tax Consequences of Long-Run Pension Policy,"

       Financial Analysts Journal 36 (July-August ]980), pp. 21-28.

Alan S. Blinder, Roger Gordon., and Donald Wise ,    Fm irical
                                                     An
        Study of the Effect of Pensions on the Saving and Labor
        Supply Decisions of Older Nen.   Draft Final Report
        submitted to the U. S. DepaaH:mc nt of Labor. February 1, 1978.
                                                                     68.



               Blinder Roger Gordon, arid Donald Wise, An Empirical
          Study_of the Effects of Penn      ehe Seveng_and Labor

          Sumply_Decisions of Older Men, report submitted to the
          U.S. Department of Labor, March 30, 1980a
                                                ____     "Reconsidering
               the Work Disincentive Effects of Social Security,1'
               National Tax Journal, December 1980b,pp. 13l-442.
                                                         "Social
          Security, Eecuests, and the Life Cycle Theory of
          Saving: Cross-Sectional Tests," National Bureau of
          Economic Research Working Paper No. 619, January 1981a.
   -   .-..-         . ,-..,....                       , "Rhetoric
               and Reality in Social Security Ana1ysis—A Rejoinder,"
               National Ta< Jour'al, December 1981h.
Alan S. Blinder and Yoram Weiss. "Human Capital and Labor'
          Sup1y: A        Synthesis." Journal of Paliti 1 Econorn 8, 1976,

          pp.
Jeremy    Dulow, "Analysis cf Pension Funding unde.r LRISA,' National Bureau
          of Economic Research Working Paper' No. 02, November 1979.
 ZviEckste.in, Martin Fichenbaum, and Dan Pelod, "Gncertan Lifetimes
      and the Welfare Enhancing Properties of Annuity Markets and
      Social Security," Working Paper 17—81-82, Carnegie Mellon
      University, April 1982.
                                                                       69.

MarLin FeJ.dstein,          "Social   Security, induced Retirement, and
         Aggregate Capital         Accumulation." Journal of Political
         Economy 82 (September/October l97L), pp. 905—26.

              _____         "SOCial Security, Induced Retirement and
         Aggregate Capital Accumulation: A Correction an Update,"
         Naiona1 'Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 579,
         November 1980.
Milton Friedman. ATheoryofhe Consumption Function.
      Piineeton; Princeton University Press, 1957.
                   and
Roger H. Gordon / Alan S. Blinder, "Market Wages, Reservation
      Wages, and Retirement Decisions," Journal of Public Economics,
         October   1980, p. 277—338.

Nasno:n Heshimoto. "Firm-Spec±fic            human Capital as a Shared
      Investment,"         American Economic Review, 71 (June 1981),
      pp.   L75L82.

Laurence Kotlikoff and Daniel Smith, Pensions in the American
       Economy, University of Chicago Press for NBER, forthcoming.
F. E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, "Rules Rather than
         Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal
         of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. L73_91.
Edward   Lazear.   "Why is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal
         of Political Economy, December 1079, p. l26ll28q..
   ____________          "Severance Pay,   Pensions, Nobility,   and   the
         Efficiency of      Work   Incentives," rnimeo,   University of
         Cnic;c. June
                                                                     70.


Dean   11. Leirner ard Scig D. Lesnoy , 'Socia Security arid Private
          Saving: A Recamination of the Time Series Evidence
         Using Alternative Soci1 Security Uealth Variables,
         Working Panen Pa. 19, cocial Security Administration,
         Office of Research and Statit los. Movember 1980.
                                         'Socia1 Security, Induced
         Retirement and Aggregate Crlt:L Accumulatiofl A Correction
         and Upda-1:e, by Martin Fcldsteln: Comment,' mimea,
         1981.
Modigliani, Franca, and Richard Brumberg, "Utility Analysis and
      the Consurrrt ion Function: An Intcrpretatlon of Cross—
      sectional PaL a.   In Post )Kcoesian Economics. d ited
      by K. F. Kur'ihare Pen Prunsnick: Rutgers University
      Press 19 98
Alicia H . I1cnnel     , Tb c   Econcsc_cs of PrIva to Pensions ,
          Biookirigs    1982.
 Josenh F. Stiglitz, ulncentive.s, Risk, arid Information: Notes
          j au.ond   a iTheorn ot Pcera.rchY " Bell. JournaL of Econonucs
        6, no. 2 (Autumn 1975) pp. ,52—579
 Irwin Tenpsr, !Tana-t lori and Corporal.e Pension. Pal icy,
        Journal of Finance, 66 (March 1981), pp. 1-13.
