                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           PORTFOLIO COMPOSITION AND PENSION WEALTH:
                      AN ECONOMETRIC STUDY



                      Louis Dicks—MireauX

                           Mervyn A. King



                     Working Paper No. 903




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050   Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MP 02138
                             June 1982




This study was funded by NSF grant No. SES 79142O9. We are grate-
ful to David Reitman for help with the computation of the pension
wealth series, and to Alan Auerbach, John BossonS, Jim Pesando and
other participants at the Amelia Island Conference for helpful com-
ments. The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research
program in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #903
                                                        June 1982




           Portfolio Composition and Pension Wealth: An Econometric Study




                                        Abstract




      There has been very little study of the consequences of pension wealth for

the composition of household portfolios. Using individual data for 10,118

Canadian households we estimate the portfolio effect of pension wealth. Because

most households do not own all of the assets which we are able to distinguish,

we   model asset demands as a mixed discrete—continuous portfolio choice problem.
We find   that whereas there is an identifiable effect of pension wealth on total

private savings, the effect on portfolio choice is less significant. Moreover,

within the area of portfolio composition the main effect is in terms of the par—

ticular number and combination     of assets held rather than the amount   of any

given   asset   as a proportion of total wealth.



Louis Dicks—Mireaux                                      Mervyn A. King
National Bureau of Economic Research                     University of Birmingham
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                                Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138                                      P. 0. Box 363
                                                         Birmingham, B15 2'PP
(6r) 868—3930                                            England
                                                         021_172_1301, x 31i21
1. Introduction

       Much empirical research has been devoted to examining the effects of social

security and private pension wealth on household savings.     In contrast there has

been very little study of the consequences of pension wealth for the composition

of household portfolios. Given that the two types of pension wealth are not

perfect substitutes for other assets, it is likely that they would affect opti—

mum   portfolio   choices among other assets. This micro—economic impact has macro-

economic implidations. Because the financial structure of the private sector's

net worth is an important determinant of both real decisions (corjorate invest-

ment, for example) and financial variables (such as interest rates and their

term structure) , any effect of pension wealth on the portfolio composition of

households' non—pension wealth will have macro—economic consequences. In this

paper we estimate the portfolio effect of pension wealth using individual data

for 10,118 Canadian households. Throughout the paper we regard pension wealth

as an exogenous variable beyond the control of an individual household.

Although this is clearly true of social security wealth it is possible to alter

private pension wealth by choosing an occupation which offers more or less

attractive retirement compensation. We shall ignore this possible source of

endogeneity.

      To model asset demands satisfactorily our specification must allow for the

empirical observation that most households do not own all of the assets which we

are able to distinguish. For each of the twelve assets in our study there is a

significant number of households with zero holdings, and only two households own

all twelve assets. We construct below a model of the probability of owning a

particular combination of assets. In the estimation of individual asset demand

equations, the failure of households to hold "complete" portfolios leads to two

problems. First, the demand for an asset depends upon the particular combina—
                                       —2—



 tiori of other assets in the portfolio. Secondly, estimates of demand equations

which use data only for those households with positive holdings will be subject

to sample selection bias. We discuss, and attempt to resolve, these econometric

difficulties in Section 3.

     Because our sample consists of a single cross—section of households, we

cannot examine the effects on portfolio behaviour of variables which are uniform

across households. These are variables which, although they may vary over time,

are identical for all households at the date of interview. The most important

of such variables are the relative prices of different assets, including the

inflation rate.1 One exception is that part of the price which reflects

households' marginal tax rates. The data on net worth is, however, both

comprehensive and of good quality, and we are able to compute estimates of both

social security and private pension wealth. There is also substantial variance

of pension wealth among the population which allows us to identify the effects

of pension wealth on the dependent variables. The sample, and the construction

of estimates of tax rates, pension wealth and permanent income for each house-

hold in the sample, are described in Sections 2 and 4.   In Section 3 we discuss
alternative approaches to modelling the mixed discrete—continuous portfolio

choice problem facing households, and explain our preferred method. Estimates

of the model are contained in Section 5, and simulations of the effects of

changing the levels of both social security and private pension wealth on port-

folio composition are presented in Section 6. This section contains also esti-

mates of the effect of the two types of pension wealth on total household

savings.
                                        —-.J—




 2.   The Sample

       The data used in this study refer to 12,7314 Canadian families in 1917 and

come from the Statistics Canada micro—data tape "Income (1976), Assets and Debts

 (1977) of Economic Families and Unattached Individuals" which contains data

collected as a supplement to the 1971 Survey of Consumer Finances.2 Unless

otherwise stated all tables are derived from this tape and money figures are

expressed in Canadian dollars. The survey covers a stratified random sample of

the non—institutional population, and provides a particularly rich source of

information on household ownership of assets and liabilities, incomes, and other

individual and household characteristics. A family or household will be defined

here as a group sharing a common dwelling and related by blood or marriage. The

data refer to market values in May 1977 and the income data to the calendar

year 1976. For the econometric analysis 2,616 households were excluded. These

included 139 "special family units", primarily those with high incomes, for whom

data on age and other characteristics were not recorded on the tape to protect

their identity. Since our main interest is in estimating equations in which the

dependent variables are relative shares of assets in household portfolios,

neither this omission nor the stratification of the sample leads us to suspect

sample selection bias. In addition, of the total value of assets and debts held

by the complete sample (computed using population weights), these "special

family units" only held 1.3% and 2.14% respectively. The sample was further

reduced to 10,118 households by deleting households headed by a woman, for

reasons   explained below in the construction of permanent income.
           The data on net worth are given for fifteen categories of assets and
liabilities.   These were aggregated into twelve classes for the portfolio com-

position analysis by defining equity in owner—occupied housing to be net of any
                                           _)4_



mortgage liability and equity in own businesses to be net of loans specifically
for this purpose, and by aggregating two forms of consumer debt into a single

category of personal debt. The twelve assets are: cash, deposits, bonds,

stocks and shares, registered home ownership savings plans (RHOSP), registered

retirement savings plans (RRSP), other non—liquid financial assets (ONLFA),

passenger cars, equity in owner—occupied housing, equity in other real estate,

equity in a business or farm, and personal debt. vkrket values of assets are

recorded (for cars and equity in real estate and own businesses these are the

respondents' own estimates) except for bonds, which are given at face value. In

all the tables, and in the presentation of the empirical results presented, debt

is measured as a positive variable. The survey data exclude social security and

pension wealth (which we discuss below), consumer durables other than cars,

equity in life insurance, and other "assets" such as the expected value of

future inheritances and support from relatives and children. The percentage

composition of wealth by asset is given in Table 1. Column 1 gives the share

of assets in the total wealth of the saniple of l2,131 households using popula-.

tion weights. These weights were not used in calculating the shares in columns

2 and 3.      In the second column are the shares of assets in the total wealth of

the sample used for our empirical work. The third column shows the average of

the asset shares of individual households in the same sample as column 2. This

is in contrast to colwm-is 1 and 2 which are the asset shares of the aggregate

portfolios of their respective samples. In effect, the shares in the second

column are a weighted estimate of those in column 3, where the weights are indi-

vidual household wealth.

     As the    focus of   this study is portfolio composition any variation across

assets   in   the accuracy of the data will be critical. Detailed evaluations of
                                              —5—


the data can be found     in   Statistics Canada (1979), and 0a (1981), and the

ensuing discussion draws heavily on these sources. To assess the quality of the

data   involves a comparison with outside estimates of the wealth components and
these in turn are unlikely to be free of all error. If we ignore this, then
discrepancies     between the two may be attributed to sampling error, incomplete

response rates, and under—reporting in the survey data. As we employ the data

in unweighted form and do not address issues of wealth distribution or of the

level of national wealth the first source of error is not of concern to us. The

overall response rate was 79.7%, and where imputations of items of wealth were

made, they were generally no greater than 10% in magnitude. Oja (1981) con-

cludes that neither of     these   sources of error in the data is a major concern.

       This suggests that under—reporting is the main source of error. tvies

(1979), in a study of a similar survey in 1970, concluded that the major source

of under—reporting is non—reporting of assets at the household level. This may

affect both the probit and share demand parameter estimates. However, compared

to previous surveys some improvements were introduced in the 1977 survey. Real

assets, which account for about 80%      of   non—pension wealth, appear to be accura-

tely recorded in the 1977 survey. The quality of the financial asset and debt

data is very varied, ranging from a low of 20—30% of outside estimates for some

assets and 90—100% on others. It should be noted however that these figures

refer to a comparison of aggregate values of        wealth items   and therefore include

all three sources of error.


3. An Econometric Model

       In   our data set we are able to distinguish between 12 assets (to be pre-

cise, 11 assets and one category of debt). Most models of portfolio behaviour

predict that, in the absence of restrictions, individuals would choose to hold
                                      —6-


non—zero quantities of all assets. Table 3 shows the distribution of' households

by the number of assets held and illustrates that such a prediction is only true

for two households in our sample. To ignore this feature of household behaviour

would be not only to produce biassed estimates of the parameters of the demand

functions for assets, but also to ignore a misspecification in that the demand

for an asset depends upon the set of other assets held by an investor. It is

clear, therefore, that the principal econometric difficulty we face is to esti-

mate jointly the decisions of how many and which assets to hold and the quantity

of each asset which is held conditional on its ownership. This raises a number

of interesting econometric issues (discussed nre fully in King (19b2)) which

have been ignored in previous studies. In one of the few published econometric

studies of portfolio composition Feldstein (1916) simply excluded households

that did not have positive holdings of any assets.

     The theoretical considerations which suggest that individuals may hold

incomplete portfolios are of two kinds. First, there are partial equilibrium

factors such as transactions costs, which may be interpreted in a broad sense to

include the costs of monitoring and managing a portfolio. Economies of scale

may imply that it is optimal to select a portfolio with only a limited number of

assets. Secondly, there are general equilibrium effects. Auerbach and King

(1982) show that in a world of distortionary taxes, no equilibrium can exist

without constraints on individual portfolios. Constraints on short sales are

the most obvious example, and these lead to an equilibrium in which investors

have specialised portfolios. The determinant of the asset (or assets) in which

an investor specialises is his marginal tax   rate.   Auerbach and King (1982)

model explicitly the case of three assets: corporate equity, corporate bonds,

and irunicipal bonds. But similar considerations apply to a world with many
                                       —T —




 assets.   Complete specialisation in a single asset (the most favoured for tax

purposes) results only if it is possible to achieve the constrained optimal

allocation of consumption over states of the world by owning only the assets in

question. If, as will be the case in practice, this is impossible, the par-

ticular combination of assets owned by an individual will reflect the trade—off

between considerations of tax—savings and aversion to risk.

      In principle, therefore, we need to construct a joint discrete and con-

tinuous choice model. We cannot simply estimate an asset demand system using

observations of those with positive holdings for two reasons. First, not all

households own each asset and to omit the sample of non—holders would lead to

sample selection bias. This problem is familiar. The second difficulty is less

familiar and more serious. The proportion of an individual's wealth which is

invested in a particular asset depends upon the combination of assets in the

portfolio. Suppose, for example, that an individual holds only one other asset

in addition to asset j. Then the proportion of his wealth invested in asset j

will clearly differ from that which he would invest if he owned all twelve

assets given values for observable characteristics. The discrete and continuous

aspects of the problem are obviously inseparable.

     Suppose that households maximize expected utility as a function of the

twelve asset holdings subject to both a budget constraint and a set of' short

sales constraints on each of the assets. The resulting set of first order con—

ditions may be inverted to give asset demand functions only if we know which

constraints are binding, that is, if we know which combination of assets the

household owns. The first order conditions do not tell us this. It is for this

reason that a multivariate tobit specification, although a seemingly natural ay

to model the problem, is an inappropriate specification. The raultivariate tobit
•                                                     —8—




model (see Amemiya 19114, Lee 1982) embodies the essential feature of a tobit

model that a single index for each asset determines both the discrete and con-

tinuous outcomes. t this is not the correct representation of the behaviour

of an optimizing investor subject to short sales constraints (this is

demonstrated formally and discussed further in King 1982). The                      solution   to the

investor's optimization problem is (a) that combination of assets is chosen

which leads to the highest level of expected utility, and (b) given this optimal

combination the corresponding set of first order conditions may be inverted to

determine asset demands. The discrete choice amounts to selecting from a very

large number of mutually exclusive alternatives. In                    fact   with J assets the

number of distinct combinations of assets is equal to 2 .                        For 12 assets this
means we have 14,096 mutually exclusive alternatives. Optimal asset demands are

given by a switching regressions model in which the demand system depends upon

the      particular combination of assets owned. Again the number of regimes is
equal to the number of possible combinations.
          To estimate individual equations            for the probability of owning each of

these        2J   alternatives   would almost certainly involve more parameters than we
have observations, even with a sample of                 10,118   households. Moreover, with the
same number of regimes we cannot estimate distinct demand equations for each
regime. The only feasible            approach is to compute the implied probabilities of

all      mutually exclusive combinations containing            the asset in question. Suppose

that     alternative i       is chosen   if   the   following linear index is    positive,   if:

(3.1)             X-j+u1>O

X   is   a   (i   x   N) row vector of   N   observable characteristics, and j       a   (N x i)
column       vector of associated parameters.
                                         —9—


        The uj are assumed to be identically and independently distributed with a

distribution function denoted by F. Let d denote a vector of dwnnr     variables
with the ith element equal to unity if the investor owns combination i and all

other elements equal to zero. The probability of holding asset j may then be

written as:


(3.2) p =                     dF; SI all i containing j



where     is a (N x I) matrix of parameters.

     The determinants of the probability of owning asset j can be represented

as interaction terms between observable characteristics and dummy variables for

the combinations of other assets owned by the individual. Again this involves

an excessively large number of parameters. To reduce the number of parameters

to a feasible magnitude we must assume some independence between combinations.

If we assume that the effects of observable characteristics on the probability

of choosing asset j are independent of the particular combination, then the pro-

bability is a function of characteristics and dummy variables with no interac-

tion terms. This still implies a very large number of parameters because there

are as many durnnr variables as there are combinations of assets containing asset

j. (2J, which in our case is 2O18). But if we are prepared to assume inde-

pendence over observable characteristics, we might as veil assume independence

over unobservable characteristics. The implication of this assumption is that

the probability of choosing asset j is a function of observable characteristics

and independent of the other assets owned (an alternative derivation of this

specification is given in King 1982). There are no cross—equation constraints

because the probabilities of owning each asset do not sum to unity. Hence we

shall estimate independent probit equations for each asset in turn.
 •
                                                          —10--




        The continuous choice open to a household is its demand for assets given

the combination of assets which forms its optimal portfolio. The functional

form of the demand for a given asset depends upon the other assets owned, and

there is a discrete ju-np in the demand function as the combination of assets

owned changes. If households face short—selling constraints these jumps embody

the    "spill—over" effects of the constraints on asset demands. As                          the dependent

variable we take the logistic transformation of the proportion of wealth

invested in each asset. We use this transformation to justify our assumptions

about    parameter restrictions below and to reduce heteroscedasticity. The demand
function for asset j is:

(3.3)         ln                 =
                                     Cj   +
                                              ZOjj + Uj           J   =   l...J
                          .3                                      i=

where Pj is the proportion of wealth invested in asset j, Cj is the constant
term    and Z is a vector of observable characteristics. All parameters, as writ-

ten, are indexed by the combination of assets in the portfolio denoted by i

which runs from i =               l...2.       In this general form there are agaIn too many para-

meters. We shall consider a simple case of the shift effect of different assets

combinations        in which              =
                                               j (for all 1) and
                     J- 1
(3.1)         Cj =                Ciçj dki        for all i,j
                     k=l
        In   other words the constant term for a particular                       combination is equal to

the sum      of   fixed        coefficients for each asset contained in the             combination (where
dkj    is unity if combination i contains asset K, and zero otherwise). These

assumptions imply               that   the effect of adding an additional asset, or of a change

in    one of the exogenous variables, on the demand for an asset is independent of
                                                —11—


the other variables or assets owned, except insofar as it affects the value of

p, the proportion of the portfolio invested in the asset. The absence of

interaction terms is rendered more plausible by the logistic specification of

the dependent variable. With these assumptions the explanatory variables in

(3.3)    are   the vector Z and the eleven dumnrj        variables   corresponding to all

assets other than j. The equations we shall estimate are:



(3.5)       in          =
                                   CIçj dkj +
                                                   +              = 1.


The variables in which we shall be particularly interested will be those

relating to social security and private pension wealth. Because of the logistic

transformation the system of J equations given by (3.5) does not satisfy the

aggregation condition that:


               J
(3.6)          E      = 1.
            •j =1




        We judged it better to sacrifice the imposition of the adding—up constraint

to obtain the benefits described above. Although we report below the results of

estimating equation (3.5)          for   all twelve assets, when simulating        the   model to

examine the effects of change in pension wealth              or   portfolio    cortrposition we
shall drop     one of the equations. This is described further in Section 6.
        Equations   (3.5)   were   estimated using     observations for those with positive

holdings of the asset in the dependent variable. To correct for sample                      selec-
tion bias we included the inverse of Mills' ratio from the estimated probit

equations as an additional regressor (HecInan 1979). For a discussion of the

assumption of the joint normality of Uj and the error term                in   the probit
                                         —12—


equation see King (1982). This procedure does not give consistent standard

errors, but we computed a consistent estimate of the covariance matrix using the

results of Greene (1981). These adjustments deal with those people who do not

own the asset in question. Less significant is the issue of how to deal with

those households which report that they own only one asset. It would be

possible to deal with this by including an addftional inverse Mills' ratio in

the regression using a bivariate probit analysis but there are strong reasons

for supposing that in these cases the data are misrecorded, and so we have cho-

sen to omit the observations with portfolios consisting only of one asset. In

any event, the numbers involved are very small. For five assets the number of

such cases is zero and in three further cases it is three or less. For depo-

sits it is 69,   for   cash l41, for passenger cars 63, and for home ownership 50.


4 The   Construction of Data

     In this section we explain how we computed estimates of pension wealth and

tax rates. The method employed to construct estimates of permanent income for

each individual in the sample is described in the Appendix, and is a summary of

that given in King and Dicks—Mireaux (1982).

     The most important component of wealth for which we do not have direct

observations is the value of the right to future private pensions and old age

social security payments. Social security wealth is defined as that accruing

from the public retirement income system, and comes from five sources; Old Age

Security (OAS), the Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS), the Spouses' Allowance

(SPA), acd the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans (CQPP). The OAS provides flat—

rate benefits which are taxable, and were equal to $16314.34 in 1916 to those

aged 65 and over. Eligibility for GIS is based on receipt of OAS, and those who

have no income other than OAS receive the maximum benefit of $11L6.3O and
                                        —13—


$2035.80 (in 1976), for single and two—pensioner families respectivelj. The SPA

is payable to a pensioners' spouse, provided he or she is 6o—6 years old and

would, except for age, qualify for OAS and the GIS at the two—pensioner family

rate. Both these benefits are reduced, at different rates, if income is

received from sources other than OAS. These benefits have been fully indexed to

increases in the consumer price index (CPI) since 1972, and are all financed

from general tax revenue.

     The Canada and Quebec pension plans, which are virtually identical with

automatic transferability of benefit credits., were established in 1965 and cover

almost    the entire labour force. Both plans are contributory and earnings—
related. Contributions are paid by individuals aged id           to   70 years and not
receiving plan benefits, at a rate of 3.6%        shared   equally by employers   and

employees   and paid in full by the self—employed, on earnings between a lower and
upper    bound. Both plans provide three types of benefits: retirement pensions,

survivors' benefits, and disability benefits.

     Since 1976 the eligible age for receipt of retirement benefits has been

sixty—five.    The benefit level is calculated as 25%        of adjusted career average

earnings    (ACAE), multiplied by the average value of the yearly maximum pen-
sionable earnings (YMPE) in the final three working years. The ACAE is the mean
value of the ratio (with a maximum   value   of   one)   of earnings to YMPE in the best
85% of earning years. The intent of the system appears to be to index the YMPE

to the   average wage and salary index, although in practice it has on occasion

failed to achieve this. Benefit payments are indexed to the CPI. Survivors'

benefits include death benefits, surviving spouses' pensions, disabled widowers'

pensions, and orphan   benefits. The surviving spouses' pensions, (the one of
most concern to us), is 60% of that which would have been paid to the deceased
contributor if the spouse    is   65 years old or older, plus a flat—rate component

if aged 145 to 65. For those of age less than 145    the   pension level is determined

by age, the number of dependent children, and disability.

        The recent nature of the plan, and the transitional arrangements used to

introduce it, has added a further source of variation in the value of pension

rights across individuals. Those persons aged 55 and less in 1966 were to be

eligible for full pensions at age 65; in effect the closer an individual was       to
age 55 in 1966 the    greater the "bonust' or net benefit received. Those of age 56
or    more, contributing for less than ten years would receive a prorated pension.
       For each individual in the sample we constructed an estimate of the present

value of social security wealth using estimated age—earnings profiles (for the

CQPP component), and the relevant survival probabilities.5 For the present value

calculation the nominal discount rate was chosen to be equal to the rate of

change of the wage and salary index. In other words, for the pension plans, the

real discount factor for the years up to the age of retirement is one. The rate

of inflation was assumed to be 5% so that for     the post-retirement years the real
discount rate is 2.5%, which is the growth rate of productivity (or the differ-
ence   in the growth rates of the wage and   salary and consumer price indices).
For   wives allowance was made for non—partcipation in the labour force at various

stages of the life cycle by adjusting the level of the age—earnings profile in a

fashion identical to that used in estimating permanent income. In addition to

the retirement pension only the surviving spouses' pension, for those over 145,

was included in the calculation. In computing the flat—rate components of

social security wealth everyone of at least 65 years of age was assumed to

receive OAS. Nb allowance for SPA was made because the age—earnings profile
                                        —15—



 implicitly assumes that   spouses' effectively work until they are 65.       Current
and future eligibility for the GIS was determined using the appropriate needs

test.

        In estimating the present value of private pension wealth, actual receipts

were used for retirees, and an expected pension was imputed for those in pension

plans who were below retirement age, (assumed to be 65). The imputation was

based on a regressioj for pension receipts of retirees in terms of permanent

income, age and occupation. To allow for sample selection bias the inverse

Mills' ratio computed from a probit model of positive pension receipts for

retirees, was included as an explanatory variable. To convert these benefit

levels into a present value it is necessary to make some assumption about

current and future pre.- and post—retirement indexation. Indexation provisions

vary widely across pension plans and any assumption, (although we do take notice

of what evidence is available), applied uniformly across households will only be

an appproximation.6 The heterogeneity of the pension plans across occupations

will be captured to some extent in the imputation of pension receipts. We

assume that prior to retirement, benefits are effectively indexed to the rate of

growth of wages and salaries. Post—retiremsent we assume the level of indexation

is 60% of the CPI which, given the rate of inflation of 5%      yields   a real

discount rate for post—retirement years of     L.5%. With   the information

available,   it was difficult to incorporate survivors' pensions. The procedure

used assumes that any living spouse will be entitled to one—half of the

households' pension income, regardless of whether he or she is widowed.

     A sore detailed description of the Canadian retirement income system, and

of the construction of the wealth estimates is presented in Dicks—Mireaux

(1981). Mean values of wealth in these various forms in the sample of 10,118
                                      —16—


households were the following; for net worth recorded in the survey $53,611,

social security wealth $72,1455, and for the Li ,381 households with private pen-

sion wealth $60,587.

     In this final section we briefly examine how personal saving is treated for

tax purposes, and describe how the marginal tax rate was computed for each

household. Both are done with respect to the 1976 tax law to which the recorded

income data relate. The first $1,000 of interest and dividend income, as of

197! and 1975 respectively (with capital gains included in 1977), are tax—

exempt. Unlike the U.S. there is no exemption for state and local bond interest

income. Since 1972 realized capital gains have been taxed with a 50% exclusion

provision and no distinction between short— and long—run gains. Associated

outlays and expenses may be excluded but there is no adjustment for inflation

when calculating taxable gains.8

     The Canadian Registered Home Ownership Savings Plan (RHOSP) originated in

1974. It permits tax deductions for contributions of up to $1,000 per year,

with a lifetime maximum total of $10,000 excluding interest earned and accumu-

lated in the plan, for up to 20 years. Withdrawn funds are not taxed insofar as

they are used to acquire an owner—occupied home. In addition when this wealth

is transformed into a house its imputed income is untaxed. Canada differs from

the U.S. in that mortgage interest and local property taxes are not deductible.

     The tax treatment of private pension plans, since 1972, is like that of an

expenditure tax. Contributions are exempt, and receipts less $1,000 for those

over 65 are taxed. All federal pension receipts are taxed unlike U.S. Social

Security. Registered Retirement Savings Plans (RRSP) were introduced in 1957

and are available to everyone.9 Their tax treatment is the same as that for

private pension plans except that there is a maxiruuia   deduction   on contributions:
                                        —17—


 $5,500 ($3,500) or 20% of earned income whichever is less, if not (were) covered

 by a private pension plan. Furthermore, interest on money borrowed by an indi-

 vidual to pay premiums into his own RRSP is also tax deductible. It is worth

 noting that initially contribution limits were very low and were raised substan—

 tially in 1971 and 1976.

      In Canada husbands and wives are assessed separately for tax purposes.

For the econometric analysis of household portfolio composition the relevant

marginal tax rate was taken to be that of the male household head.     In married

households some account should be made for wives purchasing or holding assets.

One would expect, however, that in general, rational cooperative behavior would

allocate the legal pattern of ownership and purchases so that tax savings were

maximized, which would equalize the marginal tax rates faced by husbands and

wive.1° In this case the husband's tax rate is indeed appropriate for our

purpos es.

     The calculated marginal tax rate is potentially endogenous with respect to
portfolio    composition. Only total earnings and total incoiae of the husband are

recorded in the survey, and therefore taxable income had to be estimated. This

was done as follows.11 Total income was calculated as net employment income

plus unearned income. Of the deductions which can be applied to this to derive

net total income, allowance was made for those relating to Canada and Quebec and

employer—sponsored pension plan contributions, unemployment insurance premiums,

and registered home ownership plans. In addition to the basic exemption those

related to age, nErriage, and wholly dependent children were applied to net

income to give taxable income. In the absence of any information on expendi-

tures and the different kinds of unearned income it was not possible to take

into account any other exemptions or deductions. The tax rate was then computed
                                       —18—


and incorporates the provincial tax laws which consist of a tax rate applied to

the basic federal tax payable.12 Table 2 shows the mean values of the

constructed variables and asset shares, for each sub—sample with positive

holdings of each asset.


5.   Empirical   Results

       In this section the empirical estimates of' the discrete and continuous

choice models of asset demands are presented. Table 14 shows the maximum likeli-

hood estimates of the probit model for positive holdings of each asset.13 A

priori, it is not clear what effect on the probability of holding each asset one

should expect of the three components of wealth. For example, both social

security and private pension wealth may be thought of as real illiquid assets;

though less so, in both respects for the latter. Consequently, one might expect

their presence to reduce the likelihood of holding assets with similar charac-

teristics. On the other hand some illiquid assets may not be perceived by

households to be part of retirement saving, for example cars, while liquid

financial assets such as bonds may be. As shown by the coefficients on the

three wealth to permanent income ratios, all three types of wealth do have

significant effects on the choice of which asset to hold. The effect of the

level of wealth differs between its three components. Except in the case of

debt, the probability of holding each asset rises with the ratio of non—pension

wealth W to permanent income. Private pension wealth has a significant positive

influence on holdings for all assets except business equity and ONLFA; and is

particularly strong for deposits, bonds, cars, and home equity. This form of

wealth does not appear to be very different from non-pension wealth. In

contrast, however, we observe that social security wealth has significant nega-

tive effects on positive holdings of deposits, bonds, home equity, and to a
                                          —19—


 lesser extent stocks and shares. Both private pension and social security

 wealth have similar positive effects on the discrete choice to own a RRSP, the

 former   being   statistically more significant.

      Clearly, as argied earlier, the marginal tax rate has a significant in-

 fluence on the discrete choice to hold particular assets, for example a

 positive one on stocks and shares and RRSP's. Because of our inability to

observe whethe±- individuals have or have not exhuasted the tax deductions or

exemptions associated with a particular asset, the exact interpretation is not

quite as clear—cut. In general, permanent income Y has a significant positive

effect. The negative influence on home equity (in comparison to that on

RHOSP's) is, perhaps, surprising. However, the positive effect on holding a

RHOS? may    be   largely related t the tax savings it offers via income averaging,

regardless of whether or not it is ultimately used to purchase a home. Also,

unlike    the U.S.A., the tax advantage of home ownership versus renting is limited

to the non—taxation of imputed income from the former. Its insignificance in

thecash equation attests to the transactions role of cash. Low household ear-

nings, which may reflect transitory shocks or the position on the age—earnings

profile, in contrast tend to have a negative influence. Asset holdings have

either been run down or simply little or no savings is possible. The apparently

contradictory positive effect on holdings of bonds, stocks and shares, and other

non—liquid financial assets may reflect that households with these assets may

receive most of their total income from them.

     Of the remaining explanatory variables low age    has   a negative effect except

on business equity (youthful entrepreneurship) and debt. Education when signi-

ficant has a positive influence; its insignificant role in cash and home equity
                                          —20—


 is understandable, but with regard to business equity is pertiaps surprising.

 Marriage has mixed effects: a strong role in owning a home, and a negative

 role in holding a RHOSP or RRSP.

       Estimates of relative asset share demand equations are given in Table 5,

 at the end of which is a detailed description of the explanatory variables used.

 These equations model the continuous choice of how much to hold of each asset

 given the choice of which assets are held.

       The explanatory variables in the vector Z of equation (3.5) relating to

wealth on which we focus, are the ratios of the three components of wealth to

permanent    income, and the ratio of   the two forms of pension wealth to net worth

(non—pension   wealth). The first set of variables    captures the "scale" effects

of   wealth on asset demands, and the second set the "composition" effect of
wealth   on portfolio behaviour. Non—pension wealth has a significant depressing

"scale" effect on the relative shares of all assets, apart from real estate and

business equity. In contrast the estimated coefficients on private pension and

social security wealth are rarely significant, and are of different size and

sign. Statistically significant point estimates occur for RRSP's, cars, and

debt for SSW, and cash and business equity for FPW. The "compositional"

influence of pension wealth is also very small, with significant coefficients

found only for SSW/W in the demand for cars and debt. At a first glance it

would appear that for the continuous choice decision the portfolio composition

effects of pension wealth are small, and this is borne out in the simulations in

Section 5.    This finding may in part be a result of the level of aggregation of

assets. If we had chosen to group assets into a smaller number of categories,

some of the significant discrete choice effects would instead have shown up in

the continuous choice model estimates.
                                        —21—


      The dummy variables D1—D12 take the value unity when assets 1—12 are held,

 zero otherwise. These capture the effect of the particular portfolio combina-

tion the household holds on the relative share demand for each asset. The

significant role of these asset ownership dummies, (and also the number of per-

Sons with life insurance which is a form of dummy for this type of wealth), evi-

dently justify their inclusion in the estimated equations. In most cases the

gross effect of the ownership of other assets is to reduce the relative share

held in a particular asset, and most of the positive dummy coefficients are

insignificant. 4n exception to this is the increase in demand for deposits

contingent on ownership of cash or a RRSP, or life insurance. Although it is

difficult to summarize these results some features are worth noting. Home

equity (D9), primarily because of its large share in homeowner household port-

folios, has a very strong negative effect on the demand for all other assets.

In contrast to ownership of non—financial assets, the holding of financial

assets appears to have an insignificant effect on the relative shares of finan-

cial assets held (except for stocks and shares). The demand for other non—

liquid financial assets is virtually unaffected by other asset ownership, presu-

mably because of its residual nature.

     Relative share demand for financial assets has a negative income elasti-

city, and for non—financial assets a positive elasticity. Households with lower

permanent income are less willing or unable to tie their wealth in what in

effect are less liquid assets. More so than in the discrete choice model the

interpretation of the role of the tax rate is hampered by the non—linearities

embodied in the exemption and deduction rules. The parameter estimates are

accordingly mixed; given the initial deductions the positive effect on depo-

sits, bonds and stocks and share is understandable, but the insignificant
                                              —22—


(
    influence    on RHOSP's and RRSP's which have potentially large tax breaks is

    surprising. The insignificant effect on home and real estate equity may be

    attributed to the absence of mortgage interest deductibility for tax purposes.

    The imputed income from home ownership is untaxed.

           The remaining explanatory variables are intended to cover socio—economic

    characteristics of the household which might affect asset demands, transitorily

    or otherwise, such as labour force or marriage status and the number of depen-

    dent children. To capture any life—cycle features of these demands we include a

    piecewise function of the household head's age, using variables Vl—V7 which

    allow us in a linear regression to incorporate a nonlinear function of age,

    (these variables are discussed further in King and Dicks—Mireaux, 1982).

    Neither    marriage or the number of   children aged l8_21 in full time   schooling
    appear to influence portfolio composition significantly. In the former case
    notable exceptions are the understandable positive influence on cash holdings
    and   home equity, and the less obvious    negative one on real estate equity.

    In   the latter case this may reflect the relatively complete government funding
    of university education. In contrast young children have reduced the        demand for

    financial   assets, with no significant effects   on non—financial assets other than

    to increase the demand for home equity. Neither labour force dummies (in

    contrast to low household earnings in discrete choice behaviour) influence port-

    folio composition. Up to the age bracket 60—15 years the age terms V1—V7

    suggest,    in general, a cumulative rise in relative asset share demands. For

    both cars and debt the opposite is true. The terms V5 and v6 imply that between

    the ages 60 to 15 the age effect on the demand for financial assets reaches a

    maximum, while for other assets it continues to rise. This possibly reflects a
                                       —23—


 greater initial role, in providing for retirement income, of' decumulating finan-

 cial assets.

      The inverse of' Mills' ratio clearly indicates that in its absence sample

 selection bias will occur in estimating equations of the form (3.5) for non-

 financial assets and cash. The former are available to most households in rela-

 tively less divisible units than financial assets, while zero holdings of cash

are clearly due to rather special factors.


6. The Effect of Pension Wealth on Portfolio Composition

     In this section we use the empirical estimates in simulations to examine

the effect of changes in pension wealth on household portfolio composition. To

do so correctly we must take into account two factors. First, changes in pen-

sion wealth may affect asset demands directly, as in the estimated equations,

and, indirectly, via their effect on the level of non—pension wealth. Secondly,

because individual households hold very different combinations of assets it is

important   to compute the response for each household and then to aggregate over
households to discover the overall effect.
     In the simulations we consider separately the effects on portfolio compo-
sition   of a 25% increase in the ratio of social security   and private pension
wealth   to income. This particular choice of effect to simulate is suggested by

the substantial earnings—related elements of both forum of wealth. In these

exercises some assumptions had to be made. The effect of these wealth chanbes

on the discrete choice of which assets to hold is excluded, that is the combi-

nation of assets each household owns is taken as given. This was done because

within the present model specification we have been unable to devise a corn—

putationally simple way of incorporating these effects. The estimates for all

twelve demand equations were presented in Section 5 but to impose the adding up
constraint for asset shares we drop the home equity equation.15 Note that

because the shares Pj are defined with respect to total assets this constraint

only applies to the eleven assets and not debt. Finally, the approach is a par—

tial equilibrium one in that we take no account of how the increase in either

type of pension is to be paid for or funded; and we assume the supply elasticity

of the assets to be infinite.

        We incorporate in the simulations the possible adjustment in the level of

non—pension wealth by households in the face of changes in pension wealth. This

response is modelled as follows: given an exogenous change in pension wealth

an individual may choose to hold less non—pension wealth. Having made this

choice he or she then decides how to allocate this wealth amongst assets.

Formally this offsetting behavior may be interpreted in terms of the coeffi-

cients    of the wealth terms          in the estimated equations. We can write the asset

demand    equations as

(6.1)       in             )   =i      +         + c EK + Sj   +   uj

where    S is   the vector of all non—wealth explanatory variables and             its asso-
ciated    parameter vector, and TW is "effective't total wealth. It is defined by


(6.2)       TW =   W   +       SSW +


where 6 and            reflect the extent to which social security and private pension

wealth,    respectively, are regarded as equivalent to             non—pension wealth.

Equation (6.1) can, therefore, 'be              written   as



(6.3)       in (P) =                  +    is      +   ip      +          +



            ÷ Sø + Uj               j=l...J
                                          —25—



     It   is clear, that unless pension and non—pension wealth are considered as

equivalent (i.e. O =        = 1),   there is no reason to expect the estimated coef-

ficients on the three wealth to income ratios to be the same. Indeed thej are

not (see Table 5) and for a given change in pension wealth, if households adjust

their holdings of other wealth, they will do so by a value of 6 or 5. In fact

the nature of the offset as implied by the individual demand equations differs

as between private pension and social security wealth and the estimates differ

also across assets. The range of values is in fact quite wide: a —6.2 to +3.6

dollar change in W/Y with respect to a rise in SSW/Y, and —23.3 to +2.0 for

PFd/Y. This lack of conformity in the estimated offsets across equations is

perhaps understandable in the absence of cross—equation constraints.16 If we

regard the offsets implied by the individual demand equations as appropriate,

changes in the ratio of pension wealth to permanent income will only affect

asset demands via the "composition" effects        and .    For example, any change

in SSW/Y has an effect of                on asset demand. This is simultaneously
                               SSW
matched by a change of _6sy_j in W/Y resulting in a change in asset demand

equivalent to _1ofJ. The            combined effect is therefore zero. The changes

in SS.1 and W do however affect asset demands by changing the value of the ratios

SSW/W and PPWJW. If an alternative single value for the offset of 6 is imposed

on all the equations, the net "scale" effect on asset share demands becomes
            SSW

     The effects of pension wealth on portfolio composition are examined for

three different assumptions about the response of non—pension wealth to changes

in pension wealth. The three assumptions are that the offsets are:
                                             —26—



           (a)   zero

           (b) the weighted average of the offsets implied by the estimated

                 demand    equations. The weights being the agggregate shares of
                 each    asset in the sample.

           (c)   an estimate derived from an econometric model of total household
                 savings in non—pension wealth.
     The   values   of   the offsets (for a dollar increase in pension wealth) used

were: for the weighted average of the demand equation estimates, +0.56 and

—6.03 dollars, and for the       aggregate   estimate —0.21 and —0.23 dollars for

social security and private pension wealth respectively. The zero offset can

be interpreted as the short run behavioral response to a change in pension

wealth. Households smooth their adjustment of wealth via changes in savings,

but reallocate their portfolio immediately. The two non—zero offsets can be

thought of as different steady—states in which the conlete desired adjustment

of the level of non—pension wealth has also been made.

     Before describing the simulation exercises we turn to the specification of

the model of total household savings. The model presented is one which is deve-

loped in more detail in King and Dicks—Mireaux (1982). Wealth—holdings,

(excluding pensions), over the life—cycle are modelled as a non—linear function

of age (using the piecewise function adopted in the estimation of (3.5)), house—

hold socio—econoini.c characteristics, and the size of private and social security

wealth. To control for differences in permanent income all the wealth variables

are deflated by it. The life cycle model has been criticized, on the grounds

that one can observe a large number of households owning amounts of wealth which

appear incompatible with the need to finance that part of retirement consumption

not financed by pensions or social security. Indeed, in the Canadian sample we
                                               —27—


 found this to be true. Nevertheless, the behaviour of the majority of house-

 holds is consistent with the predictions of the life cycle model (King and

 Dicks—Mireaux 1982). Consequently in estimating the model we exclude households

with net worth of less than $2,500. Table 6 shows the results of estimating a

probit model for holding low net worth. This was used to compute the inverse of

Mills' ratio which was included in the net worth regression, presented in

Table 7, to allow for sample selection bias induced by truncating the dependent

variable.

         In Table 6 we see that educational attainment and low household earning are

correlated with small wealth holdings. This suggests an explanation for why

such     households may not act as predicted by the life—cycle model; namely that

they do not plan for the future or are unable to manage their own financial

affairs, or may      receive     such low earnings that the optimal life-cycle corisump—

tion plan implies that retirement consumption is less than or equal to the

expected value of old age         social   security payments.

         Estimates of the model,


                             7
(6.14)           =
                     a   +
                                 aVi   — 6s           — &D1     Lj   +u
                             j=l


are shown in Table 7.

         The variables are defined as earlier. In addition D1 equals one if house-

hold i is eligible for a private pension plan, zero otherwise, and             and    are

the implied offsets given by the definition of total wealth in (6.2). As the

life—cycle model predicts, asset holdings rise (apart from a small dip at ages

50—60) upto the age bracket 60—75 and then fall. The implied offset to non—

pension wealth from an additional dollar of social security or private pension
                                         — 2b—



wealth   is 27 and 23 cents respectively; the larger effect of the former possibly

due to its being indexed. The macro—economic effects of introducing a public

pension plan using a hypothetical but broadly realistic simulation udel of the

economic—demographic system of Canada in the mid—seventies is examined by Denton

and Spencer (1981). Amongst several experiments they consider the effect of

different savings offset assumptions with respect to contributions.

     Additional explanatory variables were introduced. A test for homothetic

preferences is possible by including permanent income. The sign of the coef-

ficient implies that the higher is permanent income, the lover is the ratio of

wealth to permanent income. The elasticity evaluated at the mean value of Y/W

is —0.31. Farm families possess greater wealth than is predicted by the simple

model which may   reflect   the importance of land prices to the value of such

families' net worth.    Unemployment has a depressing effect on wealth, and house-
hold size appears to have little significant influence on wealth—holding.

Measured wealth does not include the value of life insurance policies, and we

know only the number of persons in each household covered by life insurance. We

might expect that, ceteris paribus, the more members covered the less would be

the level of household wealth invested in other assets. But in fact the coef-

ficient on the life insurance variable is positive, suggesting rather that

purchase of life assurance is correlated with a greater than average preference

to save (resulting perhaps from a higher than average degree of risk aversion).

     The simulation exercises are now described. The purpose of the first

simulation is to illustrate how the effect of a change in pension wealth differs

as between two households which differ with regard to the number of assets held.

This is done for a 25% increase in 35W/I using the wealth offset from the

aggregate savings model reported above. The two portfolios we consider are the
                                        —29—



 "modal" portfolio which consists of deposits, cash, cars, houe eluity and per-

sonal debt, and one in which all assets are held. As shown in Table 3 port-

folios of five assets are the most popular, and almost half of these consist of

the "modal" portfolio (1022 households). In each case the predicted portfolios

(columns 1 and 2 in Table 8) are calculated using the mean characteristics of

those holding the "modal" portfolio. These were: permanent income of $214,098,

non—pension wealth of $29,286, social security wealth of $17,684, and private

pension wealth of $32,311. The household head is of age 141, and the dummies

imply high probabilities of being married and employed, but not of being a farm

family. The   mean number of adults with life insurance and of dependent children
above and below 18 years is 0.75, 1.59, and 0.07 respectively.
     The two predicted portfolios obviously differ, with the proportion of
assets held in non—financial form being less in the "complete" portfolio.17
Columns 3 and 14 of Table 8 give   the changes in asset shares following the
increase   in SSW/Y. In both cases the effects are small. With more assets being

held the absolute changes in the "modal" 5 assets are reduced. In the "modal"

portfolio the shares of financial and non—financial assets rise and fall respec—

tivel.y, while in the "complete" portfolio the opposite occurs.

     In Tables 9 and 10 we have simulated the effect of changes in pension

wealth on portfolio composition for a single representative household which

holds the mean portfolio of the sample of 9,788 households. Both tables 9 and

10 indicate that neither change in both types of pension wealth has a large

effect absolutely or proportionately on portfolio composition. Comparing the
two tables we observe that the effects on portfolio composition of changes in
both types of pension wealth are similar for the zero wealth offset assumption.
For the non—zero offsets the changes in non—financial assets are negative in
                                      —30—


both tables, but larger for changes in private pension wealth. The direction

of change in financial asset holdings is different for the two increases in pen-

sion wealth. For example, social security in contrast to private pension wealth

has a negative effect on the portfolio share of RRSP's held.

     The final simulations presented in Tables 11 and 12 show the effect of the

two changes in pension wealth on the aggregate portfolio of the sample. The

method employed was to calculate the change in the value of wealth held in

each asset for each household and then to compute the new econoirj—wide port-

folio. Since households own different combinations of assets it would be in-

correct to simulate this effect by using a "representativet' household assumed   to
hold the initial mean sample portfolio. A comparison of Tables 9—10 and 11—12

reveals the aggregation biases inherent in doing this. In converting shares to

absolute values and in calculating the new level of total assets (net worth plus

debt) the relevant offsets to net worth and the change in personal debt as pre-

dicted by our equation estimates were used.

     The magnitude of the predicted changes in portfolio shares reported in

Tables 11 and 12 are small, and consequently we refrain from making strong

statements about the differences in these changes as between assets, or between

the two types of pension wealth increase. The results reported in Table 12

for the weighted average offset are clearly an exception. The large changes are

a result of the high value of the offset to non—pension wealth. For several

assets this led to negative predicted asset shares which makes little sense in

our framework.18 For these reasons we exclude these results from the discussion

below. 'Negative shares were also predicted, when using the aggregate model of f—

set, for cash in both tables. For the zero offset assumption the predicted

asset share changes are similar in both tables, and apart from home equity are
                                        —31—



negative.     When the aggregate offset is used almost half of'   the   predicted

changes in shares are positive. The sign of these changes are similar for the

two increases in pension wealth, but larger in absolute size for the increase in

social security wealth.

        The simulations appear to suggest rather small effects on portfolio compo-

sition of changes in pension wealth. However, before jumping to such a conclu-

sion one should take account of the exclusion of the influence of pension wealth

on the choice of which assets to hold. The estimates of the discrete choice

model of asset demands rejorted in Table 4 indicate that such an influence

exists. At the bottom of this table the change in the probability, evaluated at

the sample means and assuming a zero offset to non—pension wealth, of holding an

asset is given for the two increases in pension wealth employed in the simula-

tions. In addition it is clear from Table 8 that a change in the number and

type of assets held will affect the nature of the portfolio composition adjust-

ment.


Conclusion

        The major result of our study is that whereas there seems to be an iden-

tifiable    effect of pension wealth on total private saving, the effect on port-
folio composition    is less significant. Moreover, within the area of portfolio

composition the main effect is in terms of the particular number and        coftibination
of    assets held rather than the amount of any given asset as a proportion of

total wealth.

       We have also demonstrated the need for, and the difficulties of

constructing, a joint discrete and continuous choice model of asset demands.

The    empirical results suggest that to ignore the joint nature of the decision
process would be an incorrect specification of household portfolio behaviour.
                                             —Al—               Dicks—Mireaux and King


                                           Appendix

             The Construction of Estimates of Individual Permanent Income


        The model for permanent income (defined as normal age—adjusted manual

earnings) is:19


(A.1)       in Y =          + Si — c(A1)


where Z is a vector of observable characteristics for individual i, y is the

associated parameter vector, and s an unobservable variable measuring charac-

teristics such as skill, or drive which is constructed such that its mean value

is zero and has variance              The term, c(A), is a cohort effect which

reflects that, for given Z, younger generations are better off than their

elders because of technical progress and capital accumulation.

        Current earnings differ from permanent income because there exists an

age-earnings profile over the life—cycle, and a transitory component. rnings

in year t are therefore given by:


(A.2)       ln Ejt =   in   y + h(At—A) + Ujt

The function h measures the age—earnings profile (assumed constant across the

population), and A is a "standard't age with respect to which permanent income is

defined. The transitory component of earnings, u, is assumed to have zero

mean, variance a2, and to be uncorrelated with Sj. Combining (A.i) and (A.2)

gives the earnings equation:


(A.3)       in Et = Z1y + g(A) + Si + Ult


where g(A) = h(A—A) —            c(At).
                                        -A2 -



 The error term, Sj + Ujt, has zero mean and variance        +       Estimation    of

 (A.3) provides consistent estimates of y and the function g. By imposing a

 cohort effect using outside information both h and c could be identified. The

 minimum variance estimator of Si, the unobservable individual—specific effect,

 is given by;


 (A.L)       s =   a(s   + uit)


where


(A.5)         = _________
                    +

Therefore, given values for 2 and o52,ç and c, pei-mianent income may be

constructed for each individual. With observations on earnings for only      one
year it is not possible to obtain estimates        s2 and 2 as well as y from
(A.3). A value of 0.5 for i was therefore assumed. This value was based on the

results of studies which used longitudinal data to estimate the relative magni-

tudes of a2 and 2 20

     The earnings equation (A.3) was   estimated   for male household heads and for

wives separately. HouseholUs headed by a woman were deleted from the sample

because a substantial fraction of these were headed by elderly women, probably

widows, and therefore for whom permanent income is determined primarily by the

lifetime earnings of the deceased husband for which no information was

available.

     Equation (A.3) implicitly assumes individuals are in "full—time"

employment, and does not allow for systematic changes in labor supply resulting

from spells of unemployment during part of the year. Hence the equation was

estimated for all individuals whose annual earnings were greater than $2,000.
                                         -A3-


The sample selection bias induced by this truncation of the dependent variable

was corrected for using the two—stage procedure proposed by Heckman (1979).

Equation (A.3) was estimated by OLS, with the inverse of Mills' ratio coiiiputed

from a probit model of earnings greater or less than $2,000 included as an addi—

tional explanatory variable, to give consistent estimates of y and the g func—

tion. A discussion of the estimates can be found in King and Dicks—Mireaux

(1982) and details of them are available on request.

      For individuals included in the earnings regressions pernanent income is

equal to the age adjusted structural component of earnings given by observable

variables, plus one—half of the residual in the earnings equation. For the

excluded 1,873 male household heads permanent income was predicted by the struc-

tural component alone. The same procedure was adopted for wives but with an

explicit adjustment, (based on educational attainment and the presence of depen-

dent children), for non—participation in the labour force at various stages of

the   life—cycle. By this method, the estimate of the permanent income of wives
is   independent of   that of their husbands, and vice versa. In neither the probit
or   earnings regressions of husbands or wives, do explanatory variables pertain-

ing to the spouse enter. It is not entirely obvious which characteristics of a

spouse should affect the labor participation or earnings choice of the other.

To the extent that some do there is the more general problem of how to model

this. Does the wife make her decision conditional on that of her husband's, or

vice versa? We choose to assume that these decisions are made independently.

      Household permanent income is the sum     of   the estimates for husbands and

wives. Mean estimated permanent income of men is $15,928 and of wives $7,I51.
                                             —Fl—                       Dicks—1ireaw( and King

                                           FOOTNOTES


 1.    Strictly speaking the relevant variables are the expected relative prices

       and inflation rate, which will in general differ across individuals. This

       source of variation is allowed for insofar as it can be explained by the

       observable   individual characteristics included in the demand           equations.

 2.    All computations on this data base were carried out by the authors and

       should not be attributed to Statistics Canada. Further details of the data

      base may be found in Statistics Canada (1979).


.3.   This is because:



                                       =
                           J!(J-j)!


      which includes the combination owning zero assets.

i.    In the context of a logistic distribution as applied to the ownership of

      conswner durables, Amemiya (1915) examines a three—good case and Billowes

      (1982) presents estimates for a model with six durables. In the latter

      case the number of dumn         variables   was   too   great to allow estimation of the

      model.


5.    The estimated age—earnings profiles are those estimated for the purpose of

      constructing our measure of permanent income.


6.    A brief sunuriary   of   the evidence on pension plan indexation in Canada, and

      relevant references, can be found in Dicks—Mireaw (19b1).
                                            -F2 -




                                Footnotes    (continued)


7.   Other    sources of information about the retirement income arrangements in

     Canada are Statistics Canada (1978) and Wolfson (1979).


8.   This    calculation differs as between three types of asset. For personal use

     property such as personal and household effects, cars, boats or cottages

     gains are reported only if the proceeds of sale were more than $1,000. A

     gain on own homes is not taxed if the house was a principal residence.

     Listed personal property, (works of art, jewellery and collectors' items),

     are similarly treated except that losses may be offset against gains where

     the original adjusted cost is greater that $1,000. All gains and losses on

     other capital properties must be reported. If the loss exceeds $1,000 the

     excess may be used to reduce taxable capital gains and other income in

     1975, 1977 and future years. For business, farm or professional equity

     and real estate (other than owner—occupied homes), capital cost or depre-

     ciation allowances, CCA, are available. Bates for commonly held assets

     are    5% and 10% for buildings of brick and wood respectively, 20% on
     machinery and equipment, and 30% on vehicles.

9.   The American IRA   and KEOGH plans, before the 1981 change in    the   tax law,
     were only available to self—employed persons or those without company

     sponsored plans.


10. Certain features of the tax law facilitate this optimizing behavior.

     Spouses may contribute to each others RHOSP and BRSP, and unused portions

     of eligible deductions for interest and dividend income are transferable.

     This    suggests that when deductions are not fully exhausted,   and a husband's
                                                -F3-


                                     Footnotes (continued)                                I




        marginal     tax rate is greater than or equal to his wife's, our procedure

        is appropriate.


11. A more detailed account is available on request from the authors.


12. In the case of Quebec the procedure is different, and allowance was made for

       this.


13. To compute a consistent estimate of the covariance matrix of the demand

        equations, we required the same        sample to be used in both the probit and
        second stage of the estimation procedures. Consequently households for

       which the asset share equalled unity were excluded from the probit model

       for that asset.


i!&.   The insignificant negative effect of the tax rate on the probability of

       owning a RHOSP may   partly be a problem of endogeneity as the        RHOSP deduc-

       tion    was incorporated in the calculation of the tax rate.

15.    Home equity was     chosen because of its large share in household ixrtfolios.
       Consequently,     any proportional errors in forecasting changes in its share

       due to its residual role will be reduced. Bonds which are the most susce;-

       tible to measurement error in the survey were not used because of their

       small share. In any event as most of the predicted changes were of small

       magnitude any     errors   are also   small. Indeed   the difference between the

       change   in   the portfolio share of home equity predicted by the estimated

       equation   and that calculated as a residual was typically no larger than
         0.5 percentage points.
                                        —FIt —




                               Footnotes (continued)


16. One n.y also ask whether, if the offsets were constrained to be similar

     across equations, the remaining parameter estimates would change signifi-

     cantly.


17. A disturbing factor in this exercise is that without imposing the adding up

     constraint on the predicted portfolio of all assets the share of home

     equity was only 9.3%. With only five assets the difference between the

     predicted and imposed share of home equity was only —5.2%.


.18. The possibility of predicting negative aggregate portfolio shares of   assets
     arises  for the following reason. In predicting the new level of total
     assets at the level of the individual household nothing in the model
     precludes   negative holdings. This is more likely the larger the offset

     employed in the simulation. Consequently, although the predicted asset

     shares by construction must be positive, when they are multiplied by total

     household assets to get the value of each asset held negative values can

     arise. In the simulation performed the aggregate value of net worth and

     total assets after summing over households was always positive. However,

     the aggregate value of the decline in holdings of particular assets was in

     several cases greater than the initial value and hence the predicted aggre-

    gate shares are negative.


19. This definition excludes the annuity value of receipts of gifts and inheri-

    tances, on which no data are available in our sample, and also

     "super—normal" profits (and losses).
                                        -F 5—



                                Footnotes   (continued)

20.   These studies, which used U.S. data, were Lillard (1977),   Lillard nd
      Willis   (1978), and Lillard and Weiss (1979). See King and Dicks—Mireawc

      (1982)   for further discussion of this point.
                                         —Ri—                Dicks-Mireaux and King


                                      REFERCES

Arnerniya, T. 1974. Multivariate regression and simultaneous equation models

    when the dependent variables are truncated normal. Econometrica 42:

    999-1012.


___________     1975.   Qualitative response models. Annals of Economic and Social

    Measurement 4: 363—72.


Auerbach, A. and King, M. A. 1982. Thxation, portfolio choice and debt—equity

    ratio: A general equilibrium model. Quarterly Journal of Economics 97:

    forthcoming.


Billowes, E. The ownership of consumer durabies     in the U.K. Ph.D. diss.,

    University of Birmingham.


Davies,   J. B. 1979. On the size distribution of wealth in Canada. Review of

    Income   and Wealth, September: 237—259.

Denton, F. T. and Spencer, B. G. 1981. A macro—economic analysis of the
    effects of a public pension plan. Canadian Journal of Economics 14: 609—35.


Dicks—Mireaux, L—D. L. 1981. Canadian retirement wealth: Legislation and

    construction. Mimeographed.


Feldstein, M. S. 1976. Personal taxation and portfolio composition: An

    econometric analysis. Econometrica 44: 631—650.


Greene, W. H. 1981. Sample selection bias as a specification error: Comment.

    Econometrica 49: 795—99.
                                         -R2 -



                                References (continued)


Heckrnan, J. J. 1979. Sample selection bias as a specification error.

     Econometrica 7: 153—62.


King, M. A.   1982. The structure of discrete and continuous choices: Modelling

    asset demands. University of Birmingham. Mimeographed.


___________ and Dicks—Mireaux L—D. L.     1982. Asset holdings and the life cycle.

    Economic Journal 92: forthcoming.


Lee, L—F. 1981. Simultaneous equations models with discrete and censored

    variables. In Manski, C. F. and McFadden, D., eds. ,   Structural   analysis

    of discrete data with econometric applications. MIT Press.


Lillard, L. A. 1977. Inequality: Earnings vs. human wealth. American

    Economic Review 67: 1355.


_______________ and Weiss Y.   1979. Components in variation in panel earnings

    data: The gary income maintenance experiment. Econometrica 47: 37—54.


______________ and Willis R. S. 1978. rnamic aspects of earnings mobility.

    Econometrica, L6: 985—1012.


Oja, G.   1981. The Distribution of wealth in Canada. Paper read at the

    Seventeenth General Conference of the International Association for Research

    in Income and Wealth, August 1981, at Gouvieux, France. Mimeographed.


Statistics Canada 1978. Social security national programs. 0ttaa.


   ______________   1979.   Evaluation of data on family assets and debts 1977.
   Ottawa.
                                    -R3-


                           References (continued)


Woifson, M. C. 1979. The lifetime impact of the retirement income system: A

   quantitative analysis. Appendix 5, The retirement income system in Canada:

   Problems aTld alternative policies for reform, Vol. II, Report of the sk

   Force on Retirement Income Policy. Ottawa.
                                             Table 1            Dicks-Mireaux and King


                  Percentage Composition of Wealth by Asset, 1917

                  (shares are defined with respect to total assets)

                                     (i)               (2)             (3)

                                                             Average of individual
                                  Canadaa               b
                                                  Sample     Household asset sharesb

Total DepDsits                      11.0               9.1            16.0

Total Bonds                          3.3               2.6             2.7

Cash                                 0.2               0.2             1.6

Stocks and Shares                    1.9               1.3             0.1

RHOSP                                0.2               0.2             0.6

RRSP                                 1.8               1.8             1.5

Other Non—Liquid Financial    '
                                                       2.1             1.1
Assets

Passenger Cars                       1.8               L.8           16.6

Home Equity                        i.6             38.3              14)4.0


ea1 Estate Equity                   9.)4               9.8             5.9

Business Equity                    21.6            29.5               9.3

Personal Debt                       14.8               5.3           56.0

Mean Total Assets ($)             514,1482        58,147)4          58,14714

Mean Net Worth ($)                146,273         55,357            55,357

Mean Social Security                na             72,799            72,799
Wealth ($)c

Mean Private Pension                na             26,9)40           26,940
Wealth (5)C

Mean Permanent Income ()            na             22,598            22,598

a
    Calculated over all 12,7314 households using population weights.
b
    Calculated over sample of 97db households, with no weights applied.

C Authors' estimates.
                                                                                     Table 2


                                                       Wealth, Portfolio, Income and Tax Characteristics for
                                                         Sub-Samples with Positive IbId Ings of Each Asset

                                               (all figures are calculated as means of individual observations
                                                                      for which      1)
                                                                                           P
                                                                                                       Assets

                                                (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)      ('8)      (9)      (10)       (11)       (12)


                                                                                Stocks                                                         Fa)       Busi—
                               Total                                              &                                                  I-bee    Estate     ness
                   a
       Variable                    Sample   Deposits      Ponds      Cash       Shares     RI-4OSP      RRSP      ONLFA    Cars                                    Debt
                                                                                                                                    Equity    Equity    Equity

Share of Asset In                   —          17.7       10.1       1.8           7.8     12.0          9.0      14.0     19.4      60.8      30.1      48.1      157.3
Total Assets
             (Pa)
per cent.


SSW/W                               1.3        14.4        2.2       15.7          2.2         1.0       8.5       2.5     6.6        2.6       2.0       0.5       6.1


PR/W                               0.5         3.4         2.1       3.3           0.9         3.3       9.4       0.3     2.8        0.9       0.8       0.1       3.5

W/Y                                 2.4         2.9        3.7       2.8           5,0         2.2       4.5       6.0      2.8       3.6       4.8       7.1       2.2

SSW/Y                              3.2         3.5         3.4       3.6           3.2         2.8       3.2      3.6      3.6'       3.8      3.7        4.1       3.5

PK1/Y                               1.2         1.0        1.3           1.0       1.5         1.6       1.4       1.0      1.0       1.0       1.1       0.5        1.1

Permanent Income                   22,598     21,367      22,683    21,084       24,734    27,785       25,087    21,437   21,860    20,776    21,669 20,446 22,849
(y),   ($'s)


Marginal Tax       Fte         30.3           31.1        33.9      30.7        37.6       36.3         38.4      33.6     31.9      31.1                 31.0      32.4
                                                                                                                                              •34.0
of   Ebusehold Head

No. of observations                 9,788      8,789       2,592     8,676           895         447      1,630      751   8,295      6,960     1,906      1,876   6,327
for which        and
               p>O
        1
p
Ne. of observations                 330           69        3             141        0           0         0         0     63         50         0        2          3
for which              1
               p
a
     W = Net   Worth;      SSW =    Social Security Wealth;      PP1 =   Private   Pension Wealth.
                     Table 3


     Distribution of Household Portfolios

         by Number of Assets Held   1977


Number of
Assets Held           Frequency            ____
     0                     81               0.8

     1                    213               2.1

    2                     5147              5.14

    3                   1,166              11.5

    14
                        2,071              20.5

    5                   2,532              25.0

    6                   1,8142             18.2

    7                     988               9.8

    8                     433               4.3

    9                     174               1.7

   10                      55               0.5

   11                      114              0.1

   12                          2           0.0


                       10,118              100
                                                                           Table 4


                                                  Probit    l4Ddel     for Positive Asset Holdings

                                                          (standard errors in parentheses)


                                                                                             Assets


                           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)     (8)         (9)       (10)        (11)       (12)


                                                             Stocks                                                                Real         Busi—
                                                               &                                                         Home     Estate        ness
Explanatory Variablea   Deposits     Bonds       Cash        Shares      RHOSP         RRSP      ONLFA      P. Cars     Equity    Equity       Equity      Debt


Constant                 —2.531     —2.300     0.012         6.897      12.691      —10.200      -5.112     —3.401     6.091      —1.483     —11.129      7.494
                         (0.909)    (0.807)    (0.860)      (1.148)      (1.801)     (1.109)     (1.076)    (0.809)    (0.833)    (0.869)     (0.984)    (0.768)


Marginal Tax Rate         0.783      1.066      0.622        1.607       —0.345      2.060        1.093      1.384      1.240      1.540      -0.273     0.450
                         (0.180)    (0. 159)   (0.170)      (0.228)      (0.307)     (0.212)     (0.214)    (0. 161)   (0. 168)   (0. 171)    (0. 183)   (0.145)


Ln V                      0,372      0.127      0.095        0.511        1.100      0.875       0.335       0.346     —0.754     —0.028       0.925      0.726
                         (0.095)    (0. 084)   (0. 090)     (0.119)      (0.181)     (0. 114)    (0.
                                                                                                   112)     (0. 085)   (0. 087)   (0. 091)    (0. 101)   (0.080)


W/Y                       0,104      0.021      0.017        0.031        0,004       0.039      0.036       0.029      0.220      0.044       0.198     —0.014
                         (0.008)    (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.030)    (0.004)    (0.009)    (0.003)     (0.006)    (0.002)

SSW/Y                    —0.095     —0,064     —0.017       —0.033        0.121       0.037       0.022      0.036     —0.035     —0.002       0.216      0.147
                         (0.016)    (0.015)    (0.015)      (0, 023)     (0. 042)    (0.023)     (0. 020)   (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.016)     (0. 019)   (0. 014)

PPs/Y                     0.097      0.090      0.052        0.042        0.032       0.036       0.027      0.107      0.120      0.002      —0. 189     0.030
                         (0.018)    (0.011)    (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.016)     (0.012)     (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.013)    (0.012)     (0.015)    (0.012)

Married                   0.069      0,274      0,108        0.058       —0.572       0.358      —0.189      0.469      1.524      0.398       0.258     —0.200
                         (0.080)    (0.073)    (0.076)      (0.102)      (0. 141)    (0.094)     (0.096)    (0.070)    (0.076)    (0.082)     (0.091)    (0.067)

Edicatlon: Secondary      0.297      0.241     —0.004        0.304        0.293       0.243       0.137      0.118      0.031      0.147      —0.003      0.052
or above                 (0.048)    (0.034)    (0.041)      (0.044)      (0.052)     (0.038)     (0.047)    (0.042)    (0.037)    (0.037)     (0.041)    (0.034)

       <   40            —0. 350    —0.457     —0. 164      —0.502        0.083      —0. 552     —0.263     —0. 067    —0. 182    —0.302       0.396      0. 522
                         (0. 046)   (0. 037)   (0. 042)     (0. 049)     (0.064)     (0. 044)    (0. 050)   (0.042)    (0. 039)   (0. 039)    (0. 044)   (0. 034)

Household Earnings       —0.273      0.490     —0.181        0.154       —0.743      —0.337       0.202     —0,433     —0.161     —0.026      —0.349     —0.507
   6.000                 (0. 054)   (0. 048)   (0. 052)     (0. 068)     (0. 130)    (0. 065)    (0. 063)   (0.048)    (0.052)    (0. 051)    (0, 056)   (0. 043)
                                       Table 4.    ftobit Pbdel for Positive Asset I-bldings (continued)



                                                                                    Assets


                               (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)            (7)     (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)      (12)


                                                           Stocks                                                          Real       Busi—
                                                                                                               Hone       Estate      ness
Explanatory Varieblea      Deposits    Bonds       Cash    Shares   RHOSP     RRSP      ONLFA      P. Cars    Equity      Equity     Equity    Debt

Nos. above    limit          8789      2592        8676      895      447     1630           151     8295      6960        1906       1876     6327

Nos. below limit              1260     7523        1301     9223     9671     8488       9367        1760      3108        8212       8240     3788

                             1064.6    814.0      219.2    713.9    382.7    1426.8     319.8      1496.5    3231.0       724.2     2544.9    1654.2



The probability P            0.912    0.241       0.876    0.068    0.02.7   0.119      0.066       0.859     0.770       0.172      0.153    0.635
of positive asset
holdings evaluated
at the sample means



The change In P
for a:


2 Increase in               —0.015    —0.018   —0.003     —0.004    0.008    0.006      0.002       0.007    —0.010      —0.003      0.051    0.049
ssw
 V


25% increase in              0.004     0.007      0.003    0.001    0.004    0.002     —0.001       0.006     0.008       0.002     —0.010    0.003
I-'Pv4

  V




      Dummy variables take the value unity when the description applies to the household, zero otherwise,             individual   variables refer to
      the head of a household.
                                                                         Table 5

                                                                Asset Demand Equations
                                                           (standard errors in parentheses)
                                                            Dependent Variable In (Pj/l—Pj)

                                                                                                 Assets


                                        (2)       (3>          (4)         (5)             (6)            (7)     (8)         (9)       (10)      (11)      (12)
                              (1)


                                                              Stocks                                                                   Peal      jsi—
                                                                &                                                            Home      Estate     ness
                                                  Cash        Shares     RHOSP             RRSP      ONIFA      P. Cars     Equity     Equity    Equity    Debt
Explanatory Variable8      Deposits   Bonds


                           1.268       1.181      1.596       2.839      —0.214           0.753      0.595       0.881     —0.512     —0.870    —1.268    0.008
Marginal Tax Rate
                          (0.223)     (0.443)    (0.710)     (0.872)     (0.701)          (0.534)    (1.119)    (0.256)    (0.197)    (0.501)   (0.471)   (0.337)



Ln Y                      —0.008      —0.141     —0.541      —0.044      —0.150           —0.171     —0.008      0.100      0.123      0.139     0.453     0.009
                          (0.018)     (0.065)    (0.085)     (0. 109)    (0.071)          (0.058)    (0,166)    (0.025)    (0.029)    (0.081)   (0.060)   (0.029)

                                                 —0.051      —0.015      —0.113           —0.025     —0.012     -0.041     —0.028      0.009     0.005    —0.093
W/Y                       —0.024      —0.019
                          (0.004)     (0,007)    (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.017)          (0.005)    (0.012)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)

                                      —0.057     —0.003      —0.026       0.052           —0.155     —0.005      0.122     —0.009     —0.031    —0.006     0.142
SSi/Y                      0.006
                          (0.024)     (0.047)    (0.052)     (0.092)     (0.088>          (0.054)    (0.088)    (0.018)    (0.011)    (0.034)   (0.043)   (0.028)

                                       0.002      0.090       0.023      —0.005            0.026     —0.025      0.008      0.018     —0.018     0.127    —0.003
PPi4/Y                     0.013
                          (0.016)     (0.032)    (0.044)     (0,039)     (0.031)          (0.021)    (0.065)    (0.015)    (0.014)    (0.024)   (0.046)   (0.020)

                                      —0.001      0.0003   0.003          0.002           —0,0004    —0.001      0.0004    —0.0002    —0.001    —0.002     0.0009
SSW/W                      0.00007
                          (0.00007)   (0.001)    (0.0001) (0.004)        (0.001)          (0.0018) (0.001)      (0.0001) (0.0004) (0.003)       (0.002)   (0.0001)

                          —0.00005     0.001     —0.003       0.001      —0.002            0.0002     0.004     —0.0003    —0.003     —0.002     0.003    —0.0001
PPv4/W
                          (0.00013)   (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.006)     (0.001)          (0.0016) (0.011)      (0.0001) (0.002)      (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.0002)


No.    of Persons with     0.102      —0.023      0.029      -0.094      —0.046           —0.091     —0. 108      0.049    —0.022     —0.026     0.012     0.041
Life insurance            (0.020)     (0.032>    (0.040)     (0,060)     (0,050)          (0.032)    (0.093)     (0,017)   (0.017)    (0.032)   (0.051)   (0,027)

Farm Family Ejmrn'        —0. 097     —0.410      0.294      —1. 152      0.278           —0, 600    —1.165     —0, 506    —1.305      0, 098    0.955     0,245
                          (0.102)     (0.177)    (0.201)     (0.305)     (0.375)          (0,155)    (0.398)     (0,087)   (0.081)    (0.169)   (0.127)   (0.146)

Married Djnm              —0.070       0,109      0.538        0,263      0.171            0,061     —0.098      —0.088     0.204      0.349    0.189     —0.080
                                                 (0. 231)     (0. 281)    (0.   1   90)   (0. 146)   (0. 339)    (0,109)   (0. 097)   (0.187)   (0.213)   (0. 116)
                          (0.074)      (0.173)


Self-Employed    tXimmy    0.187       0.408     —0.007        0.114      0.101            0.188      0.034     —0.053     —0.197     —0.093     0.078     0.069
                           (0.084)    (0.146)    (0.165)      (0.225)    (0.271)          (0. 121)   (0.312)     (0,073)   (0,069)    (0.110)   (0.110)   (0.114>
                                                         Table 5      Asset Dennd Equations (continued)

                                                                                                              Assets


                            (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)         (10)         (11)       (12)


                                                                      Stocks                                                                                        Real         Busi—
                                                                          &                                                                           Horns        Estate        ness
Explanatory Varlablea    Deposits        Bonds           Cash            Shares       RHOSP            RRSP            ONLFA        P. Cars           Equity       Equity       Equity      Debt


Unsnployed or   btin    —0.006           0.295           0.178        0.246           0.018            0.015           0.503        —0.022        —0.009          —0.145       —0.059     —0.015
Labour Force Dummy      (0. 062)     (0.112)         (0.121)         (0.235)         (0.166)       (0.125)         (0.285)          (0. 054)      (0. 055)        (0.115)      (0.217)    (0.084)

,      of Children      —0.113       —0.084          —0.018              0.022       —0.083        —0.043          —0.148            0.025         0.032           0.001        0.026      0.094
< 18    years           (0.018)      (0. 032)        (0. 034)        (0. 059)        (0. 050)      (0. 029)        (0. 088)         (0.015)       (0.015)         (0.029)      (0. 040)   (0. 022)

No. of Children aged     0.111       —0.054           0.162              0.007        0.030         0.080           0.178            0.099            0.011        0.030       —0.246      0.207
18—24 in ful l—t Ime    (0. 062)     (0. 093)        (0, 120)        (0. 160)        (0. 154)      (0. 082)        (0.266)          (0. 052)      (0.050)         (0.086)      (0. 147)   (0.080)
schooling

Dl                         —
                                     —0.3 18         —0. 136         —0.775           0.071        —0.130           0.240           —0.691        —0.934           0.019       —0.119     —0,291
                           —     )   (0.1 73)        (0. 134)        (0.380)         (0. 315)      (0. 207)        (0. 577)         (0. 058)      (0.058)         (0. 146)     (0.1 70)   (0. 082)

                                           —
02                      —0.031                       —0. 157         —0.224          —0.053        —0. 155         —0.025           —0.217        —0.209          —0.263       —0.387     —0.357
                        (0. 042)     (     —     )   (0.   084)      (0. 122)        (0. 094)      (0. 063)        (0. 191)         (0. 036)      (0. 037)        (0.069)      (0. 112)   (0.059)

03                                                         —
                         0.165       —0.155                          —0.546          —0.030        —0.146              0.237         0.160         0.058          —0.309       —0.060     —0.097
                                                           —
                        (0. 061)     (0.100)         (           )   (0.213)         (0.175)       (0. 119)        (0. 322)         (0.051)       0. 051)         (0.106)      (0. 152)   (0.079)


04                                                                        —
                        —0.017        0.014          —0.106                          —0.228            0.035       —0.314           —0.170        —0.084          —0,158       —0.376     —0.061
                                                                           —
                        (0.064       (0. 084)        (0. 126)        C           )   (0.129)       (0. 073)        (0. 226)         (0.055)       (0. 054)        (0. 091)     (0.147)    (0. 087)

                                                                                           —
05                      —0.040           0.019       —0. 305             0.072                     —0. 072             0. 152       —0.614        —0.381          —0. 196      —0. 116    —0. 505
                        (0.086)      (0.122)         (0.170)         (0.207)         (
                                                                                           —   )   (0. 106)        (0.4 19)         (0.074)       (0. 101)        (0.   150)   (0.250)    (0.1 15)

06                                                                                                       —
                         0, 121       0.058          —0. 145          0.2 90         —0. 187                           0.020        —0.196        —0.247          —0. 159      —0.474     —0.317
                        (0.051)      (0.073)         (0.101)         (0. 128)        (0.107)       C     —     )   (0.209)          (0.044)       (0.044)         (0. 077)     (0.122)    (0.071)

07                      —0. 116       0.048          —0. 168         —0.173          -0. 007       —0.155                —          —0. 280       —0.365          -0. 100      —0. 206    —0.114
                                     (0. 098)        (0. 133)        (0.155)         (0,   183)    (0. 087)        C     —      )
                        (0. 067)                                                                                                    (0.059)       (0. 059)        (0. 096)     (0. 144)   (0. 095)

08                      —0. 909      —0.491          —0. 538         —0. 296         —0.476        —0.364          —0. 248               —        —0.791          —0. 184      —0. 546     0.122
                        (0.056)      (0.109)         (0.108)         (0.219)         (0. 169)      (0.1 19)        (0.274)          C    —    )   (0.052)         (0.099)      (0.135)    (0.080)

09                      —2.002       —1.632          —1.585          —1.303          —1.118        —1.046          —1.124           —2.219              —         —1.490       —1.093     —1.605
                        (0.041)      (0.082)         (0.091)         (0. 179)        (0. 109)      (0.088)         (0.242)          (0.041)       C     —     )   (0.093)      (0. 150)   (0.062)
                                                  Table 5      Asset Demand Equations (continued)

                                                                                              Assets


                               (1)      (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)            (7)     (8)         (9)          (10)            (11)           (12)


                                                               Stocks                                                                   lal             BusI—
                                                                                                                          l-brne       Estate           ness
                                       Bonds       Cash        Shares     RHOSP         RRSP       ONLIA     P. Cars     Equity        Equity          Equity          Debt
Explanatory Variable8    Deposits

                                                                                                  —0. 145    —0.429     —1. 018          —         —0. 880         —0.324
010                     —0.398        —0.174     —0. 262      —0.158     —0. 465      —0.164
                                                                                                                                   C     —     )   (0.106)         (0.066)
                        (0.047)       (0.073)    (0.092)      (0.131)    (0.126)      (0.068)     (0.196)    (0.040)    (0.039)

                                                                                                                                                         —
011                     —0.7 51       —0.736     —0.378       —0.339     —0. 661      —0.295      —0. 225    —0.696     —1.499     —0.   739                       —0.148
                                                                                                                        (0.056)    (0.087)         (     —     )   (0.087)
                        (0.066)       (0. 107)   (0.128)      (0. 172)   (0.   179)   (0. 091)    (0. 257)   (0. 057)

                                                                                                                                                                        —
012                     —0.713        —0.339      0.056       —0.018      0.065        0.073      —0.024      0.475      0.132     —0.146           0.212
                                                                                                                                                                        —
                        (0.041)       (0.070)    (0.082)      (0.139)    (0. 102)     (0.067)     (0. 197)   (0.036)    (0.036)    (0.069)         (0.103)         (


VI                      —0.002         0,015     —0.066       —0.066      0.015        0.029       0.028     —0.095      0.094         0.031       —0.079          —0.078
                        (0.011)       (0. 022)   (0. 022)     (0. 054)   (0. 024)     (0.028)     (0. 060)   (0. 010)   (0.014)    (0. 029)        (0. 036)        (0. 014)

V2                       0.013         0,006      0.010        0.008     —0.058        0.021       0.044     -0.038      0.016      0.013           0.035          —0.074
                        (0.009)       (0,016)    (0.018)      (0.029)    (0.022)      (0.015)     (0.046)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.016)         (0.021)         (0.012)

V3                       0.023         0.010      0.010        0.039     —0.011        0.007      —0.084     —0.002      0.009      0.004          —0.001          —0.040
                        (0.009)       (0.016)    (0.019)      (0.028)    (0.027)      (0.014)     (0.045)    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.015)         (0.021)         (0.012)

V4                       0.008        —0,003     —0.024       —0.024      0.016        0.034       0.074     —0.022      0.009     —0.017          —0.048          —0.038
                        (0.011)       (0.044)    (0.020)      (0.029)    (0.030)      (0.015)     (0.046)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.016)         (0.025)         (0.015)

V5                       0.086         0.152      0.022        0.187      0.025        0.051      —0. 174    —0.040     —0.051     —0.024          —0.038          —0.110
                        (0. 029)      (0.003)    (0. 057)     (0. 089)    (0. 128)    (0. 052)    (0. 125)   (0. 026)   (0, 024)   (0. 047)        (0. 071)        (0.053)

V6                      —0.003        —0.008     —0.002       —0.010      0.002       —0.011       0.011      0.002      0.001      0,0005 0.006                       0.0w
                        (0. 002)      (0. 265)   (0. 004)     (0. 007)    (0. 012)    (0. 005)    (0.010)    (0. 002)   (0.002)    (0.004) (0.006)                 (0,004)

Vi                        0.055        0.234       0.143        0.112    —0.477         0.890     —0.556     —0. 192    —0.122          0.229      —0.864          —0. 194

                         (0. 158)     (0. 173)    (0. 340)     (0.592)    (1.335)      (0.596)    (0. 777)   (0.167)    (0.142)        (0.297)     (0.676)         (0.461)

 Inverse of   Mills'    —0. 180         0.138      3.386      —0.065       0.073        0.138     —0.974      0.452      0.327     —0.040          —1.075           0.560
a t lo                   (0.   168)    (0.260)    (1 • 166)   (0. 312)    (0.213)      (0.162)    (0. 555)   (0. 174)   (0. 093)   (0. 254)        (0. 103)        (0. 189)

 S,E.    of equation      1.674         1.504      2.722        1.700      0.915        1.187       2.120      1.374     1.297         1.326           1.782           1.884
                                                 Table 5   Asset Demand Equations (continued)

                                                                                        Assets


                                (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)          (6)            (7)        (8)         (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)


                                                           Stocks                                                               Ial      Busi—
                                                             &                                                         l-bmo   Estate    ness
Explanatory Variable8        Deposits   Bonds     Cash     Shares   RHOSP         RRSP      ONLFA         P. Cars     Equity   Equity    Equity    Debt


                              8756       2559     8643       862         414      1597           718        8262       6927      1873     1843     6294
Degrees of Freedom

Mean                         0.087      0.042    0.003     0.027    0.065        0.050           0.056     0.104      0.644    0.241     0.456    0.085




a
    Dummy   variables   taka the value unity when the description appl   ies,   zero otherwise.          Individual   dummies refer to the household head.
                                                                            Table 5   Asset Demand Equations (continued)



index of Explanatory Variables


   —
Dl   D12 are           dumrn'      variables which               taF   the value unity if   the   household has positive holdings of assets 1—12, where the numeric index
corresponds            to the equatIon column nuibers.

Durmy    Variables take the value unltl when the descrIption applies to the household, zero otherwise. Individual variables                                 refer to the
heal   of  a household.
        A farm         fnl
                    iy is one which any member receives more than 5Y of his income from self—employment in farming.
        The labour force status dummies relate to the week in which the survey was undertaken.

Vi —    V7,   a piecewise function of age, (A).                            Define the following dummies for household         I,


              = I
        b11             if A1 < 30, zero otherwise
              =    I    if 30      < 40, zero otherwise
        b21                            A1


              =    1    If 40      < 50, zero otherwise
        b31                            A1


              =    I    If    50                <   60, zero otherwise
                                       A1


        b51 =      1    if   60                     75, zero otherwise
                                       A1


        b6i        I    if    75 <          ,
                                       A zero otherwi se

                                   —
                  Then       Vi        Vi correspond to,
                                                      6
              =                         +       15                                                       =
        V11        b11(A1—15)                         L    bji                                     V51       b51(A1-60) + 15b61
                                                     j=2
                                                      6                                            V61       b5i(A1—60) + 225b61
        V21        b2i(Ai—30) + 10                    L    bji                                           =
                                                     j=3                                           V71       b61
                                                      6
              =
        V31        b3i(Al—40) + 10                         bjI
                                                     J=4
                                                      6
        V4i = b41(A1—50) + 10
                                                     j=5


        which is a linear piecewise function of age with                              a quadratic form        beten   the ages of 60 and 75.
                                                Table 6

                              Probit Model for Small Wealth—Holdings

                                    (standard errors in parentheses)

                           Variablea                                    W <   $2,500
             Constant                                                     4.209
                                                                         (0.152)

             Ln Y
                                                                         (o.oo)
             Household Earnings < $6,000                                  0.353
                                                                         (0.052)

             No. of Persons Unemployed                                    0.229
                                                                         (0.030)

             Ae   <   10                                                  o.88b
                                                                         (0.052)

             Self—employed                                               —0.607
                                                                         (o.ni)
             Home Owner                                                   1.899
                                                                         (0.012)
             Farm Familyb                                                _0.L06
                                                                         (0.202)

             Married                                                      0.018
                                                                         (o.o6)-)

             Education: Secondary or above                               —0.361
                                                                         (0.047)

             Nos. below limit                                             1,839
             Nos. above     limit                                         8,279
             x2(9)                                                        1,1l6.2

a
    Duinnr   variables     take the value unity when the description applies to the
    household,       zero otherwise. Individual variables refer to the head of a
    household.
b
    A family in which any member           receives   more than 50% of his income from self—
    employment in farming.
                         Table 7


Net Worth (w) Regression: Truncated Sample W     $2,500

           (standard errors in parentheses)

             Dependent Variable



Constant                                       11.825
                                               (2.76)

Vi                                              0.071
                                               (o.o3)

V2                                              o.o51
                                               (0.021)

V3                                              0.177
                                               (0.028)

                                               —0.002
                                               (0.032)

V5                                              0.049
                                               (0.086)

v6                                             —0.009
                                               (o.©o'r)


V7                                             0.091
                                               (0.512)

Farm Family Dwnny                               7.376
                                               (0.257)
No. of Persons Unemployed                      —0.361
                                               (0.105)

No. of Adults in Household                      0.1145
                                               (0.076)

No. of Persons with Life Insurance             0.115
                                               (o.o6')

Ln Y                                           —1.013
                                               (0.256)

Social Security Wealth
                                               —0.269
                                               (o.o6i)
                   Table T   (continued)


Private Pension Wealth
            Y                              —0.227
                                           (o.o'7)

Inverse   of Mills' Ratio                  —1.379
                                           (0.175)

S.E. of equation                            5.182

                                           0.182

Degrees of Freedom                         8,263
                                           Table 8



              Predicted Portfolio of the "Average" Individual with (a)

                  the Modal Portfolio and (b) a Complete Portfolio

                          following a 25% Increase in


                                                               Change in Portfolio
                                 Initial Portfolio %           (percentage points)

                                Hold 5           Hold all     Hold 5       Hold all
                                Assets            Assets      Assets        Assets


Total Deposits                    14.51               1.36     0.014          0.01

Total nds                          —                  1.99      —            —0.08

Cash                              0.13                0.03     0.001           0

Liquid Financial Assets           14.614              3.38     0.014         —0.07

Stocks and Shares                                     1.11      —            —0.02

RHOSP                                                 0.714                   0.05

RRSP                                                  2.141                  —0.27

Other Non—Liquid                                      3.93                   —0.01
Financial Assets

Non—Liquid Financial                                  8.19                   —0.25
Assets

Total Financial Assets            14.614             11.57     0.014         —0.32

Passenger Cars                    8.05                0.65     0.83           0.07

Home Equity                      87.31               714.77   —0.87           0.148


Real Estate Equity                 —                  7.314                  —0.19

Business Equity                    —                  5.67      —            —0.04

Total Non—Financial              95.36               88.143   —0.05           0.32
Assets

Personal Debt                     14.30               0.72    —0.59           0.10
                                          Table .9

                      Change in the Mean Portfolio of the Sample

              for a 25% Increase in         , given   for different offsets

          in Non—Pension Wealth with respect to Social Security Wealth


                                     Change in Asset Share (percentage points)
                                                 Offset to Wealth

                                                          Average
                                                            of
                           Initial                        Demand
                            Asset                        Equation     Aggregate
                           Share %           Zero        Estimates    Estimate

Total Deposits               9.i44           O.00L        —0.00          0.08

Total Bonds                  2.58          —0.12          —0.03         —0.11

Cash                         0.23            0.00         —0.01          0.00

Liquid Financial Assets     12.25          —0.08          —0.08         —0.03

Stocks and Shares            1.27            0.38          0.37          0.38

R1-IOSP                      0.16            0.00          0.00          0.01

RRSP                         1.79          —0.18          —0.20         —0.18

Other Non—Liquid             2.07            0.19          0.15          0.21
Financial Assets

Non—Liquid Financial         5.29            0.19          0.15          0.21
Assets

Total Financial Assets      17.5L            0.11          0.07          0.18

Passenger Cars               14.86           0.142         0.314         0.146


Home Equity                 38.28          —0.23          —0.28         —0.30

Real Estate Equity           9.77          —0.20          —0.16         —0.21

Business Equity             29.514         —0.10          —0.014        —0.13

Total Non—Financial         82.145         —0.11          —0.07         —0.18
Assets

Personal Debt                5.33           0.53           0.03          0.63
                                       Table 10

                      Change in the Mean Portfolio of the Sample

              for a 25% Increase in      ,   given for different offsets
          in Non—Pension Wealth with respect to Private Pension Wealth


                                        Change in Asset Share (percentage points)
                                                    Offset to Wealth

                                                        Average
                                                           of
                             Initial                     Demand
                              Asset                     Equation       Aggregate
                             Share %          Zero      Estimates      Estimate

Total Deposits               9.1414           0.03        1.00              0.014

Total Bonds                  2.58            —0.02        0.06             —0.02

Cash                         0.23             0.01        0.03              0.01

Liquid Financial Assets     12.25             0.02        1.09              0.03

Stocks and Shares            1.27             0.141       0.48              0.142


RHOSP                        0.16             0.00        0.03              0.00

RRSP                         1.79             0.01        0.08              0.01

Other Non—Liquid             2.07            —0.01        0.03             —0.01
Financial Assets

Non—Liquid Financial         5.29             0.141       0.62              0.142
As sets

Total Financial Assets      17.54             0.43        1.71              0.45

Passenger Cars               14.86            0.01        0.33              0.02

Home Equity                 38.28            —1.11       —2.28             —1.12

Real Estate Equity           9.77            0.O14       —0.26             —0.05

Business Equity             29.514            0.71        0.50              0.70

Total Non—Financial         82.145           —0.143      —1.71             —0.145
Assets

Personal Debt                5.33             0.00        0.81              0.01
                                             Table 11

                The Aggregate Portfolio of the Sample, and its Change

                             after a 25% Increase in


                                             Change in Asset Share (percentage points)
                                                        Offset to Net Worth

                                                          Average
                                                             of
                               Initial                     Demand
                                Asset                     Equation      Aggregate
                              Share      %       Zero     Estimates     Estimate

Total    Deposits               9.1414          —0.22       0.914        —0.91
Total Bonds                     2.58            —0.114     —0.12         —0.11
Cash                           0.23             —0.10      —l.4l         —0.38

Liquid   Financial Assets     12.25             —0.146     —1.141        —0.38
Stocks   and Shares            1.27             —0.03      —o.i6          0.07

RHOSP                          0.16             —0.003      0.09         —0.07

RRSP                           1.79             —0.18      —0.26         —0.10

Other Non—Liquid               2.07             —0.01      -0.23          0.18
Financial Assets

Non—Liquid Financial           5.29             —0.22      —0.56          0.08
Assets

Total Financial Assets        17.514            —0.68      —1.15         —1.32

Passenger Cars                 14.86            —0.13       3.68         —2.80

Home Equity                   38.28              0.98       2.28          0.145

?eal Estate Equity             9.77             —0.16      —0.97          0.55

Business Equity               29.514            —0.01      3.814          3.12

Total Non—Financial           82.145             0.68       1.15          1.32
Assets

Personal Debt                  5.33            —0.15        14.17        —3.28
                                       Table 12

                The Aggregate Portfolio of the Sample, and its Change

                            after a 25% Increase in


                                       Change in Asset Share (percentage points)
                                                  Offset to Net Worth

                                                       Average
                                                         of
                           Initial                     Demand
                            Asset                     Equation          Aggregate
                           Share %        Zero        Estimates         Estimate

Total Deposits              9.1          —0.27         _O.1.6            —0.55

Total Bonds                 2.58         —0.05         —1.17             —0.03

Cash                        0.23         —0.10         —1.57             —0.26

Liquid Financial Assets 12.25            —O.2          —3.20             —O.84

Stocks and Shares           1.27         —0.01         —O.)48            0.03

RHOSP                       0.16         —0.01         —2.62            —0.07

RRSP                        1.79         —0.01         —2.31             0.03

Other Non—Liquid            2.07         —0.02          1.75             0.10
Financial Assets

Non—Liquid Financial        5.29         —0.05         -'3.66            0.09
Assets

Total Financial Assets     17.51         —O.L7         —6.86            —0.75

Passenger Cars              L.86         —0.61        _lI.I41

Home Equity                38.28          1.11        —29.78             0.93

Real Estate Equity          9.77         —0.08          1.73             0.140


Business Equity            29.514         0.05         39.16             2.12

Total Non—Financial        82.145         0.147         6.86             0.75
Assets

Personal Debt               5.33         —0.71        —16.01            —14.75
