                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MACROECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF ALTERNATIVE
                       EXCHANGE RATE MODELS



                        John F. Helliwell

                          Paul M. Boothe



                      Working Paper No. 9OL



               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            June 1982


An earlier version of this paper was   presented at the International
Workshop on "Exchange Rates in Multicountry Economic Models",
University of Leuven, Belgium, November 26—28, 1981. The views
expressed in the paper are those of the authors and no respon-
sibility for them should be attributed to the Bank of Canada or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. In preparing this paper, we
have had invaluable research collaboration and assistance from Ardo
Hansson, Michael Margolick, Tim Padmore, and Reg Plummer. In
building the MACE model described in Helliwell, Boothe, and McRae
(1982), and Helliwell et aL (1982), we have had the collaboration
of Robert McRae and extensive financial support from the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. In revising
the paper, we have made use of helpful coimnents from our
discussant, Josef Vuchelen, as well as from other participants in
the Leuven conference. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in International Studies.
                                       NBER Working Paper 4 904
                                            June 1982


Macroeconomic Implications of Alternative Exchange Rate Models


                           ABSTRACT

     In this paper we estimate and compare several alternative

exchange rate models that have received wide attention, but
little comparison, during the 1970s. In order to compare

purchasing power parity (PPP), nominal interest rate parity,
real interest rate parity, and portfolio balance models, we
first strip each down to its essential core and undertake

comparable single-equation tests of both 'har'd' and 'easy' (more
and less constrained) versions of each model. We then embed each
of the 'hard' versions in a new macroeconomic model of Canada,

and assess their implications for the impacts of monetary and
fiscal shocks.

     Using annual Canadian data from the 1950s and 1970s, all of
the models have single—equation errors of about 3%, except for
the 'hard' versions of PPP and real interest parity, which are

heavily rejected by the data. In a macroeconomic context, the
models have modestly different implications for the effects of
fiscal shocks, and diverge more widely under monetary shocks.
John F. Helliwell                 Paul M. Boothe
Department of Economics           Bank of Canada
University of British Columbia    Ottawa, Ontario
Vancouver, B.C,                   Canada K1AOG9
Canada V6T1Y2

(604) 228—4953
1. INTRODUCTION

       For all economies open to substantial trade and capital

flows, exchange rates are central macroeconomic variables. As
such, they influence, and are influenced by, all of the

important forces of the economy. The general 1970s move to more
flexible exchange rates has given rise to a variety of

apparently competing theories of exchange rate determination.
Some of these theories have been subjected to single-equation

tests of quasi—reduced—form equations explaining the exchange
rate. The partial nature of many of those competing models poses

problems of interpretation. On the purely theoretical level,1
the apparently conflicting implications of the various theories
are often the consequence of alternative assumptions about what
is held constant elsewhere in the economy, and vanish when the
theories are embedded in a broader macroeconomic framework.

Similarly, the empirical tests depend on different sets of
macroeconomic variables that cannot generally be assumed to be
independent of each other. In addition, estimation procedures
and data samples are seldom used comparably for alternative

theories. This poses problems of two types. First, it is not
easy to tell to what extent the various models are competitors,

rather than alternative renormalizations of the same broad
system; and, to the extent that there is competition it is

difficult to find comparable tests. This often makes it

difficult for macro—economic model builders, as well as for
policy—makers, to know which framework they should be using for


'.   These issues are spelled out in some detail in Gylfason and
Helliwel]. (1981).
                                                                  2



exchange-rate analysis. Second, since the alternative theories
are usually not compared within a quantitative macroeconomic
framework, it is not possible to assess their implications for
the national and international transmission of economic
disturbances and policies.

     In this paper, we will make a two-pronged attack on these

problems. We shall start by comparably estimating four different
models of exchange rate determination, based respectively on

purchasing power parity, nominal interest parity, real interest
parity, and portfolio balance. We shall apply and test each of
these models on a structural basis, that is, as a
renormalization of a single equation within a structural model.
The equations will be estimated using annual data from the
Canadian flexible exchange rate experience of the 1950s and
1970s.

     We shall then put each of these models in a full
macroeconomic model of the Canadian economy, and assess their
implications for the domestic and international transmission of
real and monetary shocks. For our example shocks, we shall use a
sustained increase in real government spending, and a once-and-
for-all increase in the stock of base money.

     How does our paper fit in with some other recent empirical
work on the role of exchange rates in empirical macroeconomics?
It differs from the earlier Helliwell—Maxwell (1974) study of
flexible exchange rates in three important respects. That paper
compared the macroeconomic consequences of alternative exchange

rate systems (e.g. rigidly fixed, Bretton Woods, crawling peg,
and flexible) while in the current paper we compare alternative
                                                                  3



models of the determination of flexible exchange rates. The

•earlier paper emphasized bilateral linkage, through joint
simulations with the RDX2 and MPS quarterly models of Canada and

the United States, while in this paper we use a new, and much

more compact, annual model of Canada with all world variables

treated as exogenous. Finally, the earlier paper used flexible
exchange rate data drawn mainly from Canadian experience of the
1950s, while the current data and estimates are based on almost
equal amounts of data from the 1950s and 1970s.
     Most recent studies of exchange rates in multilateral
models involve a particular model of exchange rate
determination.2 To the extent that alternative exchange rate

mechanisms are examined, it is usually fixed vs. flexible
exchange rates, or alternative intervention strategies.
     Recent studies of exchange rates in national models also
have tended to focus on the comparison between fixed exchange
rates and a particular model of the determination of flexible

exchange rates (e.g. Amano, 1979; Carr et al., 1976), or on the
implications of alternative expectations processes and

intervention strategies (Jonson et al., 1981). Our paper can be
seen as a mOdest extension of research towards a comparable

macroeconomic evaluation of alternative models of the

determination of flexible exchange rates. The structure of the
paper is as follows: Section 2 contains the specification and


2• Examples include the Japanese EPA World Economic Model (e.g.
Amano, 1981), the U.S. Federal Reserve MCM Model (e.g. Hooper,
Haas, and Symansky, 1981), the Mark III International
Transmission Model (Darby, 1980), the Project LINK model
(Hickman, 1981), the IMF's MERM model (Artus and McGuirk, 1981),
and the WEXRAM model (Armington, 1980; Richard, 1980).
                                                                   4



single-equation results for the alternative models of the

exchange rate; section 3 describes the basic structure of the
macro model, section 4 presents the results of the macroeconomic
evaluations, and section 5 concludes the paper.


2. ALTERNATIVE MODELS OF THE EXCHANGE RATE

     We have chosen four alternative theories for comparable
specification and testing. We refer to them as purchasing power

parity, interest parity, real interest parity and portfolio
models. All of these theories have been called 'asset market'

theories of exchange rate determination because the three former
theories have often been estimated in conjunction with money

demand equations and the latter involves asset stocks and
portfolio balance directly. However, some of them can equally
well be referred to as 'structural' or 'balance-of—payments
components' ffiodels, because they have been used as elements of

complete models in which the levels of current and capital
accounts interact in the determination of the exchange rate.
This is particularly true of the portfolio model, in which the
accumulated stock of foreign assets or liabilities is an
important determinant of the exchange rate.
     In developing comparable forms of these theories, for

testing and inclusion in a macroeconomic model, we have had to
purge them of any elements that were already estimated elsewhere
in the model. Since the MACE model already contains a demand for

money equation, we have removed the money demand equations from

the specification of the purchasing power parity and interest

parity models and have directly estimated the remaining parts of
                                                                  5



the hypotheses.

     In the case of the money plus purchasing power parity
model, we have therefore estimated an exchange rate equation
based on the the ratio of Canadian to US aggregate price levels.

Table 1 shows two versions, a 'hard' version assuming full and
immediate PPP, and an 'easy' version in which the current

exchange rate depends on the lagged exchange rate and the
current ratio of relative prices, with weights constrained to
sum to 1.0. Although the 'easy' version is much preferred by the
data, we use the 'hard' version in our macroeconomic analysis in

order to show more clearly the implications of the PPP

hypothesis.
     The nominal interest parity model is initially a statement
about the linkage between interest rate differentials and the

forward exchange differential. It only becomes a theory of the
level of the spot exchange rate if one assumes that the forward
exchange rate is an accurate and unbiased estimator of the
future spot rate and invokes another theory to tie down the
expected future spot rate. The mechanism we have chosen, and
applied to the interest parity model, is to assume that
forecasts of the future spot rate are made optimally based on an
information set including the current ratio of relative prices,

the lagged exchange rate, and the current rates of inflation at
home and abroad. In all cases, our estimates of the parameters

of the optimal forecasting equation rejected the inclusion of
current rates of inflation. Thus the equation used to generate
the expected future spot rate is that shown in the notes to
Table 1.
                                                                 6



     We developed and tested both 'hard' and 'easy' versions of
the interest parity model, and once again used the 'hard'

version for our macroeconomic assessments. The hard version
forces the coefficients on the interest differential and the

expected future spot rate to have the theoretically expected

coefficient sizes, while the easy version allows the
coefficients on the interest differential and on the expected
future exchange rate to both be freely estimated. Unlike the PPP
model, the constrained form of the IP model is not rejected in
favour of the less constrained form.

     Real and nominal interest parity are equivalent if

purchasing power parity is continuously maintained. Thus our
'hard' version of real interest parity (RIP) combines hard
interest parity with hard PPP, as shown by the equation •for

PFXHAT2 in the notes to Table 1, and is empirically the least
successful of all of the models. It does not contribute anything
to explaining the variance of the exchange rate (the adjusted
coefficient of determination is negative), and its theoretical
                                                                    7



                               Table 1

                    Alternative Model Estimates
Easy PPP Model

Dependent Variable:log(PFx)               Procedure:restricted OLS
variable                 coefficient              absolute t—ratio

constant                   —0.0136                         1.18
log(PQ/PA2)                 0 .3410                        2.29
log(PFX(-1))                0.6589                         4.44

Period: 1953—61,71—78      RB2=.5235      SEE= .0294         DW=2.00
F-test on restriction: F( 1, 14)=0.Oi

Hard PPP Model

Dependent Variable:log(PFx)              Procedure:restricted OLS
constant                  —0.0549                          5.50
log(PQ/PA2)                 1.0

Period: 1952—61,71—78      RB2=—. 032     SEE=.0423          DW=0.91
F-test on restriction: F(1 ,14)=10.52


Easy IP Model

Dependent Variable: log(PFx)                           Procedure: OLS
constant                  —0. 0054                         0.71
log(PFxE)                  0.8693                          4.57
log((1 +RM2)/( 1+RS))      3.1934                          2.04
Period: 1953—61,71—78      RB2=. 5466     SEE= .0287         DW=1 .23



Hard IP Model

Dependent Variable:log(PFX)              Procedure:restricted OLS
constant                  -0.0115                          1.58
log(PFXHAT1)               1.0

Period: 1953—61 ,71—78     RB2= .5026     SEE=. 0300         DW=1 .40


F—test on restriction:F(1,15)=0.96
                                                                     8



                           Table 1 con't

Easy RIP Model
variable                 coefficient                absolute t—ratio


Dependent Variable:log(PFX)                Procedure:restricted OLS
constant                   —0.0170                           0.99
log(PFxHAT2)                0.2466                           1.58
log(PFx(—1))                0.7753                           4.84

Period:1953—61,71—78          RB2=.4480      SEE=.0317        DW=1.92

F—test on restriction: F(1,14)=.008

Hard RIP Model

Dependent Variable:log(PFX)                Procedure:restricted OLS
constant                   —0.0912                           7.64
log(PFXHAT2)                1.0

Period:1953—61,71—78          RB2=—.329      SEE=.0492        DW=1.00
F—test on restriction: F(1,15)=11.7

Portfolio Model
Dependent Variable:PFX                                   Procedure:OLS
constant                   —0.2005                           0.56
LF1                         0.6129                           1.47
LF1(—1)                    —0.3259                           0.92
RS—RM2                     —3.9956                           2.17
PFXE                        1.095                            3.83

Period:1954—61,71—78          RB2=.5107      SEE=.0304        DW=1.25
Notes:
1. The variable PFXE represents the expected future value of the
spot exchange rate, and was constructed by using the predicted
values of the following equation:
log(PFx(+1 )=—0.0i 8+0.6460*log(PA2/PQ)+0.3539*log(PFX(_1)
                  (1.15) (3.10)                 (1.70)
Period:1953—61,71—78       RB2=.5107       SEE=.0413       DW1.05
F—test on restriction: F( 1,14)=0.25
the coefficients of the two explanatory variables were
constrained to sum to 1.0.
2. The variable log(PFXHAT1 )=log(( 1 +RM2)/( 1+RS) )+log(PFXE).
3. The variable log(PFXHAT2)=
log(PQ( 1+PQDOT)/PA2( 1+PA2PA2DOT))+log( (1+RM2)/( 1+RS)).
4. LF1 is defined as follows: LF1=LF/(VKB+LB+HPM).
                                                                  9



restrictions are rejected (F=11.7). The 'easy' version of real
interest parity has both PFXHAT2 and the lagged exchange rate as

explanatory variables, with the sum of the coefficients

constrained (with no loss of goodness of fit) to sum to 1.0. The
easy version of real interest parity fits much better than the
hard version, but less well than any of the other models except
hard PPP.

     The portfolio model estimated here for comparison with the
other models is an approximate3 renormalization of the

structural portfolio demand equation estimated as part of the
MACE model. In its structure and properties it is rather similar

to the 'easy' version of the interest parity model, as the terms
representing the size and the change in the size of the value of
net liabilities to foreigners do not add materially to the

goodness of fit of the equation or alter the coefficients on the
expected future exchange rate and the interest differential.

     Purchasing power parity is imposed as part of the 'hard'
versions of the PPP and real interest parity models, and plays a

lesser, but still substantial, explanatory role in all the other
versions of the directly estimated exchange—rate equations. PPP
plays no direct role in the structural portfolio demand



  The two equations differ in their variables as well as their
parameters. We have found, as have Hooper et al (1981) and
others, that renormalizing the portfolio demand equation as an
exchange-rate equation causes some variables to drop out, and
others to be preferred. For example, some of the portfolio
composition variables thus do not appear in the portfolio
exchange rate equation. More importantly, the PPP—based PFXE has
no impact if it is used in the portfolio structural equation,
and we use instead the change in the exchange rate. By contrast,
the portfolio exchange rate equation much prefers PFXE to the
lagged exchange rate as a measure of expectations.
                                                                 10



equation, where the lagged exchange rate replaces the ratio of
national price levels as the proxy for the expected future
exchange rate.
     The unconstrained versions of all four models have standard
errors of about 3%, and thus do not provide strong grounds in

themselves for choosing among the alternative specifications. In
earlier work, Boothe (1981) has constructed monthly and
quarterly versions of these same models, and used rolling
estimation periods and pure forecasts of exogenous variables to
construct ex ante out-of—sample forecasting tests of the models

against each other, against the forward rate, and against
autoregressive forecasts of the exchange rate. He found that all
of the models forecasted materially better than the forward rate
or the pure time-series models. He also found that the
information in the models could be combined with the information
in the forward rate to produce better forecasts than provided

from either alone. However, and this is the point that is most
relevant to our current paper, he also found that the

forecasting tests did not provide any strong ranking among the
competing models.


3. THE MACROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK

    As our test bench for the alternative foreign exchange

models, we employ the MACE model of the Canadian economy, based
on annual data from 1952 through 1978. The equation structure

and parameter estimates of the version used for this paper are
included in the Appendix.

     In its broad structure, the model provides a two-sector
                                                                 11




description of the Canadian economy. The energy sector has been
singled out for special treatment for several reasons: the price
of energy rose so rapidly during the 1970s as to destroy any

Hicksian grounds for treating energy and non-energy output as a

single aggregate; the economic rents generated have been so
large as to require separate accounting for factor returns and
taxation in that sector; the value of energy trade in both

directions has become very large and variable during the 1970s;
and energy is an important input into non-energy production.

Energy exploration, production and taxation are the subject of
several hundred equations in the MACE model. For the purposes of

this paper, the energy production sector can be regarded as a
'black box! that determines energy investment demand, certain

revenue items, energy prices, and the quantities and prices of
aggregate imports and exports of energy, given the

simultaneously determined aggregate price indices and energy
demands from the macro block.

     The production structure of the non-energy sector can be
best envisaged as a hierarchy. At the top level, there is an
implicit CES function for the utility of final sales, with

domestic gross output q and non-energy imports as the inputs.
The elasticity of substitution is estimated to be about .4 in
the current year and 1.25 in the long term. In the short term,

the proportion of final sales met by imports is also determined

by domestic capacity utilization. Gross production of the non-
energy sector is based on a two-level function, with capital and

energy bundled together in a vintage CES function and then
combined with labour in a higher level Cobb-Douglas function.
                                                                 12



The actual level of output is modelled as an estimated supply

decision (equation 1.11) in which the chosen rate of factor

utilization depends upon the ratio of current operating costs to

the output price, current final sales relative to capacity
output, and the gap between actual and desired inventories.4
     Factor demands are based on partial adjustment towards the

cost-minimizing input levels required to produce (at normal
utilization rates) the forward looking estimates of profitable

future output (equations 1.16 and 1.19), involving adjustment
for unintended inventory changes and for lags in the adjustments
of trade flows to relative prices. The pace of investment
spending, but not the equilibrium capital stock, is also
determined by Tobin's q, the ratio of the stock-market value to
the replacement value of the business capital stock.
     In addition to investment in the energy and non-energy
sectors, the main components of final demand are consumption,
exports, and government spending. The latter is taken to be
exogenous, in real terms. Consumption spending is based on a
life—cycle model, in which the proportion of disposable income
that is spent depends on the real after—tax interest rate and
the ratio of the market value of wealth to income. Energy


'
  There is an increasing number of other macroeconomic models
with supply-determined levels of output (e.g., the METRIC model
of France, de Menil et al., 1977; the Australian RBA76 model,
Jonson et al, 1977 and 1982; the Reserve Bank of New Zealand
core model, G.H. Spencer, ed., 1980; and the Bank of Canada's
SAM model, Masson et al., 1980), although they differ in the
extent to which the actual level of output is determined by an
explicit function of measured factor inputs. Since all these
models determine inventory changes as the difference between
production and sales, they usually employ the inventory stock
discrepancy as an important determinant of prices, imports,
production and factor demands.
                                                                 13



exports are determined in the energy sector, while the quantity

and price of non-energy exports are determined by two quasi-

reduced—form equations that display the usual Canadian feature

of relatively small responses of exports to relative prices.

     The proportionate change in annual wages (equation 3.1)
depends on the rate of increase in the absorption price, changes

in the terms of trade, changes in the rate of overall factor
utilization, the ratio of the 'natural' to the actual

unemployment rate, and dummy variables reflecting the operation
of Canada's system of wage controls in 1976-1978. Homogeneity is
imposed (and easily accepted) by constraining the sum of the
coefficients on the absorption price increase and the lagged
wage change to equal 1.0. The terms—of-trade effect is large,
being about equal to the share of exports in GNP. This has

important implications for the efficacy of exchange rate changes
in restoring the balance of trade in response to a shock. If a
devaluation worsens the terms of trade, as is normally the case,
the terms-of—trade effect in the wage equation slows down the
response of the wage rate to the rise in the absorption price.

     The proportionate increase in the price of the output of

the non-energy sector depends on proportionate changes in the
price of competing world output, domestic wages, and the costs
of capital and energy, with coefficients constrained (easily) to
sum to 1.0. There is a strong additional effect from the ratio

of actual to desired inventories. The absorption price is a

quasi-identity based on the prices of output of the non-energy

sector, and the price of non-energy imports. It should be
remembered that energy is an input to the non—energy sector, and
                                                                  14



the prices and quantities of the output of that sector include

value-added by labour, capital, and energy.
     In the balance of payments sector, a final category of
trade has been singled out for special treatment -   interest   and
dividend payments on net liabilities to foreigners. Throughout
the 1970s, the market value of these liabilities has been about

one—third of total government debt plus the market value of all
business assets. Interest and dividend payments (not including
retained earnings and capital gains, which are much larger on
average) have risen to over 2% of GNP. This means that in the

Canadian case, as for any open economy with easy access to
foreign capital, it is important to introduce debt service
payments as a wedge between GNP and GDP, with expected GDP

driving factor demands and expected GNP driving consumption and
accumulation decisions.

     The version we use here is only slightly altered from that
used in Helliwell, Boothe and McRae (1982). The main additions
have been in the financial sectors, since the earlier paper was
based on the small open economy assumption that capital was
perfectly mobile between Canada and other countries, and hence
that only tiny interest rate changes in Canada were required to
finance any current account deficits or surpluses at unchanged

exchange rates. The demand for high-powered money depends on
nominal GNP (with an elasticity close to 1.0) and on the short-

term interest rate. In the current version of the model, we

exogenized the supply of high-powered money, and inverted the

demand-for-money equation to determine the short-term interest
rate. We considered alternative formulations in which real
                                                                 15



balances were deflated by the absorption price instead of the

output price, and where money balances were given an explicit
buffer role, but the simpler equation we use was empirically

superior. We added a long-term interest-rate equation (5.7)
based on current current and short-term interest rates, lagged

long-term rates, and the medium-term U.S. bond rate. The market
value of business assets is determined by a two-asset portfolio
balance relationship similar to that used in RDX2, where the
current earnings yield on equity is determined by the current
yield on bonds, the expected rate of growth of profits, the
relative supplies of government debt and business assets, and
the gap between the U.S. yields on equity and debt. The market
value of business assets, which influences investment spending

through Tobin's q and consumption spending via wealth effects,
is therefore an important channel for the operation of monetary

p01 icy.

     The model is completed by equations for the market value of
the foreign demand for Canadian assets, an equation explaining
revaluation and retained earnings on the existing stock, and
finally an identity determining the balance of payments measure

of capital inflows as the change in the market value of foreign
liabilities, minus the revaluation variable. These equations are
used when the basic version of the model is run, with the
balance of payments equilibrium condition -used to solve for the

exchange rate. When one of the estimated exchange rate equations
of section 2 is used, it replaces the capital movements

equation, as described in the next section.
                                                                 16



4. EFFECTS OF FISCAL AND MONETARY POLICIES UNDER ALTERNATIVE
EXCHANGE RATE MODELS

     One of the difficulties in applying partial models of the
exchange rate in a macroeconomic context (as emphasized by
Amano, 1981) is that it is not always clear how they should be
made consistent with an overall model. Mindful of this problem

at the outset, we trimmed down each partial model until its

estimated form could reasonably be regarded as a re-
normalization of a particular equation in a structural model.
Thus, to take the example of the money-plus-PPP model of

exchange rate determination estimated by Bilson (1978) and by
most of the authors in Frenkel and Johnson, eds. (1979), we

split the PPP part of the hypothesis from the money demand

equation (since our model, like most others, already had a money
demand equation) and fitted the PPP relationship directly for

the exchange rate. Since the PPP hypothesis relates to the close

linkage of national output markets, it is natural to treat the
PPP relation as saying that any amount of a country's output
could be sold abroad at a given foreign price. To implement this
assumption in the hard PPP simulations, we suppress the model's

equation for non-energy exports of goods, and thus use the
balance-of-payments identity to determine non-energy exports,
with the exchange rate set at the value determined by the PPP
definition.

     The money-plus-interest—parity and the money-plus-real-

interest—parity theories were also separated into their two

component parts, with money demand being determined by the MACE
equation, and the exchange rate equations estimated in section 2
                                                                 17



being used to replace the capital flow equations. Since both
these theories rest on the perfect mobility of capital, they can
be treated as alternative versions of the small open economy

assumption used in Helliwell, Boothe, and McRae (1982). The
inflow of capital is therefore simply equal to the negative of
the current account balance, after allowing for any official

foreign exchange intervention.
     We have simulated two versions of the portfolio model. One

is the directly estimated structural equation (4.4) reported in
the appendix, and the other is the re-normalized version

estimated as an exchange rate equation and reported in section
2. We have used both versions in simulation because we found, as

have Hooper et al. (1981), that directly estimated portfolio
equations usually have a smaller estimated role for exchange-

rate-stabilizing capital flows than is implied by the same
equation when it is estimated as an exchange rate equation. In

the latter case, any shock to the trade account simply adds to
or subtracts from net foreign liabilities, and only influences
the exchange rate through the feedback from the accumulating

asset or liability. By contrast, with the explicit model the
exchange rate has to move to keep payments in balance, and a
trade account shock will only be buffered by accommodating

capital movements to the extent that the trade account or the

exchange rate enters explicitly in the determination of the

desired portfolio liability.
     To demonstrate the properties of the alternative exchange

rate models, we first prepared a 1974—1980 control solution for
the each version of the macro model, and then subjected the
                                                                 18



models to monetary and fiscal shocks. The fiscal shock is a
sustained bond-financed increase in government spending. The
size of the increase is one billion 1971 Canadian dollars, so

that the real GNP responses of Figures 1, 3, and 5, which are
also reported in billion 1971 dollars, can be read as

expenditure multipliers. The monetary shock is a once—and—for—
all 5% increase in the stock of high—powered money. The size of

the increase, which takes place in 1974, is $465 million.

     To provide a summary comparison of the properties of the
alternative exchange rate models, we have prepared six figures,
each of which shows the responses of several alternative

systems. Figures 1, 3, and 5 show responses to the government

expenditure shock and Figures 2, 4, and 6 show the responses to
the increase in high- powered money. Figures 1 and 2 show the
exchange rate responses, Figures 3 and 4 the real GNP responses,
and Figures 5 and 6 the responses of the rate of increase in the
absorption price. In all cases, theresults are shown in shock
minus control format. To ensure comparability of the shock minus
control results, we have used separate control solutions for

each of the exchange rate models. However, we report in the
tables onlythe control solution for one version of model, since
single-equation errors are added back in all cases to make the
control solutions almost identical.

     Figure 1 shows that the price of foreign exchange increases
under the fiscal shock in the PPP and real interest parity

cases, while being reduced in the portfolio and nominal interest

parity cases. In the exchange rate systems with capital mobile
in response to nominal interest differentials, the capital
                                                                 19



inflow effects of the higher interest rates more than offset the

effects of the current account deficit, while in the two systems
that are most responsive to inflation rate and price level

differentials, the domestic currency depreciates throughout the
simulation period.

     In response to the monetary expansion, the price of foreign
currency increases in all cases, although now the increases are
greatest and fastest for the models (portfolio and nominal
interest parity) in which capital movements and exchange rates
are most dependent on nominal interest rate differentials. The

PPP rate moves only slowly in response to the monetary shock, a
result that would be qualified if the PPP model were given a

more forward-looking expectations structure. Note that the
structural portfolio model, with its more explicit but more
limited role for exchange-rate-stabilizing capital movements,
has a more volatile response than the other systems to both

fiscal and monetary shocks, especially the latter.
     Figure 3 shows that the initial multiplier responses to an
expansion of government spending are almost identical for all
the exchange rate systems, but start to diverge rapidly after
the second year, with the net GNP effects soon becoming negative

for the more inflation-sensitive flexible exchange rate models
(PPP and real interest parity) and for the fixed exchange

system.

     The GNP responses to monetary expansion are much more
divergent right from the beginning, a result that is to be

expected, since the exchange rate moves very differently under
monetary expansion in the different models, and the exchange
                                                                 20



rate in turn has very important effects on spending and output.

The response appears to be importantly cyclical for all of the
models, and may be diverging from a stable path in the case of
real interest parity.

     Figure 5 shows clearly the strong links between the
exchange rate and the domestic absorption price, as the systems
with the least induced inflation from the fiscal expansion are

those (portfolio and nominal interest parity) in which the
higher interest rates accompanying the fiscal expansion lead to
a revaluation of the domestic currency. The inflation responses

to the monetary shock are as divergent as the exchange rate

effects of the monetary expansion, and for essentially the same
reasons.



5. SUMMARY AND EXTENSIONS

     The results reported in the figures and tables are helpful
in showing where the selection of one or another model of

exchange rate determination has important effects on the dynamic
responses of a macroeconomic model. It is clear that the results
of the various models differ much more with respect to monetary

than with respect to fiscal shocks. In general, the four

exchange rate models seem to fall into two broad classes with

respect to their macroeconomic implications, with the PPP and
real interest parity models in one group and the nominal

interest parity and portfolio models in the other group.

     We must qualify our results by noting that they are
probably sensitive to the country and the macro—model (and even
the version of the macro model) used for the experiments. If
                                                                 21



such tests are to be useful, they should probably be replicated
for a broader class of macro models covering countries with

different structures than that of Canada.

     The fact that single-equation tests of competing exchange
market models do not provide strong grounds for selection and
rejection, and the obvious importance that the choice of
exchange rate model has for the properties of macroeconomic
models, suggests to us that model builders and users would be
well advised to regularly test the sensitivity of their results
to the selection of a particular model for the determination of

exchange rates.
    We think that it will be useful to use alternative exchange
rate models in macroeconomic analysis, and also to use
macroeconomic tests to help evaluate exchange rate models. The
estimation results reject fairly easily the strong versions of
some of the models, but this does not help to establish clear
rankings in the very large class of less constrained
alternatives. Macroeconomic analysis should probably be an
integral part of the selection process for exchange rate models
to be used in national or multilateral modelling.
                                                                 22



References

 Amano, A. (1981) "Exchange Rate Modelling in the EPA World
Economjc Model." Presented at the International Workshop on
 "Exchange Rates in Multicountry Econometric Models", University
 of Leuven, Belgium, November 26-28, 1981.
Amano, A. (1979) "FLEX 1: A Quarterly Model of the Japanese
Flexible Exchange Rates System." The Annals of the School
Business Administratio Kobe University, No. 23.
Armington, P.S. (1980) "A New Exchange Rate Model for
Forecasting and Analysis of Multilateral Exchange Rate
Policies." SRI/WEFA World Economic Program Discussion Papers,
No. 6, September 1979, revised April 1980.
Artus, J.R. and A,K. McGuirk (1981) "A Revised Version of the
Multilateral Exchange Rate Model." IMF Staff Papers, vol. 28
(June), pp.275—309.
Basevi, G. and M. Caizolari (1981) "Multilateral Exchange Rate
Determination and Policy Reaction Functions: The Italian
Experience within the European Monetary System." Presented at
the Leuven Conference, ibid.

Bilson, J.F.O. (1978) "The Current Experience With Floating
Exchange Rates: An Appraisal of the Monetary Approach." American
Economic Review, vol. 68 (May), pp. 392-97.
Boothe, P.M. (1981) "Speculative Profits and Exchange Market
Efficiency: The Canadian Foreign Exchange Market 1974-1978."
Bank of Canada, mimeo, December.

Branson, W.H., H. Halttunen and P. Masson (1977) "Exchange Rates
in the Short Run: The Dollar—Deutschemark Rate." European
Economic Review, vol. 10 (October), pp.303—324.

Carr, J.L,, G,V. Jump and J.A. Sawyer (1976) "The Operation of
the Canadian Economy Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates:
Simulation Results From the TRACE Model." Canadian Journal of
Economics 9, No. 1, pp. 102—120.
Darby, MR. (1980) "International Transmission Under Pegged and
Floating Exchange Rates: An Empirical Comparison." N.B.E.R.
Working Paper No, 585, December 1980.
de Menil, G., et al. (1977) METRIC: Modele econometrigue
trimestriel de la conjoncture. Annales de l'INSEE 26—27 (Avril—
Sept.). Paris:INSEE.

Dornbusch, R. (1976) "The Theory of Flexible Exchange Rates arid
Macroeconomic Policy." Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol.
78, No. 2, pp. 255—75.
Frankel, J.A. (1979) "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange
Rates Based on Real Interest Differentials." American Economic
                                                                 23



 Review, vol. 69 (September), pp. 610-22.

 Frenkel, J.A. and H.G. Johnson, eds. (1979) The Economics
-'Exchange Rates: Selected Studies. Reading, Massachusetts:
 Addison-Wesley.
Gylfason, T. and J.F. Helliwell (1981) "A Synthesis of
Keynesian, Monetary, and Portfolio Approaches to Flexible
Exchange Rates," Presented at the Open Economy Macro Workshop,
Institute for International Economic Studies, University of
Stockholm, August 24—28, 1981.
Helliwell, J.F., P.M. Boothe and R.N. McRae (1982)
"Stabilization, Allocation, and the 1970s Oil Price Shocks."
Scandinavian Journal of            No. 2, 1982.
Helliwell, J.F., R,N. McRae, P. Boothe, A. Hansson, M.
Margolick, T. Padmore, A. Plourde, and R. Plummer (1982) "Energy
and the National Economy: An Overview of the MACE Model."
Presented to the Annual Meetings of the Canadian Economics
Association, Ottawa, June 1982.
Helliwel]., J.F. and T,A. Maxwell (1974) "Monetary
Interdependence of Canada and the United States Under
Alternative Exchange Rate Systems." In R.Z. Aliber, ed.,
National Monetary Policies and the International Financial
System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 82-108.
Hickman, B.H. (1981) "Exchange Rates in Project LINK." Presented
at the Leuven Conference, ibid.

Hooper, P., R. Haas and S. Symansky (1981) "Exchange Rate
Determination in the MCM: A Proposed Revision." Presented at the
Leuven Conference, ibid.

Jonson, P.D., W.J. McKibbin and R,G. Trevor (1982) "Exchange
Rates and Capital Flows: A Sensitivity Analysis." Canadian
Journal of Economics Vol. 15 (November).

Jonson, P.D., E.R. Moses and C.R. Wymer (1977) "The RBA76 Model
of the Australian Economy." In W.E. Norton, ed., Conference in
Applied Economic Research (December). Sydney: Reserve Bank of
Australia, pp. 9—27,

Masson, P.R., D.E. Rose and J.G. Selody (1980) "Building a Small
Macro-Model for Simulation: Some Issues." Bank of Canada
Technical Report 22, November.
Richard, Denis M. (1980) "A Global Adjustment Model of Exchange
Rates and Interest Rates, Empirical Analysis." In D. Bigman and
T. Taya, eds., The Functioning of Floating Exchange Rates:
Theory, yç and Policy Implications. (Ballinger, New
York), pp. 243—276.

Spencer, G.H., ed. (1980) "Experiments with a Core Model of the
New Zealand Economy," Research Paper No. 29, Reserve Bank of New
                                   24



Zealand, Wellington, March 1980.
              FIG.h EXCHANGE RATE RESPONSE TO FISCAL SHOCK
                     = PURCHASING POWER PARITY
                 2     NOMINAL INTEREST PARITY
                 3 = REAL INTEREST PARITY
                 4   PORTFOLIO STRUCTURAL
                 5 = PORTFOLIO EXCHANGE RATE
                 6 = FIXED EXCHANGE RATE
      c.
      (N




          -
u_i
I—
LU
Li        -
          -
cr        -              —




0
LU
Li
c-cD
      T
          1974        1975    1976          1977   1978   1979   1980
                                     rERR
      F1G.2 EXCHANGE RATE RESPONSE TO MONETARY SHOCK
            = PURCHASING POWER PARITY
          2   NOMINAL INTEREST PARITY
          3 = REAL INTEREST PARITY
          4 = PORTFOLIO STRUCTURAL
          5 = PORTFOLIO EXCHANGE RATE
          6   FIXED EXCHANGE RATE
                                                     7
                                                   7
                                                                  7
                                                              7
                                                          7


                                                   /
  -

  -
                                             / /
*-
  -
                                         /
                                  / /
                             //
                                                                      5

Ui-                                                /
  -L                    //                    /           /




  1974       1975     I16         1977             1978   1979        1983
     FIG.3 REAL GNP RESPONSE TO FISCAL SHOCK
           = PURCHASING POWER PARITY
         2   NOMINAL INTEREST PARITY
         3 = REAL INTEREST PARITY
         4 = PORTFOLIO STRUCTURAL
         5 = PORTFOLIO EXCHANGE RATE
         6 = FIXED EXCHANGE RATE




N




    1974    1 975   1976          1977   1978   1979   1980
                           YEAR
              FJG.4: REAL GNP RESPONSE TO MONETARY SHOCK
                      PURCHASING POWER PARITY
                  2 = NOMINAL INTEREST PARITY
                  3   REAL INTEREST PARITY
                  4 = PORTFOLIO STRUCTURAL
                  5 = PORTFOLIO EXCHANGE RATE
                  6 = FIXED EXCHANGE RATE




                    —-
                                      —

                                    N

                                                                                           6

                                                  N            N
                                                      N            N
I.—.                                                      N\...        N
                                                                       —S
                                                                            N
                                                                                N
a.
                                                                                           2

a:'
U-,




       tr-
                      I       I            I               I

             1974    1975    1976          1977           1978                      1979   1980
                                    'ERR
                FIG5: INFLATION RATE RESPONSE TO FISCAL SHOCK
                    I   PURCHASING POWER PARITY
                    2   NOMINAL INTEREST PARITY
                    3 = REAL INTEREST PARITY
                    4 = PORTFOLIO STRUCTURAL
                    5 = PORTFOLIO EXCHANGE RATE
                    6 = FIXED EXCHANGE RATE
      U-)




      Cr)




L_          -



u-i

                   V
            -.




                        I      I              I
            1974        1975   1976           1977   1978   1979   1983
                                      ' ERR
                FIC.6: INFLATION RATE RESPONSE TO MONETARY SHOCK
                      = PURCHASING POWER PARITY
                    2   NOMINAL INTEREST PARITY
                    3 = REAL INTEREST PARITY
                            4 PORTFOLIO STRUCTURAL
                            5   PORTFOLIO EXCHANGE RATE
                            S = FIXED EXCHANGE RATE
      u-I
            -

            -                                                                                          / / /

                                                                                                   /
                                                                                               /
                                                                                           /
                                                                                       /
                                                                                   /
                \
                                                                               /
                    \                                                      /
                                                                       /
      'r)                                                          /
                                                               /
                                                       /
a:                      \                          /
                                               /
c\4                                        /                                                               /\
                            N
                                       /
                                                                                                       V


a:
U-

U.-
a
UJc
                                                                       /
-J
a:                                                                 /
                                               \ /


        —
                                I                          I                               I
        1974                    1975                   1976                                1977            1978   1979   19fl13
                                                                       '(EAR
                                          Li




                                THE LIST OF VARIABLES



                                     Conventions



*       denotes desired value, e.g., kb

-
        denotes quantity given by a CES bundle, e.g., ke

        denotes a two   period average, e.g., ne        ne + kne_i)
-t denotes a lag of tyears, e.g., q_1

        denotes equilibrium value at full capacity utilization after lags

        are worked out, e.g., mne
•
        denotes one-period proportionate change, e.g.,
           =
               aa-l"a—l


Variable         Equation No.     Description


a                2.3              Real absorption, billion 1971 $

B                4.6              Current account       of   the   balance   of
                                  payments, billion $

                 4.9              The balance of trade in energy, billion $
Be
c                2.1              Personal consumption expenditures, billion
                                  1971 $

Cca              Exogenous        Capital consumption allowance, billion $

c                1.10             Production costs relative to output price
    q
                                  forq
e                1.8              Energy expenditure, billion 1971 $

e                1.4              Vintage—based energy requirement, billion
    V
                                  1971$
                                   L2



 Variable   Equation No.   Description

            4.1            Net    capital inflows excluding official
                           monetary movements, billion $
            4.7            Retained earnings and revaluation on
Fireva
                           foreign-held domestic assets, billion $

            4.2
F0                         Official purchases of foreign exchange,
                           billion uS $

g           Exogenous      Real   government     current   and     capital
                           expenditures   on     goods   and     services,
                           billion 1971 $

Gmisc       Exogenous      Balancing item to link government National
                           Accounts Balances to changes in government
                           money and debt outstanding, including
                           government transfers, billion $

            Exogenous      Federal      government   subsidies    to   oil
Gfsub0
                           importers
H           5.4            High powered money, billion $

            Link           Energy investment, billion 1971 $

            1.13           Value of physical change in non-farm
1ib
                           inventories, billion 1971 $

i           1.1            Business   fixed   investment
    ne                                                     (excluding
                           energy investment), billion 1971 $

i           1.3            Re-investment with energy use malleable in
    new
                           the current year, billion 1971 $
k
    ev
            1.3            Vintage measure of capital and energy,
                           billion 1971 $

            1.14           Stock of non-farm inventories, billion
k.b
 1
                           1971$
k ne        1.2            Business fixed capital      stock (excluding
                           energy), billion 1971 $

Lb          5.3            Net stock of government non-monetary
                           liabilities, billion $
                                 L3




Variable    Equation No.   Description


            4.4            Net    liabilities    to     non-residents
Lf
                           (excluding official reserves), billion $

M           Exogenous      Imports of cars from U.S., billion $
    ca r2


            Link           Canadian imports of energy fuels, billion
                           1971 $

            4.5            Interest   and    dividend    payments             to
Mid
                           foreigners, billion $

            1.12           Imports of aoods and services (excluding
                           energy), billion 1971 $

            1.6            Total employed (excluding armed forces),
Ne
                           millions of persons

NL          Exogenous      Total civilian labour force, millions of
                           persons

N           Exogenous      Average   population   in     each         period,
    P
                           millions of persons

            3.4            Implicit price of absorption, 1971 =         1.0

P
 e
            Link           Price of primary energy, 1971 =      1.0

            4.3            Spot price of foreign exchange, $CDN per
fx                         $US

            Link           Price index for imported energy, 1971 =1.0
me
1rnne
            3.5            Price of imports of goods and services
                           (excluding energy), 1971 =   1.0

            Exogenous      Index of world price of Canadian imports
                           (excluding energy), mw = mne"fx

            3.2            Implicit price for gross domestic output,
Pq
                           including imported energy, 1971 = 1.0

            Exogenous      OECD real output deflator, 1971 =     1.0
                                    L4



Variable    Equation No.   Description


            Exogenous      Price index of world exports of goods,
        g                  1971 =    1.0
            Link           Price of energy exports, 1971 = 1.0
xe
p           3.3            Price of exports of goods and services
                           (excluding energy), 1971 =    1.0
q           1.11           Gross output (at factor cost) of the non-
                           energy sector, billion 1971 $.    (Equals
                           real GDP plus net energy imports)

            1.15           Aggregate demand (output less unintended
                           inventory accumulation), billion 1971 $

            1.9            Synthetic supply variable, billion 1971 $
    *
q           1.16           Desired level of profitable future output
                           for investment demand, billion 1971 $

q           1.19           Desired level of profitable future output
                           for labour demand, billion 1971 $

q sv        1.17           Vintage—based synthetic supply, billion
                           1971 $

            Exogenous      Ratio of Canadian bonds held by foreigners
rd
                           to total net liabilities to foreigners

r           Exogenous      Earnings/price ratio for U.S. equities,
    ep 2
                           percent

rf          Exogenous      Fraction of population of labour force age

r           5.7            Average yield on Government of Canada
                           bonds,   10 years and over, percent
rm2         Exogenous      Average yield on U.S. government equities,
                           3-5 years, percent

mat         Exogenous      Natural rate of unemployment, percent
            1.7            Unemployment rate, percent

rpart       Exogenous      Participation rate in labour force
            5.5            Average yield on Government of Canada
r5
                           bonds,   1-3 years, percent
                                L5




Variable   Equation No.   Description


rb2        Exogenous      Yield on 91-day U.S. Treasury bills
                          converted to Canadian equivalence, percent

r          Exogenous      Total personal income tax rate

           Exogenous      Indirect tax rate

           2.4            Proportion of business capital stock owned
rVb
                          by foreigners

t                         Time, 1900 = 0

           5.45           Total corporate taxes, billion $
Tcne
           5.2            Total direct taxes on corporations and
                          persons, billion $

           5.1            Indirect taxes less subsidies, billion $
T.
V          5.10           Market value of private sector wealth,
                          billion $

           5.6            Market value of year-end stock of business
Vkb
                          fixed capital and inventories in Canada,
                          billion $

W          3.1            Wage rate, thousands of dollars per year
                          per employed person

           Exogenous      Exports of cars to U.S., billion $
Xcar2

Xe
           Link           Exports of primary energy, billion 1971 $

Xjd        Exogenous      Interest and dividend receipts from non-
                          residents, billion $

x          2.2            Exports of goods and services (excluding
    ne
                          energy), billion 1971 $

Xtr        Exogenous      Net Transfers plus misc. other items
                          required to satisfy the Balance of
                          Payments identify, billion $

y          3.6            Real gross national product, billion 1971
                          $

V          3.7            Nominal gross national product, billion $
                                   L6



Variable   Equation No.   Description


           Exogenous      Real output in major OECD economies,
                          billion 1975 US $
           Exogenous      Annual   rate   at  which   ener9y/capital
                          proportions become malleable in key

           Exogenous      Depreciation rate. We set    = .05

           Exogenous      Labour productivity index for Harrod-
                          neutral technical progress in Cobb-Douglas
                          function for Q

           Exogenous      Real supply price of capital, percent. We
                          take   r = 7.0
                                             Li


                            MACE    Model Structure




1.   Supply and Factor Demands



       Fixed business investment:


               nene =       .4709    ne1'ne1 +          .087765
                                                                  k*_kfle/kfle

                            (5.66)                       (7.71)



                          + .013624 Vkb/Pakne - .17607                 + • 20708
                                                                  Cq
                             (2.20)                      (6.64)         (6.47)


       OLS 1954 - 1978:      s.e.e =         .00251; R2 = .8986; Durbin-H = -.690
       where



        *      (I
                    *
                                    —p
                                             1ai _____________    w
       k =              +
             4.5336                      k
                                                     ll(i—a)( k            e
       is the desired long term level of capital and 1k
                                                                          201)ra
       is the price of capital services
                                                     L2




        Business fixed capital stock:

(1.2)       k
                ne
                     =   (l—o    )k
                                2 ne—i
                                              +   j ne


        Vintage bundle of capital and energy ("energized capital"):

                                                                                         a
            -
                                                                     1k '
(1.3)       key =                             +
                                                  inew[       +   - (_)              J




        where

            1new = 1ne +                 12)kne_i
        is re-investment with energy use malleable in the current
        year.




        Vintage-based energy requirement:

                                               yp a
(1.4)       e = (1_is )ei +
                                              (-i;) new

        Labour force:

(1.5)       N =      rf    rpart
                                         N                (currently exogenous)




        Employment:

                                                                   *c1
                                                                  q£ k         l-c
                                                          1
(1.6)       N = .82100           N           + .17900                    ev)
             e                       e
                                                                  4.5336
                     (84.76)                   (18.48)


        OLS = 1955 —       1978; s.e.e. = .0559;                   ff2 =       .9984
                                                       L3




        Unemployment rate:

                                       N -N
                          =             £    e
(1.7)       r                 100
                flu
                                        N

        Energy demand:

                                                                                3

                                                                               i=0
                                                                                     (11)''Pei/Pki
(1.8) in e = 0.24484 + 1.1898 in k                           -       .67286
                                                        ne

                                                                                 i0 (1_61)1
                 (15.52)                (68.09)                      (18.77)


           OLS 1955 - 1978; s.e.e = .0158;                             2      = .9989;   D-W =   1.54



        Synthetic supply variable:

(1.9)             = 4.5336 k" (n Ne)


        where

                                       a-i            a-i        a
            -                                         a
           k          =
                              (8 kne         + -y e



        is the CES bundle of capital and energy
                                     L4




         Vintage based synethetic supply:



(1.17)      qsv = 4.5336    (ev)°( Ne)'


         Average unit cost, relative to output price for producing
         gross output of the non-energy sector:

                             p +NW
                     epe +inek   e
(1.10)           =
             q
                               Pq


         Output equation:

(1.11)      in q = —.16676 + .99326 in          —   .44012 in
                                                                   cq
                       (5.75) (146.47)              (6.86)

                                                              *
                                a+xne     +
                                                             k.
                 + .48017 in                  .018998 in
                                                             kib
                     (10.54)                   (.618)


         OLS 1955 - 1978; s.e.e. = .00454; ff        = .9998;      D-W =   1.59

         where kb = .13357
                                ne
                                                   L5




          Non-energy imports:

(1.12)        in (mne —                            =    — 1.2010 + .91363 in q
                             Mcar2/Pmne)
                                                            (6.39)             (21.90)



                             -    1.2535 in (                                     +      1.3898   in (—   )
                                                            1=1          q=i                         SV
                                      (6.48)                                             (3.13)


            OLS 1955 — 1978:               s.e.e = .0288; R2 = .9944; D—W = 2.16




          Change in non—farm business inventories:

(1.13)        i. = q + T./p                - a —   x        +   m
               ib       1             q                ne           ne




          Stock of non—farm business inventories:

(1.14)        kib =      kibl     +
                                      1ib


          Aggregate demand:


(1.15)           =       -            -    .08 (kb -
                     q       [1b                            kib)]


          or, in cases where expected output is taken to be exogenous:

(1.15)'       in q = 1.0277 + .047889t



     Desired level of future output for investment demand:

                              3                    1

(1.16)        q* = 1.07               q
                                          a q_2
                                           L6




           Desired level of future output for labour demand:



(1.19)           q = 1.07          [1 +



           where mne is the equilibrium level of imports at full capacity

           with lags worked out

                 lfl(fflne_Mcar2/Pm) =    -1.2010 + .91363     in q
                                                   pmne
                                     — 1.2535 in
                                                     q




2.      Personal and Foreign Expenditure on Goods and Services


          Personal expenditure:

(2.1)            C/Yd = .75952 Cl/Yd — .33278{r(1_rt) — i]/100
                       (11.18)                  (3.50)



                            +   .023729 V/(Y_Td) + .15916
                                 (1.92)              (3.35)



          where d = real disposable income =
                                                         (Y_Td)/pa and

             =
                 200(Pa_Pai)/(Pa+Pi)

          OLS 1954 — 1978; s.e.e. =       .0092;     =
                                                          .8764; D-W = 1.84
                                        L7




        Non-energy exports:

(2.2)       lfl(Xne_Xcar2/Pxne_Xid/Pxne) =            -6.9978
                                                       (17.48)



                 + 1.2277 in       - .4284                  xne-1
                                           (1
                                                      i=0 fx—Ow-i
                   (24.87)              (2.54)




        OLS 1955 - 1978:     s.e.e. =    .0412; R2 = .9910; D-W = 1.33



        Real absorption:

            a=c+g+ine+           ie


        Return to non—residents on Canadian business assets, as a
        fraction of the total return:

            rVb = .2404 + .6731 (1-rd)
(2.4)

                  (16.90) (19.03)
                                               b
        OLS 1954 — 1978:      s.e.e. =       .0115;   2 = .9377;    D-W =   .95
                                              L8




3.      Prices, Wages and National Income



          Proportionate annual wage change:



(3.1)       = .0014817 + .36381               ÷ .63619 a + .16984 (Pxne)
                                                                                   mne
                (.25)        (4.39)                (7.67)              (2.98)



                 + .22425                 + .023240
                                                          mat/mu
                      (2.14)                 (3.24)


                 -                  -    .022570           -    .025765
                      .00221D76                                              D78
                         (.38)            (4.69)                   (4.87)


          with coefficients on               and 1a constrained to sum to unity.


          3SLS 1955 - 1978:         s.e.e. = .00544;             2
                                                        = .975; Durbin-h =
          —.50; F -     statistic    for constraint = .062




          Proportionate change in implicit price index for output:


(3.2)            =    -.026725 + .80324 I + .087383                         + .066412
                                                                                        Pfxwxq
                        (12.40)         (25.78)           (2.98)               (3.52)

                                                    *          —
                                                   k. b    —    k.ib
                 + .042967          + .13651               *
                                                          kjb
                      (3.25)              (4.03)

          with cost shares constrained to add to unity.

          3SLS 1955 - 1978: s.e.e = .0069; R2 = .968; D—W =                         1.98;
              F - statistic for constraint = .047
                                             L9




        Proportionate change in absorption price index:

                    =   .00067021 + .83163        + .16837
                                                               mne
                           (.42)      (21.90)         (4.43)

        with domestic and import fractions constrained to sum to
        u n i ty.



        3SLS 1955 — 1978: s.e.e. = .0078; it2 =                .945;   D-W =   1.65;
            F - statistic for constraint = 12.3




        Non-energy exports:

(3.3)         in p    = .0062945 + .29941 in p
                  xne                         wxg
                         (1.24)    (13.08)

                        + .52011 in        + .42717
                                      Pq
                                                      in fx
                         (19.47)             (8.32)
        OLS 1953 -        1978:    s.e.e =   .0105;     = .9986; D-W     1.38



        Reai GNP:

(3.6)
             y=a+iib+xne+xe_mne_me_Mid/pmne


        Nominal GNP:

(3.7)
                                                        Li 0




4.      Balance of payments, capital movements



           Net capital inflows, excluding official monetary movements:

(4.1)          F = Lf       -          -
                                Lf_1       Fireva
           or, for the small open economy:

(4.1)'        F. -B+p fxxo
                1
                       F


          Price of foreign exchange:

              fx =      fx +      .0i(-B       -
                                                   F1
                                                         +
                                                               PfxFxo)


          and other formulations discussed in Section 2.



          Net liabilities to non—residents:

              Lf/(Vkb + Lb ÷ H) = .22662 +
(4.4)
                                                                 .15130(pfx
                                                                              -
                                                                                  fx-1
                                               (6.68)             (1.77)

                       +                   -
                            l.7840(r5          rtb2)I100
                            (5.70)

                       +
                            .51215 Lf_l/(Vkbl + Lbl + H_1)
                            (4.53)
                       + .26357
                                       Lf 2/(Vkb2 +              Lb2 + H2)
                            (2.61)
                       — .54416(Lb ÷ H)/(Vkb +                         + H)
                                                                  Lb
                            (5.54)

              + •3583{Pxne(Xne_Xne)                 -                              +        + H)
                                                         pmfle(rnfle_mfle)J/(Vkb       Lb
                    (.79)

         OLS 1955-1978: s.e.e. =               .0093;            = .9195; Durbin-h =        2.28
                                                 Lii




          Net foreign liabilities with small open economy assumption:

(4.4)'        Lf = Lf_1 +              + Firev


          Interest and dividend payments to foreigners (BOP definition):

                                                       r
(4.5)        M.., =   .0722        + 1.3186 rA
              lu
                                                  u100       I




                      (.41)            (9.08)


                      + .010758 (i -
                                                rd)   tf
                             (1.45)

         OLS 1954 - 1978:           s.e.e =      .2476;          =
                                                                     .9646; D-W = 1.21


         Balance of trade:

(4.6)        B =         -         +              -                  +
                   Xtr       Mid       XnePxne         mnepmne           Be




         Balance of trade in energy:

(4.9)        Be = XePxe - mepme




         Retained earnings and revaluation adjustments increasing
         liabilities to foreigners:


(4.7)        Fjrev = -1.2471 + 1.0283                                -
                                                                         Vkbl)
                             (7.78)       (69.20)


                      + .80392 (rb -
                                                rVbl)      Vkb
                         (4.35)


         OLS 1954 - 1978:          s.e.e. .518; R2 = .9959; D—W = 1.96
                                                 Li 2




5.      Government and Private Finance



           Indirect taxes:

(5.1)          T =      r1    apa - Gfsubo/1000




           Direct taxes:

(5.2)               =   .010735 + .15966(Y -            C        -   T.    - WN
                d                                           ca         1          e)
                         (.02)          (2.57)


                                                            -
                         + 1.1722 rt(Y -
                                                  Cca            T)
                              (11.12)


           OLS 1954 - 1978:         s.e.e. .4806;                     = .9978; D—W = 1.03

           where the capital consumption allowance is given by

               in C          = -.2.6549 + .9971 ln(k p )
                        ca                         nea
                               (41.76) (73.43)


           OLS 1952 - 1978:         s.e.e. = .0469; 12 = .9952; D-W                            .40




           Government bonds:

(5.3)          Lb= Lb_i + 9Pa -              - Td       + pfxFxo + Gmisc -             H   + H1



           Demand for high powered money:

 (5.4)         in H =        -2.0472 + .89917 in V - .093672 in r5
                              (14.98) (24.94)                         (3.01)


           Cochrane—Orcutt 1952 — 1978:                  s.e.e. =          .0292;          =   .9488;
           p = .837
                                                   L13




         Corporate taxes:

(5.0)          Tcne =   -.33843 +                         -          -   .08 knepa -
                                           .2967(qpq           epe                   NeW)
                         (2.45)            (31.43)


         OLS 1955 - 1978:             s.e.e. =     .34;    2 = .977;         D-W =      .86


         Business capital and inventories at market value:

(5.6)          100 Y
                    corp
                           I'!
                                 kb
                                      = -1.3007      +   r£    +   .40178(rep2      -   rm2 )
                                          (1.58)                   (2.64)



                                      -   .36583         + .82782        corp
                                                                                +
                                                                                    akbl
                                                     a
                                                                            rZLb/lOO
                                          (4.94)              (4.61)

                    =
         where
                        200(pa_           a-1 "a +        p1)
         and     'corp =                  epe — .08 knePa - NeW _Tcne
                            Pq

         OLS 1955 - 1978:             s.e.e. =     1.12;      2    = .540;   D-W -      1.01



         Long-term interest rate:

(5.7)          rL = .21330 + .50548
                                                r1
                    (1.65)            (10.58)

                        + .32870 r5 + .23690
                                             rm2
                           (4.44)               (2.60)


         OLS 1954 - 1978:             s.e.e. =     .176;           = .991; Durbin-h = .197




         Private sector wealth:

(5.10)
               V=Vkb+Lb+H_Lf
