NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION UNCERTAINTY AND INTEREST RATES:
THEORY AND EMPIRICAL TESTS

Richard Hartman
John H. Makin

Working Paper No. 906

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

June 1982

A paper by Levis Kochin (1980) stimulated our interest. Charles
Nelson and Bill Strang provided helpful comments. Responsibility
for any errors is our own. The research reported here is rt of
the NBER' s research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

not

NBER Working Paper 1/906
June 1982

Inflation Uncertainty and Interest Rates:
Theory and Empirical Tests

ABSTRACT

This paper develops two models, one involving risk neutrality and
the other risk aversion, which suggest that inflation uncertainty affects

interest rates. Both models give rise to essentially the same interest
rate equation for estimation. Empirical evidence supports the hypothesis
that inflation uncertainty affects interest rates. Interpreted in terms
of the risk neutral model, the empirical results suggest that inflation
uncertainty has a negative impact on nominal interest rates and a positive

impact on the expected real rate. If the results are interpreted in terms
of the risk averse model, inflation uncertainty has a negative impact on

nominal interest rates. The expected real rate is not of direct interest
in a risk averse world.

The results raise real questions about the use of the Fisherian definition
of the real interest rate in situations when there is uncertainty about

rates. It is argued that even with risk neutrality the Fisherian
definition of the real rate is not the appropriate concept upon which to
inflation

base

economic decisions if inflation uncertainty is present. The appro-

priate concept is an expected real rate which involves an adjustment for

uncertainty. Moreover, if the world is risk averse, the expected real
rate is not a relevant concept for economic decisions.

Richard Hartman
John H. Makin
Department of Economics
DK-30
University of Washington

Seattle, WA 98195
(206) 543—5865

I.

Introduction

In this paper we examine the relationship between interest rates

and inflation uncertainty. We develop two models here, one involving
risk neutrality and the other risk aversion, which suggest a theoretical

relationship between inflation uncertainty and interest rates. Both
models suggest essentially the same reduced form equation which we esti—

mate using quarterly U.S. data for the period 1959—I to l980—IV. The
empirical results support the assertion that inflation uncertainty has
an effect on interest rates; the estimated effect is highly significant

and enters with the appropriate sign. These results are consistent with
the findings of Levi and Nakin (1979, 1981).

The theory developed here raises some important points. First,
even with risk neutrality, the standard Fisherian definition of the real
interest rate is not the relevant concept for economic decisions when
the expected rate of inflation is the expected value of a random variable
rather than a point expectation; the appropriate concept is an expected

real rate which generally includes uncertainty effects. As noted at the
beginning of the next section, this point has been made by several

authors. Second, with risk aversion, economic decisions depend on
higher order moments of probability distributions and the expected real
rate which is important in the risk neutral case no longer plays the

central role. These two facts raise important questions about the use
of the standard Fisherian definition of the real interest rate in situations where there is uncertainty about the future inflation rate.

2

Section II develops our risk—neutral model and examines its

implications. We begin with a simple model of a producer—consumer in a
two—period world, then extend the analysis to cover market determination
of the nominal and expected real rates of interest, and finally discuss

the continuous time version of these rates. Section III examines a
simple model with risk aversion. Again we begin with a single producer—
consumer and then aggregate to discuss the determination of the equili—

brium interest rate. Section IV contains the econometric estimates of
the common reduced form equation suggested by both models. Finally,
Section V contains a brief summary and some concluding comments.

II.

The Risk—Neutral Case

In this section we investigate the relationship between inflation
uncertainty and interest rates in a risk—neutral economy.
A central feature of this analysis is an expected real interest
rate which plays a critical role in both the investment decision of

producers and the borrowing or lending decision of individuals. This
expected real rate, which differs in a fundamental way from the standard
definition of the real rate associated with the name of Fisher (1930),

has been examined by Blejer and Eden (1979), Boonekamp (1978), and
Eden (1976) in papers dealing with portfolio choice and the demand for
money in discrete time models, and by Fischer (1975, pp. 518—19) in a
paper dealing with the demand for indexed bonds in a continuous time
model.

With continuous discounting, the standard Fisherian definition of
the real rate of interest, rF, is the nominal rate of interest, i,

3

less the expected rate of inflation, a:

rF =

definition for discrete time is given by1 1 +

i

—

a.

The corresponding

r = (1+i)/(1-i-a).

However the expected real rate which enters both the production
decisions and the consumption or borrowing decisions in this paper is given
by

1 + r =

(l+i)

E[l/(l+a)}

where E is the expectation operator, a is the inflation rate and r is

the appropriately defined expected real interest rate. If a is a non—
degenerate random variable (1+i)/(l+a) and (l+i) E[l/(l+a)] will differ

and the difference may be large. This difference arises from the basic
fact that the reciprocal of the expected value of a random variable is
not equal to the expected value of the reciprocal. Since 11(1-i-a) is

convex in a, Jensen's inequality implies r >

rF.

As is clear from

Fischer's analysis, the difference does not disappear in continuous time.

We begin by developing a simple model in which risk—neutral individuals make production and consumption and borrowing decisions and show
that these decisions are based on an appropriately defined expected

real rate of interest. We then investigate the effect of increased inflation uncertainty on the net demand for loans and the resulting
effects on the equilibrium expected real and nominal interest rates.
The section concludes with a discussion of continuous—time versions of
these results.

4

The Model

Consider an individual consumer in a two—period world. The con—
sunier receives nominal endowments (non—capital income) of W0 at the

beginning of period 0 and W1 at the beginning of period 1. These can
be interpreted as payments for labor services plus transfer payments.

Wealth carried over from previous periods is included in W0. W1 need

not be known with certainty in period 0. We assume W1 . 0.

The indi-

vidual can borrow or lend "money" in the initial period at the known

nominal interest rate i. Let B denote the individual's net borrowing.
"Money" in each period is used to purchase a nonstorable good. In period
0 the good can be either consumed or used as the input to a production

process whose output is the good in period 1. For simplicity assume
that production is carried out in sole proprietorships. This, of course,
implies that borrowing to cover production costs is included in net

borrowing, B. Let X be the amount of the period—U good used in production; the corresponding output in period 1 is F(X). The price of
the good in period 0 is 1 and its price in period 1 is P. P is not
known with certainty in period 0; P clearly satisfies P = 1 + a where a
is the random inflation rate.

Let C0 and C1 denote consumption of the good in periods 0 and 1

respectively. The Individual's period—U budget constraint is

(1)

W0+B=C0+X.

In period 1, the individual faces the constraint

5

Wi + PF(x) = (1+1) B + PC1.

(2)

If we were to follow the common practice of identifying risk
neutrality with a linear von Neumann—Morgenstern utility function the
individual would maximize

E{C0 + RC1}

where R is a subfective discount factor reflecting time preference.
Since this objective function is linear in B, there is no unique,

interior solution. In particular, if hR >
consumption is unboundedly large, if hR <

small; and if hR =

E(l+i)/P

E(l+i)/P

E(l+i)/P

the optimal current
it is unboundedly

any level is optimal. This is clearly not

an adequate solution to the consumer's consumption or borrowing problem,
and it suggests either that consumers cannot make these decisions in a
risk neutral manner or that this specification of the risk—neutral ob-

jective function is inappropriate. The latter point of view is adopted
here.

The difficulties just outlined arise because the marginal rate

of substitution between consumption in the two periods is constant. To
avoid these problems we assume the consumer maximizes

(3)

where U' >

U(C0) + RU(EC1)

0,

U" <

0, and R is a subjective discount factor. This seems

to be a reasonable way to specify the objective function of a risk—

neutral consumer in a two—period setting. It reflects risk neutrality

6

in that it depends only on the realized or the expected values of
those variables of ultimate interest, namely, consumption in the two

periods. However it does not require a constant marginal rate of
substitution between current consumption and expected future consumption.
From (2) it is clear that

EC1 = E(W1/P) —

(4)

E[(l+i)B/P]

+ F(X).

If (1) and (4) are used to eliminate C0 and EC1 in (3), the con-

sumer's problem is to choose B and X to maximize

g =

U(W0+B—X)+RU{E(W1/P)—E[(l+i)B/p]+ F(X)}.

The first—order conditions are g/B = 0 which implies

(5)

U'(c0) =

and g/X =

0 which implies

(6)

U'(c0) = RU'(EC1)

RU'(EC1)E[(l+i)/P]

F'(x).

Optimal B and X are found by solving (5) and (6). Note that once
B and X are determined, so also is the optimal C0 through (1). The
resulting C1 will be determined by (2) once the random variables are
observed in period 1.

Consider first the production decision. Since the nominal rate
of interest is known in period 0, (5) and (6) imply

7

(7)

F'(X) = (1+1) E(l/P),

or

(8)

(l+i)E(l/P)

F'(X) =

1.

The interpretation of (8) is straightforward. The cost of a unit of

the input in period 0 is 1. The marginal unit of the input makes an

expected real contribution of F'(X) to real wealth in period 1. The
discounted value of this contribution is to be equated to the price of

the input, and the discount factor is based on (l+i)E(l/P). Note that
(7) or (8) essentially gives a Fisher Separation Theorem in that the
optimal production—investment decision is independent of consumer pre-

ferences. However, the expected real interest rate implicit in (8) is

not the standard Fisherian real interest rate. Note also that

(l+i)E(l/P)

F'(X)

EPF'(x)

so it is inappropriate to discount the expected nominal value of the
marginal product using the nominal interest rate.
If there are diminishing returns in production, F"(X) < 0, and
(7) or (8) can be solved for optimal X as a function of (l+i)E(l/P);

in essence, the demand for capital is a function of the appropriately
defined expected real interest rate.

Consider now the individual's consumption or net borrowing de-

cision. If there are diminishing returns in production, the optimal X
can be substituted into (1) and (4), and then (5) can be solved for B

8

as a function of W0, E(W1/P), and (1+i)E(l/P). Optimal net borrowing
is clearly a function of the appropriately defined expected real interest

rate, (l+i)E(l/P). If notation is simplified by letting

(9)

S =

(l+i)E(l/P),

the functional relationship for optimal net borrowing can be denoted

(10)

B =

B(W0, E(W1/P), S).

If F(X) exhibits constant returns, F"(X)

0 and there is no demand

function for X. However, in this case marginal and average products are
equal, and (7) implies that

F(X) =

X(l+i)E(l/P).

If this is substituted into (4), expected consumption in period 1 is

EC1 + E(W1/P) —

(B—X)(l+i) E(l/P).

There are no unique solutions for B and X under these conditions. This
is to be expected since the individual scale of production is not determined under constant returns to scale, and optimal net borrowing will

vary as the scale of production varies. Note, however, that B—X can
be determined, and optimal C0 is a function of W0, E(W1/P), and S.

The Effects of Inflation Uncertainty and Variation
in Expected Inflation on Interest Rates

The notion of increased uncertainty we use is the mean preserving

spread analyzed by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970). We will be making

9

use of the fact that the expected value of a convex function increases
as its argument undergoes a mean preserving spread.
We begin by considering the case of constant returns to scale in

production. In this case F'(X) is constant, and (7) determines the
equilibrium expected real interest rate. Under these conditions the
expected real interest rate is constant, and any variation in the distribution of P brings about a change in the equilibrium nominal interest

rate to keep S =

(l+i)E(1/P)

constant.

The effect of increased inflation uncertainty on the nominal in-

terest rate is easily determined here. Since 1/P is a convex function,
a mean preserving spread in the distribution of P will increase E(l/P).

If S is to remain constant, this requires that i fall. Note also that
1/P is decreasing in P, and therefore an increase in the mean of P

(holding other central moments constant) will decrease E(l/P). Given S,
this implies that i must increase.

If there are diminishing returns to scale in production, the
market determination of equilibrium interest rates can be investigated

using the following simple model. Assume there are n individuals in the
economy. They may have different preferences and different endowments,
but all are risk neutral in the sense defined above and all have the

same (marginal) distribution for P. Let the superscript k index indivi-

duals. Equilibrium requires

(11)

E(W/P), S)
k=l

B*(S,E(W/P),...,E(/P),W,...,W) = 0

10

*

tthereB

is

the aggregate net demand function for borrowing. Given

and E(W/P), k =

l,2,...,n,

the market can be viewed as determining

the equilibrium S. Given the equilibrium S and the distribution of P,
the equilibrium nominal interest rate is then determined from (9).

Suppose first that E(W/P) does not vary as the distribution of
P changes for all k, i.e., all period—i endowments are fully indexed.
If there is a unique equilibrium, any variation in the distribution of P
must lead to variation in the nominal interest rate, 1, in such a way
that the expected real interest rate, S =

(l+i)E(l/P),

remains constant.

If some of the period—i endowments are not fully indexed,

E(W/P) will vary as the distribution of P changes. This will generally
affect the net demand for borrowing and the resulting equilibrium

expected real interest rate. To investigate this effect we divide
E(W/P) into two parts, one part being fully indexed and the other not

indexed at all. Let

E(W/P) =

(12)

w+

E(W1/P)

where w is the real value of the fully indexed part of individual k's
period—i endowment and

is the nominal value of the nonindexed part.

w is clearly independent of all variation in the distribution of P.
Since

is not indexed at all, it is independent of the distribution

of P. Now,

is decreasing and convex in P. Thus, if

>

0,

an increase in the mean of P will decrease E(W/P), and a mean preserving
spread in the distribution of P will increase E(W1/P).

11

It is straightforward but tedious to show that an increase in

E(W/P) increases the net demand for borrowing for the model considered
here,

k/E (W/P)

(13)

This,

>

of course, is to be expected since any increase in future real

income, c. p.,, would be expected to increase current net borrowing.

We shall now make the assumption that (11) determines a unique,

stable equilibrium. Stability requires that
< 0

(14)

around the equilibrium point. Consider now the effect of variation in

E(W/P) on equilibrium S. The differential of (11) is

n

n

k=l E(W1/P)

dS E

dE(W/P) + :
k=l

*

n
dE(W/P) +

dS = 0.

k=1 E(W1/P)

Given (13) and (14), any increase (decrease) in some or all of the
k =

1,2,...,n,

will increase (decrease) equilibrium S.

Therefore, so long as

.. 0

for all k with strict inequality

for some k, an increase in the mean of P decreases equilibrium S.
This, of course, is equivalent to a decrease in the expected real rate

of interest. This result is similar to the Mundell (1963) and Tobin
(1965) effects in that a rise in expected (anticipated) inflation

12

depresses the equilibrium expected real rate of interest. Moreover,

since a mean preserving spread in P increases E(W/P), we have that
increased inflation uncertainty increases the equilibrium S so long as

W .

0 for all k with strict inequality for some k.

The results of this subsection can be summarized briefly. For
the risk—neutral model considered here, the appropriately defined
expected real rate of interest, r

l—S, will be constant in the cases

of constant returns to scale in production or fully indexed future

endowments (noncapital income). However, if there are diminishing returns
to scale in production, F" < 0, and if some of the individual's have some
nonindexed future endowments, then an increase in expected inflation

decreases S

l+r while increased uncertainty about the inflation rate

increases S =

l+r.

We can denote these effects by writing r as a function

of expected inflation, a, and a shift parameter, v2, which corresponds
to a mean preserving spread in the distribution of P,

(15)

r =

r(a,

v2)

where r/3.a . 0 and r/v2 > 0.
follow from (l+r) =

S

=

(l+i)

The effects on nominal interest rates

E(l/P) and the fact that 1/P is decreasing

and convex. Given S, an increase in expected inflation increases the
nominal interest rate, i, while increased uncertainty about the inflation
rate decreases i.

13

Continuous Time

We have argued that the appropriate discrete—time definition
of the expected real interest rate satisfies

S = 1 + r =

(16)

where et

is

(l+i)E(l/P)

(l+i) E(1)

the random inflation rate. We now investigate the corres-

ponding relationship for the continuous discounting case. To do this,
we divide the period into n subperiods of equal length with compounding
carried out in each subperiod and then take the limit as n --

The analysis is complicated by the fact that the inflation rate is
random. Once the period is divided into n subperiods, it will be necessary to associate a random inflation rate with each subperiod.
If we divide the period into n subperiods with interest being compounded in each subperiod, and if the growth factor in prices over the
th
.
.
.
k subperiod is given by (1 +

(n) ) where

(n)

is a random variable,

0k

then (16) is replaced by

(17)

(1 +

We take the 1 +

=

(1 +

E

1

to be identically and independently distributed.

This is, roughly speaking, the multiplicative equivalent of a stochastic

process with independent increments. Let
Then,

= + (n) k = 1,2,...,n.

14

'18
"

E

1

1

(n)

(n)

1
•

1

2

1

— E

Z (n)

1

E

(n)

Z1

(n)

Z2

1

E

(n)

Zn

= [E
Zk

since the

are independently and identically distributed. It is clear

that the results will depend on how the random variables

are speci—

(n)
fied. Since prices cannot be negative, we must have Zk
= 1 +

specifications

Two

(n)
..

come naturally to mind; one involves letting

0.

be

log normal while the other lets it have a gamma probability distribution.
We consider these in turn.

Let z' = (1 +
(1 +

be lognormally distributed, i.e., log

is a normal variate with a mean and a variance of, say,

and — respectively.
:f log(l +

and

(Note that

are the mean and variance

and not of the underlying random variable

Note that the mean price change over a subperiod and its variance approach
zero as the subperiods get shorter (n -'

°°). Thus,

we are requiring

that prices do not behave too erratically over very short periods of
time.

is a lognormal variate then so also is l/z, and log
(n)

[1/zk

]

has mean — and variance —.

n

[E[l/z]] = [elI

2

Therefore

n]

With the lognormal specification (17) gives

15

n

(1+-f-)
As n -*

, this

=

.n -+—-a2
2
(1+3:) e

becomes

12
e

r

e

so that

r =

(19)

it

Recall that the mean, p, and variance, a2,

here refer to the mean and

variance of log (1 + a) rather than to the mean and variance of a itself.
= 1 + ct1) is a gamma variate with mean

Suppose now that

1 + (i/n) and variance v2/n. Notice that this again implies that the
mean price change over the subperiod and its variance both approach
zero as n -'-

we again require that prices do not behave too erratically

over very short periods of time. Some straightforward but rather

.3

tedious calculations give

1

Zk

1+
n

(1 +_)2
n

n

(l+)
(1+
Substituting

)(1+

(20) into (18) and that into (17) gives

___________

)

16

•n

n

(1+)

)

(1+ n) =(1+
n

—12
a- -v +v

______
r2
VV - —n
4a

(1+

As n -

)

a-

—n
12- —VT
Vv2—4a

(1+

)

° this becomes
ea

er —e 1

— 12 V
a-v +

/2 -4a
—

12 a- —v

VV

e

V

'v/2 -4a

e

which simplifies to

er =ei—ct+V2
so that

(21)

I — a + v2.

r =

In other words, if the

are independent and identical gamma Variates,

then with continuous discounting the real rate of interest is the
nominal rate less the expected rate of inflation plus the variance of

the inflation rate. We can identify the shift parameter for the mean
preserving spread with the Variance, substitute (15) into (21), and

rearrange to get

(22)

i =

r(a,

v2) + a — v2

where r/a < 0 and r/Dv2 . 0.

17

III. A Simple Risk Averse Case

In this section we briefly investigate the effect of inflation

uncertainty on the interest rate in an economy of risk—averse individuals.
Except as noted below, we continue to use the notation of the previous
section.

We begin by considering the behavior of a single individual who

maximizes

E {u(c0)

+

R U(C1)}

where U is a vonNeumann—Morgenstejn utility function and R is a subjec-

tive discount factor. We will simplify the analysis greatly by making
the following two assumptions:
(i)

There is no production in the model. Returns from production
are simply included in the period—l endowment; and

(ii)

The vonNeumann—Morgenstejn utility function is logarithmic,

U(C) =

log

C.

Our justifications of the logarithmic utility function are its relative
simplicity and Arrow's (1965, p. 37) argument that the appropriate
form of the utility function is logarithmic if we wish to restrict ourselves to the class of functions having constant relative risk aversion.
If there is no production

C0 =

W0

+ B.

18

As in equation (12) above, we explicitly recognize that some of the

period—i endowment may be indexed while some of it may not. Real consumption in period—i is given by
C

C1 = w1 +

—

(l+i)

B

where w1 is the real value of the fully indexed part of the period—i

endowment and W is the nominal value of the nonindexed part. Both

w1

and W may be random, but W is independent of P.
With the logarithmic specification the first order condition for

net borrowing implies
1

1

—

W0+B

+

-

(l+i)}

(l+i) -B

or

(23)

W+B
0

=

(1+1)
Pw1 + W —

(l+i)B

}.

The optimal B clearly depends on the nominal interest rate, i, on W0,

and on the parameters of the distribution of W, w1 and P. The expected
real interest rate which played a central role in the risk—neutral model
does not enter here since (1+1)/P does not enter as a simple linear term

under the expectation sign. This will be true generally for models with
risk aversion.

The effects of variation in the distribution of P on the indivi—

dual's net demand for borrowing are easily determined. The left hand
side of (23) Is a decreasing function of B; it is graphed in Figure 1.

19

The right hand side of (23) is an increasing function of B; it is

graphed as A in Figure 1. The intersection of these two functions gives
optimal net borrowing, B, in Figure 1.

Now, the random variable P

appears only on the right hand side of (

(l+i)/{pw1 + W —
if w1 >

0,

(1+i)B}

23).

If w1 >

0,

is decreasing and convex in P.

Therefore,

an increase in the mean of P, c.p.,, will decrease the right

hand side of (23) for any given B; this shifts the curve A down, say,

to A". The optimal B therefore increases with an increase in the expected

inflation rate, a. Moreover, since the expression inside the expectation
sign on the right hand side of (23) is convex in P, a mean preserving
spread in the distribution of P will increase the right hand side of (23)

for any given B. This shifts the curve A up, say to A', and leads to a
decrease in B.

If we denote the individual's net demand for borrowing as a

function of the nominal interest rate, i, the expected inflation rate,
a, and a shift parameter, v2, reflecting a mean preserving spread in
the distribution of P,

(24)

B (i, a, v2).

We have that B/ct > 0 and DB/v2 < 0 so long as w1 >

0.

We turn now to the determination of the equilibrium interest rate.
Assume there are n individual's in the economy. They may have different
endowments, but all have the same vonNeumann—Morgenstern utility function

and all have the same marginal distribution of P. We let the superscript

k index individuals. We assume w - 0 for all k with strict inequality
for some k.

20

,A

1

W0 +B
1

A'

W0 +B

/

/

II

B
B

Figure 1

Market equilibrium requires

(i, , v2)

(25)

B* (i, ct, v2) =

0.

k=l

We again assume a unique, stable equilibrium. Stability requires

(26)

BIi < 0,

around the equilibrium point. Under these conditions we can solve
(25) for equilibrium i in terms of c and V2.

(27)

i =

i(c, v2).

21

Standard operations show that

——

kl

__________

and
ai

k=l

v2

Given (26) and the properties of (24), it is clear that i/ct > 0 and

ai/v2 <

0

so long as w > 0 for all k with strict inequality for some k

In other words, given this specification of the risk—averse model, the
equilibrium nominal interest rate increases with expected inflation and
decreases with uncertainty about the inflation rate.

IV.

Empirical Tests

We have developed two models which suggest that the equilibrium
nominal interest rate responds to variations in the expected inflation
rate and to uncertainty in the inflation rate.
The risk—neutral model operates through an appropriately defined
expected real interest rate which, with the gamma specification, gives
rise to equation (21),

(21)

i=r+c—v2

giving the nominal interest rate in terms of the expected real rate

and the mean and variance of the inflation rate. If the expected real
rate is constant, the variance, v2, in (21) enters with a coefficient of
(—1).

22

Statistical investigations of the behavior of the real rate in
models with point expectations have appeared with increasing frequency
since publication of Fama's (1975) provocative article and suggest that
it is inappropriate to treat the real rate as a constant, particularly
outside of the 1953—1 through 1973—2 sample period investigated by Fama.
Nelson and Schwert (1977) argued that Fama's test of the joint hypothesis
of rationality of inflation forecasts and constancy of the real rate
was not sufficiently powerful and after applying more powerful tests
concluded that the data permitted rejection of the constant real rate

hypothesis. Mishkin (1981) showed the sensitivity of Fama's tests to
sample period. Studies by Levi and Makin (1979, 1981), Tanzi (1980),

Mishkin (1981), Makin (1982), Hafer and Hem (1982) and others have
found that the real rate may be affected, at least in the short run,
by a number of specific variables including measures of the stage of
the business cycle, unanticipated changes in the money supply, measures
of inflation variability, total borrowing demand relative to GNP and
anticipated inflation itself.

The risk—neutral model considered in this paper suggests that the
expected real rate may respond negatively to the expected inflation rate

and positively to uncertainty about the inflation rate. (See (15)
above.) If the expected real rate is not constant, which seems a safe
operating hypothesis, and if we maintain the gamma specification of the
distribution of P, we have (22) of Section II as a specification of an

interest rate equation for the risk neutral model. The other variables
which the studies mentioned above have found to be important determi-

nants of the real rate can be viewed as variables from outside our

23

model which shift the aggregate net demand for borrowing and hence
affect the equilibrium expected real interest rate.
The expected or anticipated inflation rate may affect the real
rate for the reason given in Section II above or because of the Hundell
and Tobin effects.

In a model of point expectations, the hypothesized impact of a
money surprise on real interest arises from an assumption of "sticky"

price adjustment. Money growth above its anticipated level results
in an excess supply of money if prices are sticky in the short run,
assuming also that surprisemoney growth does not immediately cause a

rise in real income sufficient to absorb excess money supply. Until
prices adjust fully to absorb excess money supply, the only alternative
is for real interest to fall thereby lowering (cet. par.) nominal
interest by an amount sufficient to clear the money market.4

The real rate may also be affected by budget deficits. In addition to the possible impact of deficits on anticipated inflation, a
measure of the deficit or total borrowing relative to GNP can be viewed
as a shift parameter in our function given the aggregate net demand for

borrowing. An increase in this ratio corresponds to an upward shift
in the net demand function, and, as was shown in Section II, this will
tend to increase the expected real rate.
Combining these variables with those in our equation (15) gives
rise to an expression for the expected real rate involving expected
inflation, c, a measure of borrowing relative to GNP, d, a measure
of surprises in money growth, N, and the variance of the inflation rate or

some other measure of uncertainty, v2. In linearized form we have

24

c + A2d—X3M + A4v2,

=

with X. >

0,

0,.. .,4.

i =

Substituting this in (21) and adding an error

term, e, gives the linear equation

=

(28)

X0+(lX1)

+ A2d—X3m —

(l—X4)v2

+ e.

The expected real rate does not play a role in our model of interest

rate determination with risk aversion. However, as shown in Section III,
the equilibrium nominal rate is an increasing function of expected
inflation, c, and a decreasing function of a measure of inflation un-

certainty, v2, which we can identify with the variance. Moreover, the
arguments given above that the measures d and N may act as shift parameters in the aggregate net demand function for borrowing can be applied

here too. If we combine these shift parameters with the parameters explicitly recognized in (27), linearize, and introduce an additive error

term, e, we have

=

(29)

where

>

0,

o]_

i =

i

+ 2d—M

1,.. .,4.

—

i3

v2 + e

Equations (28) and (29) are not generally

distinguishable, and we therefore are not in a position to test which of

our two models is appropriate. However, both imply that inflation uncertainty affects the nominal interest rate, a proposition which we now
test.

25

The common equation given by (28) or (29) will be estimated employing the transfer function methodology developed by Box and Jenkins

(1970). The methodology has a number of advantages over usual, linear

econometric estimation techniques. It is possible to entertain any
autoregressive (AR), moving average (MA), or combined ARMA representation of residuals and to estimate it simultaneously with relationships

between the endogenous and exogenous variable(s). Usual methodology
only allows iterative estimation of a first—order autoregressive pro-

cess to represent residuals.5 The transfer function also enables
parsimonious representation of possible distributed lag relationships

between the endogenous variable and exogenous variables. In addition,
transfer function output includes leading and lagging cross correlations
between the endogenous and exogenous variables which enable the investigator to check for all possible lagged relationships while also providing a check on possible feedback running from the endogenous variable

to exogenous variables. It is worth noting that the transfer function
in its simplest representation produces estimation results identical

to usual OLS methodology with serially uncorrelated residuals. As is
well—known, however, the standard assumptions required for OLS estimation are often violated, and in such cases transfer function technique

provides the investigator with a useful and more flexible tool with
which to test for empirical relationships.
Overall, the transfer function is reasonably well described as
a means of combining time series and structural explanations of behavior

of economic variables such as interest rates. By providing maximum

26

flexibility with respect to the form of the ABIIA model required to model

residuals, the procedure imposes a more stringent test of the existence

of a relationship between dependent and independent variables. In
effect, significant explanatory variables must explain the residuals
from the best ARNA model representing time series behavior of the
dependent variable.

The result of estimating the equation given by (28) or (29) over
the 1959—I —

l980-1V sample period is reported as equation (1.1) in

Table 1. Since the ratio of total borrowing to GNP (d) is not signif i—
cant even at the 10 percent level, equation (1.1) is reestimated omitting

that variable with the result reported as equation (l.2).6 A number of
conclusions emerge. Anticipated inflation produces a positive impact

upon nominal interest. The estimated coefficient on a is 0.791, significantly below unity. This is consistent with the risk—neutral model
where expected inflation affects the expected real rate, either through

our (15) or through the Mundell and Tobin effects. It is also consistent
with the risk averse model, (27), and the fact that si/Ba < 0 as shown
in Section III. The money "surprise't variable carries the anticipated
negative sign and is significant at the 0.01 level.
The primary object of our investigation, the effect of inflation
uncertainty, produces the anticipated negative impact on the nominal

interest rate and is significant at the 0.01 level. The value of the
coefficient, —0.271, is significantly different from —1. If we adopt
the risk—neutral version of the model given by (21), this is consistent

with having the expected real rate depend positively on inflation

0.666
(5.07)

3.28
(4.00)

2

(1.17)

3.77

d

(5.47)

—0.385

—0.435
(8.23)

—0.393
(5.47)

M3 Money
Surprise

1959—I — 1980—IV; t—statistics are in parentheses).

0.791
(6.74)

3.52

(5.83)

(3.92)

(4.72)

0.733

Anticipated
Inflation1

3.15

Constant

(2.78)

-O.27l

(2.07)

—0.216

Variance of
Inflation4

0.920

0.925

0.925

R2

199.2

174.87

5Both equations (1.1) and (1.2) are estimated as transfer functions. Residuals are modeled by an
The significance level of the chi—
AR—l, MA2,4 model (all terms significant at the 0.01 level).
square test that the first 24 residuals from equation (1.1) are white noise is 0.873; for
equation (1.2) it is 0.916.

4The variance of inflation is measured by the variance across respondents to the Livingston survey
on 6—month inflationary expectations. Variance lagged one quarter produced the only significant
impact on the dependent variable and that result is reported here.

3The money surprise is measured by residuals from an AR—i, MA—5 model of Mi—B growth estimated
using quarterly data from 1959—I — 1980—IV. The chi—square test of the hypothesis that residuals are white noise has a significance level of 0.94.

F
150.78

1Anticipated inflation is based on Livingston survey data on 6—month inflationary expectations.
Interpolation is employed to obtain a quarterly series.
is defined as total borrowing divided by GNP.
See Makin (1982) for further discussion.

(Sample Period:

(1.3)

(1.2)

(1.1)

Dependent Variable:
T—Bili Rate)

jIo.

1

ESTIMATION OF TUE INTEREST RATE EQUATION

TABLE

0.679

0.659

0.658

SE5

NJ

28

uncertainty as argued in Section II. Alternatively, it is consistent
with the risk—averse model in which the nominal interest rate depends
negatively on inflation uncertainty.
The results reported in Table 1 support the hypothesis that infla-

tion uncertainty is an important determinant of interest rates. Within
a risk—neutral setting, inflation uncertainty has an impact on both
the nominal and the appropriately defined expected real interest rates.
With risk—aversioh, inflation uncertainty has an impact on the nominal

interest rate. Failure to take account of inflation uncertainty may
well account for the frequent empirical findings by Gibson (1972),
Tanzi (1980), and others that the impact of anticipated inflation on
nominal interest rates lies below the level suggested by previous theory.
As noted by Levi and Makin (1979) omitting a variable such as v2
which is positively correlated with anticipated inflation and negatively
correlated with nominal interest rates will bias downward the estimated

impact of anticipated inflation on nominal interest rates. Such an
effect is evident from equation (1.3) in Table 1. Omission of v2
causes the estimated impact on the nominal interest rate of a unit change
in expected inflation to fall from 0.791 to 0.666.

V.

Concluding Remarks

We have developed two models, one involving risk—neutrality and
the other risk—aversion, which suggest that inflation uncertainty affects

interest rates. Since both models give rise to essentially the same
interest rate equation for estimation, we cannot distinguish between
the two models implying that inflation uncertainty has an impact on

29

nominal interest rates. Our empirical evidence supports the hypothesis
that inflation uncertainty affects interest rates. If we interpret the
empirical results in terms of the risk—neutral model, inflation uncertainty has a negative impact on nominal interest rates and a positive
impact on the expected real rate as implied by our theory in Section II.
IE we interpret the results in terms of the risk—averse model, inflation

uncertainty has a negative impact on nominal interest rates. The expected
real rate is not bf direct interest in a risk—averse world.
We believe our results raise real questions about the use of the
Fjsherjan definition of the real interest rate in situations when there

is uncertainty about inflation rates. We have argued that even with
risk—neutrality the Fisherian definition of the real rate is not the
appropriate concept upon which to base economic decisions if inflation

uncertainty is present. The appropriate concept is an expected real
rate which involves an adjustment for uncertainty. Moreover, if the
world is risk—averse, the expected real rate is not a relevant
concept for economic decisions.

30

FOOTNOTES

1.

To see that this gives rise to the continuous time Fisherian
definition, first divide the period into n subperiods of equal

length with compounding carried out in each subperiod. This
gives rise to

rFn =
(1+—)
-n

(l+)
(l+)

For continuous compounding take the limit as n - on both sides
to get

r

eF =e i-o

2.

See Aitchison and Brown (1963) for a discussion of the properties

of the lognormal distribution. Since the product of independent
lognormal variates is lognormal, it follows that P is lognormal.

Although this specification and Fischer's (1975) both lead to the
price level being lognormally distributed, they really are not
directly comparable since Fischer assumes the inflation rate is
normally distributed.
3.

See Parzen (1960, pp. 160—65, 220) for a discussion of the gamma
probability distribution and of the mathematics used in this

deviation. If we drop superscripts and subscripts, the density
function of z is

31

f(z) =

F(p)

(Az) e (z >

0, p > 0)

where F(p) is a gamma function. The mean of the distribution

is p/A and the variance is p/A2. Since p/A = 1
p/A2 =
p =

v2/n,

we have A = [1 +

[1 + (/fl)]2/(2/)

E(l/z) =

j

and

and

Now

(Az) e dz

F(p)

?, F(p—1)

-

(/n)]/(v2/n)

+ (Z/n)

—

F(p) j

z2

e dz

A

F(p) A1
Therefore,
n
Z

(1 +

4.

- V

2

Some investigators, see Grossman (1981) and Engel and Frankel

(1982), have argued the reverse. Unanticipated money growth, they
claim, will cause markets to anticipate tightening by the Federal
Reserve which in turn will cause interest rates to rise in anti-

cipation of the tightening. This could be termed an "expectations"
effect which operates in the opposite direction upon interest
rates as does the "liquidity" effect from unanticipated money
growth.

Two observations are in order on the expectations effect.

First, it is very short—lived. Grossman found it operative over

32

a two—hour period from one hour before Friday's money supply an—

noucement to one hour after. Frankel, testing for the same effect
to persist until the following Monday did not detect a statisti-

cally significant effect. It appears that the expectations effect
is operative only on an intra—day basis while over a longer period

such as a quarter. Makin's (1982) results strongly support dominance of the liquidity effect.
Second, it must be remembered that the expectations effect,

which suggests a change in policy, is likely conditional upon the
position of the actual money supply relative to its target when

a "surprise" occurs. If money supply is below target, a positive
surprise may produce no change (or no expected change) in policy
while the reverse would hold given money supply above target and a
positive surprise.
5.

For a more thorough discussion of implications of improperly
modeling residuals see Hendry (1977).

6.

Total borrowing/GNP may serve as a crude proxy for variance of
inflation. The correlation coefficiency between it and c12 is 0.41.

33

REFERENCES

Aichison,

3. and J.A.C. Brown (1963). The Lognormal Distribution,
Cambridge University Press.

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Risk—Bearing,

Helsinki; Yrj Johnsson Sti.
Blejer, Mario I. and Benjamin Eden (1979). "A Note on the Specification
of the Fisher Equation under Inflation Uncertainty," Economics
Letters 3: 249—255.
Boonekamp, C.F.J. (1978). "Inflation, Hedging, and the Demand for
Money," American Economic Review LXVIII (December): 821—833.
Box, G.E.P. and G.M. Jenkins (1970). Time Series Analysis, Forecasting
and Control, Holden—Day, Inc., San Francisco.

Eden, B. (1976). "On the Specification of the Demand for Money: The
Real Rate of Return Versus the Rate of Inflation," Journal of
Political Economy LXXXIV (December): 1353—59.
Engel, C. and 3. Frankel (1982). "Why Money Announcements Move Interest
Rates: An Answer from the Foreign Exchange Market," Mimeographed,
Institute of Business and Economic Research, University of
California, Berkeley, (February).
Fama, Eugene F. (1975). "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictors of
Inflation," American Economic Review (June): 269—82.

____

(1976). "Inflation Uncertainty and Expected Returns on Treasury
Bills," Journal of Political Economy (June): 427—48.

Feldstein, Martin (1976). "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of
Interest: A Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review
(December): 809—20.
Fischer, S. (1975). "The Demand for Indexed Bonds," Journal of Political
Economy 83, No. 3 (June): 509—534.

Fisher, Irving (1930). The Theory of Interest, New York: Macmillan.
Gibson, W.E. (1972). "Interest Rates and Inflationary Expectations,"
American Economic Review 62, No. 5 (December): 854—865.

Grossman, 3. (1981). "The 'Rationality' on Money Supply Expectations
and the Short—Run Response of Interest Rates to Monetary Surprises,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (November): 409—24.

34

Hafer, R.W. and S.E. Hem (1982). "Monetary Policy and Short—Term
Real Rates of Interest," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review
(March): 13—19.
Kochin, Levis (1980). "Interest Rates and Uncertain Future Price Levels:
Irving Fisher's Money Illusion," University of Washington.
Levi, Maurice D. and John H. Makin (1978). "Anticipated Inflation and
Interest Rates: Further Interpretation of Findings on the Fisher
Equation," American Economic Review (December): 801—12.

____

(1979). "Fisher, Phillips, Friedman and the Measured Impact of
Inflation on Interest," Journal of Finance (March): 35—52.

Makin, John H. (1982). "Effects of Inflation Control Programs on
Expected Real Interest Rates," International Monetary Fund:
Staff Papers (June).

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1981). "The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical
Investigation," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 15 (Autumn): 151—200.
Mundell, Robert A. (1963). "Inflation and Real Interest," Journal of
Political Econoy (June): 280—83.
Nelson, Charles R. and C. William Schwert (1977). "On Testing the
Hypothesis that the Real Rate of Interest is Constant," American
Economic Review (June): 478—86.
Parzen, Emanuel (1960). Modern Probability Theory and Its Applications,
Wiley.

Peek, Joe (1981). "Interest Rates, Income Taxes, and Anticipated Inflation,"
Mimeographed, Department of Economics, Boston College, (July).

Rothschild, M. and J.E. Stiglitz (1970). "Increasing Risk: l.A.
Definition," Journal of Economic Theory II (September): 225—43.
Tanzi, Vito (1976). "Inflation, Indexation and Interest Income Taxation,"
Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, Quarterly Review 29 (March): 54—76.

____

(1977). "Inflation and the Incidence of Income Taxes on Interest
Income: Some Results for the United States, 1972—74," International
Monetary Fund Staff Papers 24 (July): 500—513.

____

(1980). "Inflationary Expectations, Economic Activity, Taxes, and
Interest RAtes," American Economic Review 70 (March): 12—21.

____

(l980a).

Inflation and the Personal Income Tax, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1980.

35

Tobin, James (1965). "Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica (October):
671—84.

Zeliner, A. and F. Palm (1974). "Time Series Analysis and Simultaneous
Equation Econometric Models," Journal of Econometrics 2: 17—54.

