                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE PRODUCTION AND COST OF AMBULATORY
             MEDICAL CARE IN COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS



                           Fred Goldman
                         Michael Grossman


                      Working Paper No. 901




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            June 1982




The research reported here is .rt of the NBER' $ research program
in Health Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER WORKING PAPER #907
                                                           June 1982




                     THE PRODUCTION AND COST OF AMBULATORY MEDICAL
                           CARE IN COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS



                                       ABSTRACT


         An assessment of the efficiency of Federally funded community health centers

 (CHCs) in delivering ambulatory medical care to poverty populations reveals that

the centers' input decisions reflect departures from cost—minimizing behavior.

In particular, they employ too few physician aids (nurses and physician assis-

tants)   relative to primary care physicians and too   many medical support and

ancillary personnel relative to primary care physicians. The CHC system—wide
cost   reduction due to the elimination of allocative inefficiency is estimated at

$32 million in 1978 dollars or 6 percent of total cost. This modest cost reduc-

tion and evidence that allocative inefficiency is not more widespread among CHCs

than anng private sector physicians seriously question the conventional wisdom

that services in the public sector are produced less efficiently than in the pri-

vate sector.     Support is also reported for the hypothesis that, since grants are
not   tied to particular services rendered, centers who derive most of their reve-

nue   from this source relative to Medicaid and private insurance have a greater
incentive to provide a given mix of services in the least—cost method.

Fred Goldman                                             Michael Grossman
Columbia University School of                            City University of New York
  Public Health                                            Graduate School
600 West 168th Street                                    33 West 42nd Street
New York, New York 10032                                 New York, New York 10036
(212) 694—3934                                           (212) 790—4426


                        National Bureau of Economic Research
                        269 Mercer Street, 8th Floor
                        New York, New York 10003
                        (212) 598—3446/3321
                    THE PRODUCTION AND COST OF AMBULATORY MBDICAL
                          CARE IN COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS

                          Fred Goldman and Michael Grossman*


                                  I. Introduction
        Since   1965 a network of Federally   funded community health centers (CHCs)
has    developed in the United States to deliver comprehensive ambulatory     care,
both    primary and preventive,   to poverty populations in medically underserved

areas.       The program to create and fund these centers, originally termed
neighborhood health centers, was started by the Office of Economic Opportu-
nity as part of the War on Poverty. By 1973 overall control of the         centers
had been     shifted to the Bureau of Community   Health   Services (BCHS), Health

Services     Administration, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and

the   centers began to be referred to as community health centers. Funding

authority for the centers rests in Section 330 of the Public Health Ser-

vices   Act. New and smaller    variants of the basic CRC model were created       in
1975   and   1978 by the introduction of the Rural Health Initiative and the
Urban Health Initiative, respectively. Concomitant with these legislative
developments, the number     of CHCS increased from 51 in 1968 to    104 in 1974

and   to   approximately 800 in 1980.1

       In   some respects CHCs resemble prepaid group practice organizations,
commonly termed health maintenance organizations (HMOs). CHCs deliver
ambulatory care in a group practice setting with salaried physicians. Yet
there are obvious differences between the centers and liMOs. The clientele
of the centers primarily are poor. In addition, some services delivered by
centers are billed to patients and third—parties, most notably Medicaid, on
a fee—for—service basis.
                                   —2—


     CHCs are part of a larger Federal system for the direct delivery of am-

bulatory care to low—income groups throughout the U.S. The principal addi—

tional projects in this system are maternal and infant care projects,

children and youth projects, and family planning clinics.2 This system

differs from Medicaid which is solely a mechanism for financing the ambula-

tory care services of poor people. Unlike the other members of the system,

CHCs are not limited in terms of the types of services provided or the age

classes of low—income people who receive services.

     The purpose of this paper is to assess the efficiency of CHCs in deliv-

ering ambulatory medical care to poverty populations. In particular, we

evaluate the extent to which centers select input mixes that minimize the

cost of a given output. We focus on the employment of physician aids

(nurses, physician assistants, and related personnel) because studies of the

production of ambulatory care in the private sector suggest that aids are

underutilized relative to physicians,3 while the General Accounting Office

(14) has criticized the centers for employing too many aids relative to

physicians.

     We estimate a transcendental production function, compute the marginal

product of aids relative to physicians for each center, and compare it to

the location—specific relative price of an aid. The ratio of the former to

the latter equals one if a given center selects the cost—minimizing input

mix. Hence, the average value of the ratio indicates whether the CHC system

overutilizes or underutilizes aids.

     We also examine the determinants and effects of departures from cost

minimization by computing an index of inefficiency for each center. Since

grants are not tied to particular services rendered, centers who derive

most of their revenue from this source relative to Medicaid and private
                                        —3—


 insurance   should have a greater incentive to provide a given mix of services
 in the least—cost method. This hypothesis and others are tested via a
multiple regression analysis of the index of departure from cost minimiza-
tion. Moreover, the index is included as an independent variable in multi-
ple regression estimates of average cost functions       of ambulatory care.     This

procedure    enables us to   calculate the magnitude of the cost savings asso-

ciated with movements toward a more appropriate input mix. In addition, it

provides impacts of other variables on average cost net of their impacts on

departures from cost minimization. Estimates of average cost functions are

valuable in    their    right because they convey useful information about the
                       own

extent    of economies of scale, the potential for exploiting these economies,
and the    characteristics of high cost centers.

       The importance of our research is highlighted by the current policy

debate with regard to the effectiveness, efficiency, and ultimate fate of

the CHC    system. The growth   of   this system has been curtailed sharply in
real   terms by the Reagan Administration's budget cutbacks. Although the

centers were exempted from the block grant program in the fiscal 1982 budget,

starting in 1983 individual states have the option to take      over   the CHC pro-

gram or leave it in Federal hands. If a state chooses to take control, it

must match a portion of the Federal support. In the proposed       fiscal   1983

budget,   CHC8 are combined with family planning clinics, migrant health cen-

ters, and   black   lung clinics into a single block grant.   Moreover, the    state

matching   payment provision just mentioned is eliminated. If the CHC8 are
relatively inefficient producers of ambulatory care, the policies of the
Reagan Administration have some merit. On the other hand, if the centers
are relatively efficient, the wisdom of these policies can be questioned.
                                        —4—




        We have already mentioned that the General Accounting Office (14) has

charged that CHCs use too many aids relative to physicians. Yet the GAO

presents a very limited amount of data in support of its charges. In addi-

tion,    it ignores the fact that one   of the   goals of the older centers in
particular is to provide employment and job training to the members of the
communities that they service. ?reover, it          fails to mention that   CHC5

have    been much more receptive than   other   delivery systems, especially pri-

vate physicians, to the employment of new types of allied health manpower

such as physician assistants and nurse practitioners. Finally, the GAO

proposes no rigorous standards for efficiency.

        Proponents of   the CHC system cite evidence by Reynolds (3), Davis     and

Schoen (5), and Link et al. (15) that utilization rates of ambulatory medi-
cal care by poverty populations who use CHCs are higher than utilization

rates of similar populations who must rely on other sources of care. Davis

and Schoen (5) suggest that the CHC     per   capita ambulatory   cost   is comparable

to that in the U.S. as a whole once the national       data are adjusted to    re-
flect the exclusion of X—ray, laboratory, and pharmacy costs from routine
private physicians' office visits. They present, however,         very   limited
evidence   in support of this position. Duggar et al. (16) find that Medicaid—

eligible CRC users      had lower per capita ambulatory cost than Medicaid—
eligible   non—users in each of three study sites. A problem with their study

is   that non—users typically obtained ambulatory care from hospital, emer-
gency rooms and outpatient departments. Therefore, the cost structures and
staffing patterns of these sources reflect the joint production of outpatient
and   inpatient care by hospitals.

       Since it is difficult, if not impossible, to compare CRC ambulatory care

costs   with ambulatory care costs of other institutions that       serve poverty
                                       —5—




 populations, we focus on the NintelN        efficiency   of the CHC   system.   Spe-
 cifically, we   examine the extent to which input decisions by centers reflect

 departures from cost minimization and the impact of these departures on the

 total cost of care. We compare our results with those of similar studies

 of the behavior of private physicians.

       According to conventional wisdom, services in the public or non—profit

 sector are produced less efficiently than in the private sector because of

 the absence of a profit motive in the former sector. For example, the large

literature on public utilities suggests that utilities are too capital in-

tensive because the cost of capital is set at an artificially low level by

regulators. In a similar manner, the public      provision and/or financing of
medical   care often is characterized by cost—plus or fee—for—service reiin—

bursement of providers. Both reimbursement schemes promote inefficiency if

high   cost producers are   not penalized or penalized less than they     would be
in the private   sector. Further, until fairly recently Medicaid reimburse-

ment   rules in many states failed to cover   services provided by paramedical

personnel   and thus encouraged overutilization of physicians relative to
such   personnel. Currently, reimbursement rules in at least some states

still are biased in favor of physicians.

       Conventional wisdom notwithstanding, whether the production of anibula—

tory   care in the public sector is less efficient than in the private sector
is   an empirical issue. In particular, although incentives in favor of in-

efficient production exist, it is not known how the agents in the public

sector (the CHCs in our case) react to these incentives. Moreover, even

if the incentives do cause departures from cost—minimizing behavior, the

quantitative importance of these departures in terms of an increase in
                                       —6—


total cost is not known.      Thus, in undertaking this study, we seek answers to

three basic questions. What is the extent of departures from cost—minimizing

behavior by community health centers in the production of ambulatory care?

What are   the determinants of such departures? What are their effects on
total cost?
     In addressing these issues, we recognize explicitly that incentives for
inefficiency need not cause significant departures from efficient production.
An analogy from the private sector is instructive here. Reinhardt (8) finds

that private physicians, whose incentive structure clearly includes the

profit motive, use less than the optimal number of aids. We also recognize

that cHCs confront incentives for efficient production as well as inefficient

production. Federal, state,      and local government grants are the major source
of funds to cover the expenses incurred by CECs. These grants finance
approximately 70 percent of the centers' costs, although this             percentage

varies   considerably among centers (see Section III) •         The   grants bear some
resemblance to the capitation payments made by members of health maintenance
organizations.    Since the   grants are not   tied to   particular services ren-
dered,   the centers, like HMOs, largely operate on fixed annual budgets.

Hence, both types of organizations have incentives         to   provide a given mix

of   services in the least—cost method. Finally, we choose to address the
three questions cited   above because we   do not appreciate policy which is
not based on rigorous standards for the evaluation of efficiency.4
       In general the analysis of the   determinants and effects of departures

from cost minimization in this paper represents a new innovation in the

empirical literature on cost and production. Thus, we make a methodolog-

ical as well as a policy contribution in the paper. Our contribution is
                                      —7—


particularly relevant because the issue of inefficiency in the not—for—

profit public sector will continue regardless of whether CHCs are placed

in a block grant and regardless of whether states gain more control of

the centers, other health programs, and non—health programs. We develop

a   framework to evaluate and perhaps improve efficiency in one part of the

public sector, but our framework can be applied to many other parts of

this sector.


                           II. Analytical Framework

      In the traditional economic theory of production, the firm is      the
fundamental behavioral unit. A firm's production function relates its
output   to various inputs and to a measure of the level of technology. A

firm's cost function relates the total or average cost of output to out-

put, input prices, and the level of technology. If the firm      minimizes the
cost of a given output, the cost function is the "dual" of the production

function. By this is meant     that all   the properties of the cost function

are known   once   the properties of the production function are known   Ifor
example,   Shephard (18)]. Put differently, given sufficient information

about the   production function, the estimation of the cost   function   con-
veys no additional information.
      We use the above concepts from the economic theory of production to
organize our econometric work on production and cost functions of anibula—
tory medical care in community health centers • Since the assumption that
centers are completely successful cost minimizers is questionable, we
estimate both these functions. Indeed, important components of our re-
search are to test the hypothesis that centers select the cost—minimizing
combination of inputs, to develop an index of inefficiency or     departure
                                              —8—




from cost minimization, and to examine the determinants of variations in
this index among    centers     and the effects of inefficiency on average cost.
Moreover,    the estimation of average cost functions allows us to incorpor-

ate the impacts of indivisibilities, randomness of demand, and complex-

ities of large scale operations (see below) which are not fully reflected

in    the production function.
       Our basic methodology may        be   outlined as follows. Let the production
function of output (xe) for the tth community health center be

                            =
                                 'it'       '2t'         ' 'mt              (1)




let       be the price of input y, and denote the marginal product of

       (ax/ay.) by •• Then,           provided factor supply curves faced by each

center are infinitely elastic (centers take input prices as given), the

cost—minimizing input mix satisfies

                       w.           w
                                      2t                 wmt
                        it
                         it
                                -
                                —
                                    F-
                                    2t
                                       -•••-

Alternatively, for any two inputs                  and



                                        =            '
                                 jt           jt
or the absolute value of the slope of an isocost line must equal the abso-
lute value of the slope of an isoquant between y. and y. (the marginal
rate   of substitution in production between the two inputs).5
                                          —9—




       Define   rj. as the ratio of the marginal rate of substitution between

                            to
                     ')          the relative price of input
                                                                     (w.t/w.t):


                                 =
                                              (w./w.)'      .                   (4)


This    ratio equals one if a given center selects the cost-minimizing combina-

tion of the inputs in question. A value of rj. greater than one indicates

that the center uses too much of input y. in the sense that the same out-

put could be produced at a lower total cost by raising y and lowering y.

Similarly, a value of r., smaller than one indicates that the center uses
                       ijt
too little of input y. Therefore,          it is natural to define the absolute
value of r,,, minus one as an index of inefficiency in the selection of the
          ijt
            6
two inputs:



                            e..
                             ijt
                                 mIr..
                                    ijt
                                        —l I                                    (5)


       Based    on the above, we estimate a production function for ambulatory
care delivered by CHCs, compute the marginal product of aids relative to
physicians for each center, and obtain        nit using   the   location-specific

relative price of an     aid. When averaged over all centers the ratio
                 n
r.1,
   .   Cr,.
         1)
                 Z
                      ijt
                     r, /n) indicates whether the CIIC system overutilizes or


undenutiljzeg aids. At the sau time, we compute the inefficiency index
Ce,, ) for each center and employ it both as the dependent variable in an
investigation of the     determinants    of inefficiency and    as   an   independent

variable in     multiple regression estimates of average cost functions.
                                         — 10   —




        A detailed description of the variables in the production and      cost   func-

tions is contained in Section III. In the remainder of this section, some

general comments are made about the methodology, including the interpreta-

tion of average cost functions, econometric considerations, and specific

functional    forms. Clearly, one does not have to assume cost minimization
in order to fit production functions. The use of ordinary least squares,
however, to estimate these functions      has been criticized because outputs

and inputs   are jointly determined (Marschak and    Andrews   (19); Nerlove (20);
Mundlak    (21)].   If this is the case, then production functions should be
fitted by simultaneous equations methods such as two—stage least squares.
If ordinary least squares is employed, the resulting estimates       may   be sub-
ject to simultaneous equations bias. A number of persons have shown,

however, that this bias is likely to be small in a wide variety of cases

(Hoch (22); Konijn (23); Griliches (24); Reinhardt (8)]. For this reason

and because almost all production function studies in the medical economics

literature   employ ordinary least squares, we do not estimate production
functions by simultaneous equations methods.7
     We estimate transcendental production functions. This function is
given by

            in x =   a0
                          +
                              a1
                                   in   + a2Y2 + a3y2   +       + aSY3     ,       (6)



where       is the physician input, 2t is the physician aid input, and y

stands for other inputs (medical support and ancillary personnel such as

medical secretaries and laboratory personnel).8 This form, which was popu-

larized in the health economics literature by Reinhardt (8), has the
                                      11 —




property   that output can be positive even if inputs 2t and 3t are zero.

This is an important property because many private sector physicians, as

well as some CHCs, do not employ aids. Note that the marginal rate of

substitution between aids and physicians is



                                     + 2
                      2t   —   a2Yi
                               ___________
                                     a3i 2t                         7




     Equation   (7) reveals that the transcendental production function is

strongly separable in the sense that the marginal rate of substitution be-

tween any two inputs depends only on those two inputs. Moreover, the

cost-minimizing input ratios depends on output and the absolute amounts of

the inputs. This is in sharp contrast to the Cobb-Douglas and other

homothetic production functions, whose cost—minimizing input ratios are

independent of output. A priori, a2 should be positive and a3 should be

negative. Although an isoquant between        and 2t could be convex to the

origin even if a3 were positive, the physician input would be an inferior

factor of production (a factor whose employment falls as output rises with

input prices held constant) if a3 were positive.9 Obviously, it is un-

realistic for the physician input to be inferior.

     In computing the ratio of the marginal rate of substitution between

physician aids and physicians to the relative price of an aid for each CHC,

we employ a location—specific relative price variable. This is because the

centers are located throughout the United States and therefore face differ-

ent input price ratios (see Section III). Observe that our procedure of

computing r2i separately for each center and then averaging the ratio
                                          — 12 —




over    all centers yields a simple t—test of the hypothesis that r21 is sig-

nificantly different from one:



                     t—ratio =
                                 2l   — 1) /
                                               rn_12)                         (8)




where a is the sample standard deviation of r21. Observe also that, if a

center employs no aids, its marginal rate of substitution is a3 a

Provided this rate is less than or equal to relative price of an aid

(w2/w1t), such a center is minimizing the cost of a given output, and

        is set equal to one.

        It is worth mentioning that, even if each center faces the same relative

input price, r21 differs from a measure computed at the sample means of 2t

and 'lt '21 This follows because



                    r21 =   cc' 2y1   +
                                          2ct3y1y2) (w2/w1)   ,               (9)



while



                =        2']. + 2a3y1y2 + 2a312a1a2) (w2/w1)
                    cz                                                    (10)




where        is the sample correlation coefficient between lt and 2t'               is

the standard deviation of y, and c12 is the standard deviation of

Since       is negative and p12 is positive (large centers use more of both

inputs), r21 exceeds r21. Typically, estimates of r21 are given in studies

of the efficient choice of aids by private sector physicians. [for example,

Reinhardt (8); Brown and Lapan (13)1.10 In our view               is a more
                                       — 13 —




appropriate   statistic because incentives for inefficient input decisions may

vary greatly among firms, physicians, or CHCs.

     It is also worth making a distinction between the efficient choice of

inputs or allocative efficiency and technical efficiency. The latter per-

tains to the amount of output obtained from a given quantity of inputs)"1

An evaluation of the technical efficiency of CHCs requires a comparison be-

tween this system and another health care delivery system. Technical effi-

ciency is not studied here because the goals, structure, and clientele of the

dC system    are unique. Put differently, in a fundamental sense the compari-
son involved is between "apples and oranges."

     By fitting an average cost function, we address directly the issue of

the extent of economies of scale. If average cost falls as output rises,

the average cost function is said to exhibit economies of scale. If aver-

age cost rises as output rises, the cost function is said to exhibit dis—
                       12
economies of scale.

     Most economists posit a U—shaped average cost function [for example,

Johnston (30); Friedman (31); Walters (32); Stigler (33); Becker (34)].

Given this function, average cost first declines as output rises, reaches

a minimum   value   at a certain output, and   then   begins to rise as output

rises. The declining segment of the average cost curve           is   attributed to

the fixed costs of hiring and training labor and installing and warming up

machines. In a basic sense, these fixed costs can         be   traced to "indivis—

ibilities": community health centers, for example, cannot hire half a

physician or buy half an X—ray machine. Of course, the centers can hire a

half—time physician or buy an X—ray machine and keep it idle half the time.

These options, however, entail higher costs per physician hour or machine
                                         — 14   —




hour than if      the   inputs are utilized on a full-time basis. Average cost

also   may fall initially if the production function has a range of increas-
ing returns to      scale (see note 12). Another    source of declining average

cost   is randomness of demand (for example, Chiswick (35)]. For instance,
on any   given    day, the administrator of a community health center cannot
predict with perfect certainty the number of patients who will desire ser-
vices. Hence, in order to treat a certain percentage of potential patients,

some amount of excess capacity is required. As output and the average num-

ber of patients treated rises, the variability in demand tends to decline

and less excess capacity is required.

       The increasing complexity of large scale operations is the basic cause

of an increase in average cost with output beyond some point. In the case

of CHC5, average cost may rise beyond some point because of a fixed amount

of the own time input of the chief administrator or project director of the

center. Another consideration is that, if the administrator is a non—

physician, he may find it very difficult to monitor the activities of a

large number of highly skilled physicians (DuBois (36)]. Moreover, the

objectives of the administrators of CHCs may differ from the objectives of

the board members •       To paraphrase an example by Becker (34), administrators

have incentives to increase their incomes and can do this in spite of

policing      efforts by board members via large expense accounts, pleasure
trips, and fancy offices. As centers get larger, it is more difficult to
prevent administrators from engaging in these actions because the board
members have other responsibilities. A final source of rising         average cost

is   a segment of the production function that exhibits diminishing returns
to   scale.
                                        — 15 —




        In    assessing the extent of economies of scale, it is important to keep

in mind that all relevant costs should be included. One type of cost that

often    is ignored is the direct and indirect transportation costs incurred
by patients and employees to travel to and from community health centers.
The former pertain to direct or imputed outlays on cars,      buses, taxis, or

trains. The latter pertain to travel time multiplied by the opportunity

cost of this time. It is possible that average cost inclusive of trans-

portation cost rises as output rises, while average cost exclusive of

transportation cost      falls)3
        A finding that average cost begins to rise beyond some output (econo-

mies of scale are exhausted beyond some output) conveys useful information

to policy makers with regard to the optimal size of CHCs. For example,

suppose that two centers in the same area are each operating on the de-

clining segment of their average cost functions and that their combined

output is smaller than or equal to the output that minimizes average cost.

Then the combined output could   be produced at a smaller total cost if one
center    closed or if the two centers merged. To cite another illustration,
suppose that the CHC program is to be expanded in a given area. If centers
in that area are operating at outputs beyond the minimum average cost out-
put,    a new   center should be built. If not, existing centers should be in-
creased      in size.

        It should be noted that the existence of a U—shaped average cost curve

does    not   imply that each community health center should operate at the out-
put where      average cost is at its minimum value. Economically efficient

firms   minimize the average cost of given output rather than average cost
per se. Moreover, one would hardly recommend that high average cost CHCs
                                              — 16 —




in medically   underserved and       sparsely   populated rural areas should be closed.

Indeed, if transportation costs are added to production costs, these centers

might not be operating on the declining segment of their average cost func-

tions (see note l3)) Put differently, the closing of these centers might

raise   transportation costs by more than it lowers production costs.
       In its most complete specification, the average cost function estimated
in Section IV has   a   quadratic form:
                                                       2
                            ac   =
                                     80
                                          +     + 32x      .                (11)



If   the true average cost function is U—shaped, then            is negative, 82 is

positive, and ac is at a minimum when x = — 81/282.            Since there are no

data on transportation costs, any finding with respect to a minimum average

cost output is interpreted with caution.

      A problem encountered in the estimation of average cost functions is

that of the "regression fallacy" (for example, Friedman (38); Johnston (30)].

From an econometric point of view, suppose that output Cx) contains measure-

ment error. Then so does average cost (ac) since ac is computed in part from

x. Hence, errors of measurement in the dependent variable are correlated

with errors of measurement in the independent variable. It follows that the

parameter estimate of 81 is biased away from zero (biased upward in absolute

value), while the parameter estimate of 82 is biased toward zero. Therefore,

the computed output that minimizes average cost exceeds the theoretical out-

put at which this occurs. That is, the estimated regression overstates the

extent and importance of economies of scale.15

      Theoretically, Friedman (38), Johnston (30), and others stress that in-

put decisions of firms will take account of random fluctuations in the demand
                                     — 17




for output. To accommodate these fluctuations, inputs will be underutilized

in periods when demand is unusually low and overutilized when it is unusually

high. Even if average cost is independent of expected (average) output,

average cost will be relatively high when output is unusually small and vice

versa.

     To deal with problems associated with the regression fallacy in particu-

lar and to reduce errors of measurement in all variables in general, costs,

outputs, and inputs are averaged over the t-year period of 1978 to 1979.

Moreover,   at one point we employ the technique of    instrumental variables to

fit average   cost functions. This is a standard technique for treating
measurement errors in independent variables in a multiple      regression. To

implement this estimation method,   we fit   a   regression of x on a set of in-
strumental   variables. From the regression, we obtain the predicted value of

x for each community health center and the square of the predicted value.

Finally, we fit the average cost function using the predicted values of x

and their squares rather than the actual values of x and their squares. If

the instrumental variables are uncorrelated with the errors in actual output

and average cost, the resulting estimates of the cost function are unbiased.

     Average cost functions are obtained with and without the inefficiency

index (ejj) as one of the independent variables. The inefficiency index

equals zero if the actual input mix selected corresponds to the cost—

minimizing input mix. Nence, the regression coefficient of the inefficiency

index multiplied by its mean value gives the magnitude of the cost savings

associated with movements toward a more appropriate input mix. In addition,

when inefficiency is held constant in the average cost function, one obtains

impacts of other variables on average cost net of their impacts on depar-

tures from cost minimization, When efficiency is included as an independent
                                     — 18   —




variable, the average cost function bears some resemblance to a long—run
average cost function. In the long run, the fixed factor, say capital, is
fixed at its optimal level; the ratio of the marginal product of capital
to that of labor (the variable factor) equals the relative price of capital;
and our inefficiency index is fixed at zero. Our estimated function is not
perfectly analogous to a long—run average cost function because the ineff i—
ciency   index, while fixed, is not fixed at zero.


                         III. Empirical Implementation

A. Data

     The basic data set employed in this paper is the Bureau of Community

Health Services Common Reporting Requirements data tape (hereafter termed

the BCRR tape). This data tape consists of reports filed with the BCHS on

a semiannual basis by community health centers and all other grantees re-

ceiving support from additional BCHS programs such as Title V children and

youth projects, Title V maternal and infant care projects, and Titles V and

X family planning clinics.16 We limit our analysis to the community health

centers on the tape and employ data for the years 1978 and 1979. In certain

cases we have augmented the tape with data from other sources; these sources

are discussed below. This is possible because the location of each center

(specific address, county, state, and region) is given. For reasons in-

dicated in Section II, most of the variables in our analysis are two—year

averages for the years 1978 and 1979. This period is selected for detailed

study because it enables us to include in the production and cost functions

the original neighborhood health centers as well as those funded as part of

the Rural and Urban   Health Initiatives and    other CRC program   designs   (see
           17
note 1).
                                      — 19




       A   detailed discussion of the measurement of variables in the production

and cost functions is contained in Section IlIB. Here it is useful to

point out the nature of the ambulatory medical care output, input, and cost

variables. The basic output proxy is a medical encounter, defined as an

encounter between a medical user (a patient) and a provider of medical care

who is employed by a community health center. A medical encounter may be

cross—classified as a primary care physician encounter, a medical or surgi-

cal specialist encounter, a midleve]. practitioner encounter, and a nurse

encounter)8 According to the BCHS glossary (41, p. 40): "To meet the en-

counter criterion, the provider must be acting independently and not assist-

ing another provider. For example, a nurse assisting a physician during a

physical examination by taking a patient's history or by drawing a blood

sample is not credited with a separate    encounter.   The nurse in this

instance    is simply participating in a physician encounter. An encounter
does not encompass such services as a laboratory technician drawing blood
or collecting urine specimens nor does it    include an   X—ray technician taking
an X—ray film." During any one visit to a CHC, a patient may have more than
one medical encounter. This would occur, for instance, if he      sees a physi-
cian   and then sees a nurse who is acting independently of the physician.

       Primary care physicians consist of general   practitioners, family prac—
titioners,    internists, pediatricians, and obstetricians/gynecologists.

Medical or surgical specialists are physicians with a specialty other than

those included in the preceding category. Psychiatrists are excluded from

this category. Midlevel practitioners include physician assistants, physi-

cian associates, nurse practitioners, and certified nurse—midwives. Nurses

include clinical nurse specialists, registered nurses, licensed practical
                                         — 20 —




nurses,    and licensed vocational nurses. For each type of provider, the num-
ber employed in the center is given on a full—time equivalent basis. This
is obtained by dividing the sum of total annual hours worked by each type
of provider by 1,600 hours. In addition, the number of full-time equivalent
medical   nonproviders is indicated. This category consists of medical sup-

port and   ancillary   personnel. It includes nurse aids, medical clerks, medi-

cal secretaries, laboratory      technicians,     X—ray technicians, pharmacists,

and   pharmacist assistants. The centers        utilize salaried personnel, National

Health    service corps (NHsC) personnel, Comprehensive Employment and Training
Act (CETA) personnel, and non—salaried personnel whose services are obtained
on a consultational, contractual, or donated basis. All such personnel are
included   in the input measures on a      full—time equivalent basis.
      Total   medical care   costs   are costs directly associated with medical en-

counters as well as ancillary costs for laboratory          tests,   X—rays, and   drugs.
Total   costs can be divided   into direct costs and indirect or overhead costs.

Direct    costs primarily consist of personnel costs (salaries, fringe benefits,
and related costs), drug costs, laboratory supply costs, and depreciation or
rental of medical equipment. Indirect costs are administrative costs and
facility costs. The latter pertain to the costs of using and maintaining a
center's plant——utilities, space rental, and building depreciation.
     Personnel costs include consultant costs and contractual services as

well as the costs of salaried personnel. Estimates of the dollar values of
any donated labor and material are made by each center. These estimates
primarily pertain to the salaries of NHSC and CETA personnel which are paid,
at least in the first instance, by the Federal government)9 iany centers
deliver dental care and social and comeunity services as well as medical
                                           — 21   —




care.     This means that   indirect costs   must be allocated among a variety of

services. Therefore, the well—known problem of the allocation of joint

costs arises. Facility costs are distributed to medical care based on

the   percentage of square footage occupied by medical facilities. Adminis-
trative costs are distributed based on the percentage of all direct costs
accounted     for by medical care. Although these allocation rates are some-

what arbitrary, medical care is by far the most important service deliv-

ered by CHCs and the one that absorbs the largest percentage of resources.

      The centers aggregate encounters and costs to an annual basis in the

second semiannual report filed in each year. Hence, only these reports

are used, and input as well as cost and output data are taken from them.

The universe of CHCS for      inclusion in the production and cost function is
limited     to those with an initial service year (the year in which the

center began to deliver services) of 1978 or earlier.20 There are 518

such centers.21 A frequency distribution of these centers by region and

size of county is shown     in Panel   A of Table 1.

      The   actual number of centers in the production and cost functions
equals 325.     Centers   are deleted if   they   failed to   file a report in the

second reporting period of 1978 or 1979. They also are deleted if any of

the following key variables is missing in either year: medical users,

primary care    physicians, onsite primary care physician encounters, total
                                                                                22
direct medical    care cost, total medical care cost, and total receipts.

Finally, centers are deleted if they had less than one—fifth of a full—

time primary care physician in either year or if reported total           medical
care cost was equal to or less than reported total direct medical care

cost in either year. The former exclusion eliminates very small centers
                                        — 22 —




                                        TABLE 1

                 Frequency Distribution of Community Health Centers
                           by Reqion and Size of County



   Size of
   County
                      All      Greater       Lesser               Semirural
Region             Counties Metropolitanb MetropolitanC Adjacentd or Iura1e


  Panel   A:   All CHCs with Initial Service Date of 1978 or Earlier (n = 518)

Northeast           19.51        7.34              6.18         2.32       3.67

North Central       17.57        5.41              2.70         3.09       6.37

South               41.31        4.44             11.97         9.46      15.44

West                21.61        6.56              4.63         3.86       6.56

All Regions        100.00       23.75             25.48        18.73      32.04


            Panel B: Sample of CECs Studied in this Paper (n = 325)

Northeast           21.53        8.00              7.38        2.77        3.38

North Central       16.62        5.54              3.08        2.77        5.23

South               41.55        4.62             11.39       10.46       15.08

West                20.30        5.23              5.23        4.92        4.92

All Regions        100.00       23.39             27.08       20.92       28.61




                                                     (Footnotes on following page)
                                   — 23 —




                           Footnotes to TABLE 1


        aEach cell entry gives the percentage of all centers in that cell.


        b.        in Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSAs) with

population of one million or more in 1970.



        ccounties in SMSAs with population of less than one million in

1970.



        dcounties adjacent to the metropolitan counties and having easy

access to the central city in the metropolitan area.


        ecounties other than those in the first three groups.
                                   — 24 —




who are open less than one full day per week. The latter exclusion elimi-

nates centers who have reported inaccurate data. A frequency distribution

of the sample of 325 centers by region and size of county is shown in

Panel B of Table 1. A comparison of Panels A and B of the table reveals

that the locational distribution of the sample is very similar to the lo-

cational distribution of the universe of 518 centers. Moreover, the per-

centage of neighborhood health centers (NHCs) in the sample (20.9 percent) is

almost identical to the percentage in the universe (19.1 percent). It can

be concluded that the sample is representative of all CHCs with an initial

service year of 1978 or earlier.

     Note that the Bureau of Community Health Services uses certain per-

formance indicators when it reviews grants by CHCs for continued funding.

Two of these pertain to onsite medical encounters per physician and cost

per medical encounter. Since the BCHS standards for these indicators are

contained in the reporting manual (39), the centers have an incentive to

report inaccurate data. The possibilities that there are errors in our

basic data are mitigated, however, because the centers compute and report

the performance indicators in tables that are not used in our analysis.

Nevertheless, we consider an empirical test of the accuracy of our data in

Section IV.


B. Specifications

     Table 2 contains definitions, acronyms, means, and standard deviations

of all of the dependent and independent variables in the production and cost

functions. The specification of these functions is discussed in the re-

mainder of this section. A discussior of the specification of an equation

to determine inefficiency in the selection of inputs is postponed until
                                        — 25 —




                                        TABLE 2
            Definition of Variables in Production and Cost FUflCOflSaIb



                            Standard
Variable           Mean     Deviation                   Definition


                                  I. Production Function

A. Dependent Variables

1. LNOME            9.482        .948    Natural logarithm of number of onsite medi-
                                         cal encounters


2. LNWOME          12.580        .960    Natural logarithm of number of weighted on—
                                         site medical encounters; weights are the
                                         average costs of a primary care physician
                                         encounter, a physician aid encounter, and
                                         an encounter with a medical or surgical
                                         specialist other than a primary care
                                         physician


B. Independent Variables

1. pcp              3.583       4.144    Number of full—time equivalent primary care
                                         physicians; includes general practitioners,
                                         family practitioners, internists, pediatri-
                                         cians, and obstetricians/gynecologists


2. LNPCP             .920        .800    Natural logarithm of preceding variable


3. PA               4.440       6.860    Number of full—time equivalent physician
                                         aids; includes nurses,nurse practitioners,
                                         physician assistants, and related personnel


4. PASQ            66.626     386.683    Square of preceding variable


5. MS                .226        .617    Number of full—time equivalent physicians
                                         with a medical or surgical specialty other
                                         than specialties included in the primary
                                         care physician category; excludes psychi-
                                         atrists


6. MSSQ              .431       2.325    Square of preceding variable



                                                           (continued on next page)
                                            — 26 —




                                    TABLE   2   (continued)




                              Standard
 Variable           Mean      Deviation                       Definition

 B. Independent Variables (continued)

 7. 0               10.226       14.651     Number of full—time equivalent medical sup-
                                            port and ancillary personnel; includes
                                            nurse aids, medical secretaries; laboratory
                                            technicians, X—ray technicians, pharmacists,
                                            and related personnel


 8. OSQ            318.576 1,162.823        Square of preceding variable

 9.   FMO4            .158         .087     Fractions of medical users ages 0 to 4,
10. FM59              .086         .029     5 to 9, 10 to 19, and 65 and over, respec—
11. FM1O19            .200         .043     tively; omitted category is fraction of
12. FM6S              .088         .056     medical users ages 20 to 59




13. AGE              4.218       3.493 Number      of years that a center had been in
                                            operation as of 1979

14.   OCH             .791        .407 Dichotomous variable that equals one if a
                                        center is not a neighborhood health center

15.   FPAE            .291        .221      Fractions of onsite physician aid encoun—
16. FMSSE             .024         053      ters and medical—surgical specialist en-
                                            counters, respectively; omitted category
                                            pertains to fraction of onsite primary
                                            care physician encounters


                             II. Average Cost Function
A.    Dependent Variables
1.    ADMC          21.399       7.484      Average direct medical care cost in 1978
                                            dollars
2.    ATMC          28.667       9.575 Average total medical care cost in 1978
                                        dollars

                                                               (continued   on next   page)
                                        — 27




                                  TABLE 2 (continued)


                            Standard
 Variable         Mean      Deviation                    Definition

 B. Independent Variables
 1. o             21.283       31.301   Number of onsite medical encounters in
                                        thousands


 2. OMESQ      1,429.705    9,643.793   Square of preceding variable

 3. FPAE            .291         .221   See I.B, variables 15 and 16
 4. FMSSE           .024         .053




 5. FOE             .083         .102   Fraction of offstte medical encounters

 6. FMO4            .158         .087   See I.B, variables 9—12
 7. P1459           .086         .029
 8.  FM1O19         .200         .043
 9. FM65            .088         .056




10. AGE            4.218       3.493    See   I.B, variable 13
11. OH              .791         .407   See I.B, variable 14
12. PCPNI         61.154       6.922    Annual net income of primary care physi-
                                        cians in private practice in thousands of
                                        1978 dollars by region and size of county

13. NE            11.132       1.070 Annual full—time earnings of nurses em-
                                        ployed in hospitals in thousands     of 978
                                        dollars by region and size of county
14.   OHPE        8.648        1.052    Annual full—time earnings of hospital per-
                                        sonnel other than nurses, staff physicians,
                                        interns, residents, and other trainees in
                                        thousands of l78 dollars by region and
                                        size of county

                                                                 (continued on next page)
                                                    — 28   —




                                            TABLE   2 (concluded)


                                      Standard
 Variable                Mean         Deviation                     Definition



 B.    Independent Variables (continued)

15.    MEDICAID               • 079        .108     Fractions of a center's receipts obtained
16.    MEDICARE               .027         .035     from Medicaid, Medicare, private insurance
17.    PVTINS                 .060         .111     companies, and patients, respectively;
18.    PATIENT                .135         .152     omitted category pertains to fraction of
                                                    receipts obtained from Federal, state,
                                                    and local government grants


19.    Mu                 7.187         10.360      Number of medical users in thousands




       aMeans and     standard    deviations pertain to the sample of 325 centers described
in the text.
              the    exception of AGE, OCR, PCPNI, NE, and OHPE, all variables            are based
on   data for 1978 and 1979. Number of onsite medical encounters, number of medical

users, and    inputs are two—year averages. All ratio variables are obtained by the

suting      the   numerator   and denominator     for the two   years   separately and   then

dividing.
      cSee text for a more detailed definition.
                                       — 29   —




Section     V. It should be realized that the average cost function specified

in this section is one in which direct measures of inefficiency are excluded.


1. Production Function

       Like other health care delivery systems, the ultimate or final output

of community health centers takes the form of improvements in the health of

its users. Encounters between users and health care providers may be viewed

as the intermediate     output of CHCs. In    the estimated production   function,
this   intermediate output--the natural logarithm of onsite medical encounters

(LNOME)——is related to inputs. Onsite encounters are those that occur in

CHCs themselves rather than in other locations. They are emphasized because

the input measures pertain to the staff that work in CHCs.23

       There are four input variables in the production function. These are

the number    of primary care physicians (PCP) and its natural logarithm
(LNPCP), the number of    medical and surgical specialists (MS) and its square

(MSSQ), the number of physician aids (PA) and its square (PASQ), and the
number of medical support and ancillary       personnel (0,   where the acronym
denotes     personnel other than those in the first three categories) and its

square (OSQ). Nurses and midlevel practitioners are aggregated into a com-

bined physician aid input for reasons indicated below. In Section V both

the efficient choice of physician aids relative to primary care physicians

and   the   efficient choice of medical support and ancillary personnel (other

personnel) relative to primary care physicians are considered. The efficient

selection of medical and surgical specialists relative to primary care physi-

cians is not studied because only 37 percent of all CHCs employ specialists.24

       The types of cases treated by centers may     affect   the output obtained

from a given set of inputs. Since actual casemix differences are not
                                                 — 30




available, four variables reflecting the age distribution of medical users

are employed to control for casemix. These are the fraction of users ages

0 to 4 (FMO4), the fraction ages 5 to 9 (FM59), the fraction ages 10 to 19

(FM1O19), and the fraction ages 65 and over (FM65). The number of years

that a center has been in operation (AGE) also may affect the output ob-

tained from a given set of inputs. This is particularly true if technical

efficiency in production is an acquired skill. A dichotomous variable

that denotes a CRC that is not one of the original neighborhood health

centers (OCR) is added because the NHCs deliver a somewhat broader range

of services than the other centers. Whether this factor has an independent

effect in the production function is an empirical issue.

       An obvious problem with the number of medical encounters as the

measure of output is that varying amounts of output may be associated with

encounters with different providers. For example, it is reasonable to

suppose that a physician encounter yields a greater amount of output than

a physician aid encounter. If the proportions of encounters with various

providers vary among community health centers and are correlated with the

inputs, estimates of the production function are biased.

       The problem of adjusting CRC ambulatory medical care output for "en-

counter—mix" is similar to the problem of adjusting hospital output for

casemix. The latter problem has been considered in detail by Feldstein(25)

in his study of the British National Health Service, and we use two of the

adjustment techniques that he has developed. One technique is to include

a   vector of encounter—mix proportions in the production function. These
are the fraction of        onsite medical encounters with physician aids (FPAE)

and the fraction of onsite medical encounters with medical—surgical
                                                 — 31 —




specialists   (FMSSE). The omitted category pertains to the fraction of on—

site medical encounters with primary care physicians.

     The second technique is to replace the simple sum of medical encoun—
                           3
ters in the tth CHC (x = E
                          i=l
                              x.) by the "weighted" sum of encounters.
With the latter measure, more weight is given to encounters that yield

more output. In the context of CHC               data,    Feldstein's procedure is to

weight an encounter with the th provider by the sample average cost of an

encounter with that provider (ac1). Hence, the weighted output of a given

CHC (z.) is


                                            3
                            z.
                             it
                                   =        E
                                                   ut
                                                 ac.x.        .                  (12)
                                           i=l



The natural logarithm of this measure (LNWOME) replaces LNOME as the depen-

dent variable in alternative specifications of the production function.25

      Although     the average cost of all medical encounters in each CHC               and in
the sample as a whole easily can be computed, there are no data on the sample

average cost of an encounter with a specific provider. Under the assump-

tion that the ac. are constant (independent of the number of encounters),

the sample average costs can, however, be estimated from a multiple regres-

sion. Let
            ac be the average cost of medical encounters in the tth cRc,
and   let     be   the proportion   of encounters with the th provider            in that

center. Then


                                       3
                            ac =       E                                         (13)
                                    i=l
                                            ac.p.
                                                   32




or


              ac =           +           —       2t +       — 3) 3t               (l$)




Given observations for each center, the last equation specifies a regression

of ac on 2t and 3t The intercept of the regression is an estimate of

ac1, and the regression coefficient of p (i = 2, 3) is an estimate of
—   — 26
ac.—ac.
  3-      1
       The actual regression equation is



           ADMC =    23.087     —            4.671 FPAE + 20.022 FMSSE — 9.912 FOE
                     (t =29.22)              (t = —2.53)   Ct   = 2.62)   (t = —2,47)

                            =    .066,       F = 7.50



The dependent variable is average direct medical care cost (ADMC) because of

the somewhat arbitrary accounting rules used to allocate indirect costs.

The fraction of offsite medical encounters (FOE) is included as an indepen-

dent variable because of fsite costs cannot be excluded from total costs.

Based on the regression, the average direct cost of an onsite encounter with

a primary care physician is $23.09 in 1978 dollars. The average direct cost

of an onsite encounter with a physician aid is $18.42, and the average di-

rect cost of an onsite encounter with a medical—surgical specialist is

$43.l1.27


2. Average Cost Function

       Average direct medical care cost (ADMC) and average total medical care

cost (ATMC) are employed as alternative dependent variables in the average

cost function. Both are used because of the problem of allocating indirect
                                        — 33   —




costs   among the   services   provided by CHCs. The numerator of average direct

medical care cost equals total direct cost in 1978 plus total direct cost

in 1979 in 1978 dollars. The 1979 data are deflated by the physicians'

services component of the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The denominator of

ADMC equals total medical encounters (onsite and offsite) in 1978 plus

total medical encounters in 1979.28 offsjte encounters are included in the

denominator because offsite costs cannot be excluded from total costs.

Average total medical care cost is constructed in a similar manner.

       The number of onsite medical encounters (OME) and the square of this

number    (OMESQ) are entered    into the cost function to explore the extent and

importance of economies of scale.       The weighted encounter variable is not

used   as an   alternative   output measure because it    is   derived under   the

assumption     that average cost is constant. We want to test this assumption
in   the context of empirical estimates of average cost functions.29 In the

instrumental variable regressions, the number of medical users (MU) serves

as the instrument     for the number   of   onsite medical encounters. To take
account of differences in casemix and        in    encounter—mix, the same age dis-
tribution variables     (FMO4, FM59, FMlOl9, FM65) and encounter—mix propor-

tions (FPAE, FMSSE) included in the production function are included in the

cost    function. Since offsite costs cannot be subtracted from total costs,
variations in the fraction of offsite encounters (FOE) among centers are
held constant. The number of years that a center has been in operation
(AGE) and   whether or not it is one of the original neighborhood health
centers (OCH) may have independent effects on average cost. These may be

due in part to differences in casemix and in scope of services that are not

reflected   by other variables.
                                    — 34   —




     In Section I of this paper, it was indicated that alternative financing
mechanisms have   the potential to affect incentives to cost minimize and

therefore average cost. CHCs receive approximately 70 percent of their

receipts from Federal, state, and local government grants, although this

percentage varies considerably among centers (standard deviation = 24 per-

cent). Since the grants are not tied to particular services rendered, the

centers largely operate on fixed annual budgets and have incentives to pro-

vide a given mix of services in the least—cost method. These incentives

are diluted by increases in the proportions of receipts obtained from

Medicaid (MEDICAID), Medicare (MEDICARE), and private health insurance com-

panies (PVTINS). On the other hand, incentives to cost minimize may be

expanded by an increase in the proportion of receipts obtained from patients

(PATIENT). This is because most of the clientele of CHC5 are poor. There-

fore, centers that must rely on patients for a relatively large proportion

of their receipts face a considerable amount of uncertainty with regard to

whether and when these payments will be made.

     Funds obtained from the above four sources include those received on a

fee—for—service or prepayment basis, but fee—for—service funds cannot be

distinguished   from prepayment funds. The prepayment basis is relevant be-
cause the   design of certain non—NHCs, especially those established in the

early 1970s, emphasized the delivery of services on a prepaid capitation

basis,   with Medicaid as the source of   prepayment where possible (see note 1).

The centers were not, however, successful in attracting Medicaid funds for

this purpose [Roemer (7)]. Therefore, the fraction of receipts obtained on

a prepaid basis is likely to rise as the fraction of receipts obtained from
patients rises. In addition the fraction of prepaid funds is likely to be

larger in non—NHCs.   Prepayment encourages cost minimization relative to
                                       — 35   —




fee—for—service     payment, but its impact relative to funding from grants is
ambiguous.    If, however, centers anticipate that some portion of a poten-
tial current deficit can be financed by future grants, there is an addi-
tional factor that predicts negative effects of the fraction of a center's
receipts obtained from patients and     its   status as a non—NHC on average cost.
       The final set of variables in the cost equations pertains to the prices
or wages   of inputs employed by the centers. Input prices     are not available
on a center—specific basis on the BCRR tape because personnel costs cannot

be disaggregated. Even if input prices could be estimated by, for example,

dividing primary care physician costs by the number of full-time equivalent

physicians, the value of the resulting measure would be questionable. This

is because centers in the same local market area should pay the same price

for physicians of a similar quality or skill level given perfect competition

in input markets.3° If the measure just described indicates that they do

not, then it may reflect variations in skill levels of physicians among

centers rather than true differences in the price of the physician input.

       The prices of three types of inputs    employed by CHCs are taken from
surveys   conducted by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) and by

the American Hospital Association (AEA). The former is used for the wages

of primary care physicians, while the latter is used for the wages of physi-

cian   aids and   medical support and ancillary personnel (other personnel).

Ideally, these wages should be specific to the county in which a given cen—

tsr is located. A significant number of centers, however, are located in

small counties (see Table 1). Especially in the HCFA survey, county-level

mean wage rates would be based on a small number of observations. Moreover,

there are no physicians from some counties in the HCFA survey. For these

reasons, mean wages are estimated by region and size of county. The ten
                                         — 36   —




Federal regions and the four county sizes defined in Table 1. are employed in
these computations, so that     wages   are   obtained   for forty region—county size
cells.3'     A given center then is assigned wage rates that correspond to the

cell in which it is located.

       The wage of primary care physicians is proxied by annual net medical

practice income of primary care physicians (PCPNI) from the HCFA Physician

Practice Cost Surveys of 1977 and 1978. Both surveys are used to maximize

the number of observations on which a given region—county size mean is

based. Net income in the 1977 survey pertains to 1976, while net income in

the 1978 survey pertains to 1977. Income in each year is expressed in 1978

dollars based on the all commodities component of the cpi.32

      The wage of physician aids is measured by annual full—time earnings of

nurses employed in hospitals (NE). The wage of medical support and ancillary

personnel   is measured by annual full—time earnings of hospital personnel
other than   nurses, staff   physicians, interns, residents, and other      trainees

(OHPE). Both measures    come from the AHA annual survey of hospitals, pertain
to   1979, and are converted into 1978 dollars. Nurses include registered

nurses, licensed practical nurses, and licensed vocational nurses. Full—

time earnings of nurses in one of the forty region—county size cells equal

the total nurse payroll of all hospitals in that cell divided by the total

number   of full—time equivalent nurses employed. In         the computation of the

number of   full—time equivalent nurses, one part—time nurse is counted as
one—half of a full—time nurse. Similar comments apply to the computation of

full—time earnings of other hospital personnel.

      Conceptually, input prices should include fringe benefits as well as

wages. Thus, the relevant price of input y in location c (region—county
                                             — 37 —




size   cell c) is


                              w.
                               ic
                                  =wic (l+k ic)                                   (15)



where w is the wage per employee and                    is the ratio of the wage per em-

ployee to the fringe benefit cost per employee. Suppose that ki is inde-

pendent of c,and suppose that the w.             Ci =   1,   2, 3) rather than the         are

employed as independent variables in the cost function. Then regression co-

efficients and their standard errors are multiplied by 1 + k1, leaving sta-

tistical tests of significance unaffected. In addition, if                     is the same

for all inputs, the relative price of input y. can be measured either by
                 A     A 33
w/w. or by w/w.

       Fringe   benefits definitely are excluded from the AHA earnings data and
from the   net       practice income of salaried physicians. Whether or not amounts
that self—employed        physicians spend on pensions, health insurance, and             life
insurance are        excluded from their net practice income is problematic. These

outlays should be excluded if the physician is incorporated since they can be

almost fully deducted from income in computing income               tax   liabilities.     Tax

deductions   are much more limited for unincorporated physicians.               Hence,     the
measured price of a physician aid relative to that of a physician may                    under-
state the true price. In the inefficiency analysis in Section V,                 we comeent

on the   sensitivity      of the   results   to such an understatement.
       Nurses   and midlevel practitioners are aggregated into a single physician

aid input in the production          function   partly   because location-specific data
on   earnings   of midlevel practitioners are extremely limited. This aggrega-
tion is less arbitrary than it may appear. Brn and Lapan (13)                    report    that
hourly   wage rates      of registered nurses and physician assistants are           almost
                                      — 38 —




identical.     To be sure, licensed practical and vocational nurses are less

skilled than either registered nurses or physician assistants. But since

CHCs focus to a large extent on fairly routine primary and preventive care,

the potential exists to exploit substitution possibilities between less

skilled and more skilled assistants.



                IV. Empirical Results: Production and Cost Functions

        Empirical estimates of production and cost functions are presented in

this section. All empirical results pertaining to the efficient choice of

inputs are presented in Section V. Therefore, the average cost functions

presented in this section are those in which direct measures of inefficiency

are excluded.


A. Production Functions

        Four alternative estimates of ambulatory medical care production func-

tions are shown in Table 3.    In   each regression the   dependent   variable is

the   natural logarithm of weighted onsite medical encounters (LNWOME) • In
regression (3—1) the set of independent variables is limited to the         four

input   measures: the natural logarithm of primary care physicians (LNPCP)

and the arithmetic values and squares of physician aids (PA, PASQ), medical

or surgical specialists (MS, MSSQ), and other personnel (0, OSQ). In regres-

sion (3—2) the measures of the age distribution of medical users (FMO4,

FMS9, FM1O19, FM65) are included, while in regression (3—3) the center's

age (AGE) and the dichotomous variable that distinguishes NHCs from other

CHCs (OCH) are added. Finally, in regression (3-4) the arithmetic value of

primary care physicians (PCP) is included.

      The regression coefficients of the four input measures have the "cor—

rect signs" in the sense that an isoquant between any two inputs has a
                              — 39 —




                             TABLE 3

           Estimates of Medical Care Productiofl Functions,
                    Dependent Variable: LNWOME


                                   Regression Number

Variable            3—1            3—2               3-3            3—4



LNPCP              .543           .534              .528           .598
                (10.95)        (10.42)           (10.59)         (7.91)

PA                 .053           .053              .053           .053
                 (6.37)         (6.04)            (6.21)         (6.29)

PASQ          —.004D—1        —.004D—1       —.004D—l          —.004D—1.
                (—3.12)        (—2.95)           (—3.00)         (—2.69)

0                  .034          0.035            0.026           0.025
                 (5.82)         (5.85)            (4.19)         (4.05)

OSQ           —.003D—l        —.003D—1       —.003D—].         —.002D—1
                (—5.02)        (—5.08)           (—4.08)        (—2.69)

MS                 .269           .259              .206           .208
                 (2.56)         (2.45)            (1.99)         (2.01)
MSSQ              —.041          —.036            —.021           —.018
                (—1.57)        (—1.39)           (—.82)          (—.72)

FMO4                             —.109            —.161           —.158
                                (—.30)           (—.46)          (—.45)

FM59                             1.065              .604           .720
                                 (.98)             (.57)          (.67)

FM1O19                           —.666            —.530           —.593
                                (—.90)            (—.73)         (—.82)

FM65                             —.614            —.489           —.484
                               (—1.06)            (—.87)         (—.86)




                                              (continued   on next page)
                                       — 40 —




                             TABLE   3 (concluded)


                                         Regression Number
Variable               3—1               3—2             33        3—4



AGE                                                     .038      .038
                                                      (4.29)    (4.28)


OCH                                                    —.012     —.004
                                                      (—.16)    (—.05)

PCP                                                             —.027
                                                               (—1.24)


CONSTANT           11.577             11.699         11.635    11.645
                  (284.73)           (60.98)         (55.44)   (55.50)


R2                    .791              .793            .806      .806


F                  171.24            108.78           99.11     92.30




      at_ratios in parentheses. The critical t—ratios at the 5 percent
level   are 1.64 for a one—tailed test and 1.96 for a two—tailed test.

The F—ratio associated with each regression is statistically signifi—

cant   at the 1 percent   level of significance.
                                    — 41 —




downward   sloping segment and is convex to the origin in that segment.34
Moreover, these   coefficients are very stable across alternative specifica-

tions. All coefficients except those pertaining to MSSQ and PCP are sta-

tistically significant.35 According to regression (3-3)——the preferred

specification for reasons indicated below——the output elasticity of

primary care physicians is .528. Evaluated at sample means, the output

elasticities of the other inputs are .218 for physician aids, .044 for

medical—surgical specialists, and .204 for other personnel.36 Hence, the

returns to scale parameter at the point of means is .994, indicating con-

stant returns to scale at that point.

     Variations in the age distribution of medical users among centers have

little impact on the amount of output obtained from a given set of inputs.

On the other hand, technical efficiency is sensitive to the number of years

that a given center has been in operation. In particular, older centers

get more output from their inputs. The regression coefficients of LNPCP,

0, and MS are reduced slightly when age of the center is held constant.

These reductions are not dramatic because older centers use more of all in-

puts. Apparently, the age effect is divided ecually among three of the

four inputs when the age variable is omitted. The original status of a CEC

as an NHC has no independent effect on output, although it should be noted

that NHCs are approximately five years older on average than non—NHCs.

When age is deleted, the coefficient of OCH becomes significant.

     Production functions in which the dependent variable is the natural

logarithm of onsite medical encounters (LNOME) are shown in Table 4. The

parameter estimates of these functions are very sensitive to the inclusion

of the two encounter—mix proportions (FPAE, FMSSE) •   In   particular, when
                                      — 42   —




                                 TABLE 4

Estimates of Medical Care Production Functions, Dependent Variable:


                                         Regression Number
Variable           4—1          4—2                  4—3          44           45

LNPCP             .508         .499                 .493         .649         .678
               (10.08)       (9.60)               (9.72)      (12.40)       (9.12)

PA                .062         .062                 .062         .030         .031
                (7.37)       (6.96)               (7.13)       (3.23)       (3.26)
PASQ          —.005D—i.    —,005D—l          —.005D—l       —.002D—1      —.002D—1
                (—3.89)     (—3.66)              (—3.72)      (—1.27)      (—1.15)

0                 .034         .035                 .027         .024         .024
                (5.72)       (5.75)               (4.18)       (4.10)       (4.02)

OSQ          —.003D—1      —.003D—1          —.002D—1       —,002D—1      —.002D—1
               (—4.76)      (—4.83)              (—3.89)      (—3.50)      (—2.64)

MS                .147         .138                 .088       —.028         —.021
                (1.38)       (1.29)                (.84)       (—.22)       (—.17)

MSSQ             —.023        —.019                —.005         .007         .008
                (—.89)       (—.73)               (—.19)        (.27)        (.28)
FMO4                         —.015                —.070        —.132         —.133
                             (—.04)              (—.20)        (—.39)       (—.40)

FM59                         1.114                  .676         .703         .749
                             (1.01)                (.62)        (.70)        (.74)

FM1O19                        —.623               —.486        —.491        —.518
                             (—.82)              (—.66)        (—.71)       (—.75)

FM65                         —.581                —.456        —.120        —.123
                             (—.99)              (—.79)        (—.22)       (—.23)



                                                           (continued on next page)
                                         — 43   —




                              TABLE   4 (concluded)


                                            Regression Number
Variable              4—1          4—2                 4—3        4—4       4—5



AGE                                                    .037       .037      .037
                                                     (4.12)     (4.32)    (4.32)

OCR                                                 .008D—1      .033       .035
                                                      (.01)      (.45)     (.48)


FPAE                                                              .909      .904
                                                                (6.78)    (6.71)

FMSSE                                                            1.492     1.443
                                                                (2.17)    (2.08)

pCP                                                                        —.011
                                                                          (—.54)

CONSTANT           8.494        8.587                8.510      8.172     8.180
                 (205.70)      (44.10)              (39.83)   (39.63)    (39.52)


R2                   .779         .781                 .793       .822      .822

F                 159.38       101.44                91.81      95.04     88.91


      at_ratios in parentheses. The critical t—ratios at the 5 percent level

are 1.64 for a one—tailed test and 1.96 for a two—tailed test. The F—ratio

associated with each regression is statistically significant at the 1 per—

cent level of significance.
                                         — 44 —




FPAE and FMSSE are     held   constant, the coefficient of LNPCP rises by slightly

more than 30 percent, the coefficient of PA is cut in half, and the coeffi-

cient of MS becomes negative. Note, however, that the fraction of onsite

physician aid encounters and the fraction of onsite medical—surgical spe-

cialist encounters have positive and statistically significant effects on

output. Note also that the number        of   medical—surgical specialists is posi-

tively correlated with the fraction of onsite medical—surgical specialist

encounters Cr =     .665),    and the number of physician aids is positively corre-

lated with the fraction of orisite physician aid encounters Cr =        .242).
Therefore, it is questionable whether FPAE, for example, should be held con-

stant when the     marginal   product of PA is evaluated.

       For   the above reasons, the encounter-mix adjustment technique reflected
by the   weighted   output variable is superior to the adjustment technique re-
flected by the inclusion of the encounter—mix proportions in the production
function. Consequently, one of the production functions contained in
Table 3     is employed in the inefficiency analysis in Section V. Since the

coefficient of PCP is not significant in regression (3-4), the preferred

specification is regression (3—3). This is the case because we want to

evaluate marginal rates of substitution in production between physician aids

and   primary care physicians and between medical support and ancillary per-
sonnel (other    personnel) and primary care physicians. Clearly, it is

preferable to use significant coefficients only in these computations.

       In   Section III it was pointed out that the existence of BCHS perform-

ance standards may give centers an incentive to report inaccurate data.

To the extent that centers act on these incentives, one would expect those

that receive relatively large proportions of their receipts from government
                                       — 45 —




 grants   to be more likely to overstate their output. This is because reim-

 bursement from Medicaid and other third parties requires proof that ser-

 vices were in fact delivered. To check the accuracy of the data, the set

 of variables indicating the proportions of receipts obtained from Medicaid

 (MEDICAID), Medicare (MEDICARE), private       health insurance companies
 (PVTINs), and   patients (PATIENT)   was included in the production function
 specification   given by regression (3—3). The test of the hypothesis that

no member of this set of four variables has a nonzero effect resulted in

an F—statistic of 2.74, which is not significant at the one percent level.

This result strengthens our confidence in the reliability of the basic

data.


B. Average Cost Functions

     Average direct medical care cost (ADMC) regressions are presented in

Table 5, and average total medical care cost (ATMC) regressions are

presented in Table 6. Four specifications are shown in each table because

of intercorrelations among output, average cost, age of the center, and

sources of receipts. These correlations are highlighted in Table 7 which

shows that NHCs are older, produce more output, have higher average costs,

and derive a larger percentage of revenue from Medicaid than non—MECs.

The regressions in Tables 5 and 6 demonstrate that it is important to con-

trol for center characteristics (AGE, OCH) and revenue sources (MEDICAID,

MEDICARE, PVTINS, PATIENT), especially the former, in assessing the impact

of onsite medical encounters (OME) on     average cost.
     Linear, rather than quadratic, average cost functions      are shown in the

tables   because the square of onsite medical encounters (OMESQ) is omitted
from the set of independent variables. When OMESQ was included in the
                                — 46 —




                               TABLE 5

        Estimates of Average Direct Medical Care Cost FUflCOflSa



                                     Regression Number

Variable              5—1            5—2            5—3               5—4


0i*                  .007         —.022          —.007             —.035
                    (.53)        (—1.68)         (—.56)        (—2.64)

PCPNI                .106           .054           .069             .114
                   (1.79)         (1.23)         (1.96)         (1.54)

NE                 1.738          1.137          1.288              .740
                   (3.80)         (2.52)         (2.76)         (1.61)

OHPE                 .706           .784           .423             .502
                   (1.55)         (1.80)          (.94)         (1.17)

FPAE               —5.886        —5.875         —5.016          —4.975
                  (—3.16)        (—3.31)        (—2.75)        (—2.86)

FMSSE             12.444            .946         6.013          —4.641
                   (1.64)         (.126)          (.80)         (—.63)

FOE               —3.952         —3.536         —4.287          —4.164
                  (—1.00)         (—.93)        (—1.10)        (—1.11)

FMO4                —.068         —.062         —4.666          —3.257
                   (—.01)         (—.01)         (—.83)         (—.60)

FM59             —10.796        —22.579        —20.555         —32.301
                   (—.65)        (—1.42)        (—1.25)        (—2.04)

FM1O19              5.910         3.923          1.488             3.154
                    (.52)          (.36)          (.13)            (.30)

FM65             —11.355        —15.133        —11.396         —11.323
                  (—1.22)        (—1.70)        (—1.21)        (—1.26)

AGE                                 .423                             .434
                                  (3.19)                           (3.31)




                                              (continued on next page)
                                      — 47 —




                                TABLE 5 (concluded)



                                          Regression Number
Variable                  5—1             5—2             5—3          5—4



OCH                                    —3.805                       —3.694
                                      (—3.29)                      (—3.21)

MEDICAID                                              13.838        12.728
                                                       (3.24)       (3.12)

MEDICARE                                              —5.518       —17.259
                                                       (—.45)      (—1.45)

PVTINS                                                 6.316         9.777
                                                       (1.75)       (2.80)

PATIENT                                               —9.715        —6.951
                                                      (—3.52)      (—2.60)

CONSTANT               —8.170           3.893          1.435        10.791
                      (—1.14)           (.53)           (.20)       (1.46)


R2                       .180            .263            .237         .313


F                        6.25            8.55           6.40          8.22




     at_ratios in parentheses. The critical t—ratios at the 5 percent
level   are   1.64   for a one—tailed test and 1.96 for a two—tailed test.

The F—ratio associated with each regression is statistically signif—

icant at the 1 percent level of significance.
                                 — 48   —




                                TABLE   6

         Estimates of Average Total Medical Care st FUflCOflSa


                                     Regression Number
Variable              6—1            6—2            6—3              6—4



OME                  .005          —.027          —.012            —.042
                    (.32)        (—1.59)         (—.70)          (—2.43)

PPNI                 .142           .101           .153             .121
                   (1.88)         (1.38)         (2.05)           (1.68)

NE                  2.014          1.354         1.365              .781
                   (3.44)         (2.32)         (2.29)           (1.31)
OHPE                1.113         1.200            .784             .871
                   (1.90)         (2.13)         (1.37)           (1.57)

PPAE               —8.369         —8.347         —7.282           —7.229
                  (—3.51)        (—3.63)        (—3.12)          (—3.21)

FMSSE              13.839         1.024          6.116           —5.401
                   (1.42)         (.11)           (.64)           (—.56)

FOE                —8.879        —8.536         —9.055            —9.009
                  (—1.75)        (—1.73)        (—1.82)          (—1.85)

FMO4                1.481         1.354         —5.118            —3.687
                    (.20)          (.19)         (—.71)           (—.52)

FM59               —9.995       —23.243        —20.841           —33.646
                   (—.47)       (—1.12)         (—.99)           (—1.64)

ffl019              6.362         4.307           —.812            1.114
                    (.44)         (.31)          (—.06)            (.08)
FM65               —7.698       —11.678         —7.912            —7.679
                   (—.64)       (—1.01)         (—.66)            (—.66)

AGE                                 .497                            .486
                                  (2.89)                          (2.86)




                                             (continued   on next page)
                                 — 49    —




                             TABLE   6 (concluded)


                                         Regression Number
Variable              6—].               6—2             6—3       6—4


OH                                   —4.042                     —3.847
                                     (—2.69)                   (—2.58)
MEDICAID                                              17.575    16.407
                                                      (3.22)    (3.10)

MEDICARE                                             —12.130   —24.705
                                                      (—.78)   (—1.60)

PVTINS                                                 5.787     9.550
                                                      (1.26)    (2.11)

PATIENT                                              —13.206   —10.213
                                                     (—3.74)   (—2.95)

CONSTANT          —9.317              3.742           4.128    13.948
                  (—1.02)             (.39)            (.44)    (1.45)


R2                   .179              .243             .239      .294

p                   6.21               7.66            6.48      7.50


     at_ratios in parentheses. The critical t—ratios at the 5 percent

level are 1.64 for a one—tailed test and 1.96 for a two—tailed test.

The F—ratio associated with each regression is statistically signif-

icant at the 1 percent level of significance.
                              — 50   —




                             TABLE 7

         Means of Selected Variables by Type of Center


                     Neighborhood            Other Community
                    Health Centers           Health Centers
Variable                (n = 68)                (n = 257)


AGE                       7.809                   3.268


DICAID                     .143                    .062


MEDICARE                   .034                    .025


PVTINS                     .047                    .063


PATIENT                    .077                    .150

OME                      43.893                  15.301


ADMC                     26.624                  20.016


ATMC                     34.687                  27.074
                                      — 51 —




regressions,     its coefficients never were significant. Moreover, in those

cases in which the coefficient of OME was negative and that of OMESQ was

positive, the output that minimized average cost either was beyond the

range of all observations or beyond the range of all but 1.8 percent of

the observations. Instrumental variable estimates are not presented be-

cause the use of this technique raised the coefficient of output in abso-

lute value and lowered the coefficient of the square of output. These

results suggest that the average cost functions in Tables 5 and 6 are not

marred by the regression fallacy.37

       According to the results in Tables 5 and 6, output has negative and

significant impacts on average direct medical care cost and on average

total medical care cost once all other variables in the cost functions are

held constant (see regressions (5—4) and (6—4)]. Note that the output

effect is positive and not significant if the center characteristics and

the revenue sources are omitted (see regressions (5—1) and (6—1)]. Regres-

sions   (5—2) and (5—3) or (6—2) and (6—3) show that more bias is introduced
by   the omission of the center characteristics than by the omission of the
revenue   sources.

      Although average direct cost and average total cost fall as output rises,

the elasticities of average cost with respect to output are very modest. At

the point of means, the elasticity of average direct medical cost with re—

spect to the number of     onsite medical encounters equals —.035. Evaluated at
an   output   one standard deviation above the mean output,    the elasticity

equals —.091.      At two standard deviations above the mean   output, the elas-

ticity is —.153. The corresponding elasticities of average total. medical

care cost with respect to the number of onsite medical encounters are —.031

at the point of means, —.081 at an output one standard deviation above the
                                    — 52 —




mean, and -.135 at an output two standard deviations above the mean.38

Thus, the average cost functions slope downward in a statistical sense, but

in a practical sense they are very flat. Put differently, the departure

from constant average cost is very small.

      Centers that obtain relatively larger percentages of their revenues

from Medicaid and private insurance companies have higher average costs,

while centers that obtain relatively large percentages of their revenues

from patients and Medicare have lower average costs. All effects except

for that associated with Medicare are statistically significant. Of the

significant effects, that pertaining to Medicaid is the most dramatic.

Consider two hypothetical centers that are the same in all respects ex-

cept that one obtains 100 percent of its revenue from Medicaid, while the

other obtains 100 percent of its revenue from grants. The first center's

average direct medical cost would exceed the second center's average di-

rect medical cost by $12.73. The corresponding average total cost differ-

ential would be $16.41. The impacts of Medicaid reimbursement, private

health insurance reimbursement, and patient reimbursement on average cost

are consistent with a priori notions about the effects of alternative

revenue sources on the efficient choice of inputs. The impact of Medicare

reimbursement is not consistent with these notions, but Medicare is the

least important source of the centers' revenues. On average, it accounts
                                          39                  .   .
for   only 2.7 percent of all revenues.        In any case definitive conclusions

with respect to these issues must await the analysis of the determinants

and effects of allocative inefficiency in Section V.

       A standard prediction from the theory of production is that an increase

in the price of an input used in the production process increases the aver-

age cost of output. In line with this prediction the three input price
                                    — 53 —




proxies   (PCPNI, NE, OHPE) have positive coefficients in the eight regres-

sions in Tables 5 and 6. In the most complete specifications of the cost

functions [regressions (5—4) and (6—4)], five of the six input price ef-

fects are significant at the 10 percent level. Only the coefficient of

physician net income (PCPNI) on average direct medical cost is, however,

significant at the 5 percent level. Note that the simple correlation co-

efficient between the annual full—time earnings of nurses employed in

hospitals (NE) and the annual full—time earnings of other hospital per-

sonnel (OHPE) is positive and fairly large (r =   .534).   When one of these

two variables is omitted from the cost equations, the coefficients of the

other are significant at the 1 percent level.40 Given the multicollin—

earity problem, the finding that the three input price measures have posi-

tive impacts on average cost and t—ratios greater than one is an important

and impressive one. It underscores that these measures are very good

proxies for the prices of the inputs actually used by CHC5.

     with respect to the empirical roles of the other variables, average

cost is not in general related to differences in the age distribution of

medical users among CHCs. Older centers have significantly larger costs

that newer centers, and NHCs have significantly larger costs than non—

NHCs. In part these results may be traced to aspects of allocative in-

efficiency. They also may be due to variations in casemix and scope of

services that are not captured by other variables. As shown by the co-

efficient of the fraction of offsite encounters (FOE), onsite encounters

are more expensive than offsite encounters, although the differentials

are not significant at the 5 percent level on a two—tailed test.41 The

average direct cost differential between a primary care physician
                                       — 54   —




encounter and a physician aid encounter of $4.98 is similar to the one esti-
mated from a regression of ADMC on FPAE, FMSSE, and FOE in Section III. The

average cost of a medical—surgical specialist encounter relative to a pri-

mary care physician encounter is very different from the one obtained in

Section III. This is partly because FMSSE is correlated with the center

characteristics and the revenue variables (compare regression (5—1) with

regression (5—4)] and partly because net income of specialists is excluded

from the regressions.


                   V. Empirical Results: Allocative Efficiency

      In this section the performance of the CRC system with respect to the

efficient   or cost—minimizing selection of inputs is examined. Both the
efficient choice of physician aids relative       to   primary care physicians and
the efficient choice of medical support and ancillary personnel (other per-
sonnel) relative to primary care physicians are treated. In Section V.A
the   extent of departures from efficient utilization       of these inputs is

quantified. In     Section V.B the determinants of inefficiency are studied,
and in Section V.C the     effects of inefficiency on    the total cost of
ambulatory   medical care are estimated.


A. Evaluation of Efficient Use of Inputs

      To evaluate whether CHCs select the combinations of primary care physi-

cians and physician aids that minimize the cost of a given output, we com-

pute the marginal rate of substitution in production between aids and physi-

cians (MRSPAP) for each center, divide it by the location—specific relative

price of aids (WPAP — (PCPNI) (NE)], and average the resulting ratio

ERPAP = (MRSPAP)    (WPAP) 1]   over all centers. At the     same   time, we   compute
                                          — 55    —




an index of inefficiency in the use of aids relative to physicians (EPA =

IRPAP—li).     Similarly,    to   study the efficient choice of other personnel
relative   to physicians, we compute the        marginal   rate of substitution in

production     between these personnel and physicians (MRSOP), divide it by
the location—specific relative price of other personnel (WOP                (OHPE)

(PcPNI)1], and average the resulting ratio (ROP =              (MRSOP)   (WOP)] over
all centers. At the same time, we obtain an index of inefficiency in the
use of other personnel relative to physicians CEO               ROP—l I).   In making
these computations, we employ the formula for the marginal rate of sub-
stitution given by equation (7) and the production function given by
regression (3—3) in Table 3.
       Summary measures pertaining to these computations are shown in Panel A
(aids relative to physicians) and Panel B (other personnel relative to
physicians) of Table 8. The ratio of the marginal rate of substitution
between physician aids and physicians to the relative price of aids equals
1.644 and is significantly greater than one (t =           8.59   based on equation (8)].
The ratio of the marginal rate of substitution between other personnel and
physicians     to the relative price of other personnel equals .554 and is sig-

nificantly less than one Ct = —5.65). It follows that CHC5 underutilize

physician aids relative to physicians and overutilize other personnel rela-

tive to physicians. Put differently, the same output could be produced at

a lower cost by raising the ratio of physician aids to physicians and by

lowering the ratio of other personnel to physicians.

       Thereis a considerable amount of variability in the marginal rate of
substitution—relative price ratios in Table 8. The coefficient of variation
of   RPAP equals   82.5   percent   and that   of POP equals   257.0 percent. This
                                       — 56 —




                                     TABLE 8
                Definition of Variables in Inefficiency Analysis



                           Standard
Variable          Mean     Deviation                    Definition


             Panel A: Physician Aids versus Primary Care Physicians

1. spiP            .305       .291         Marginal rate of substitution in pro-
                                           duction between physician aids and
                                           primary care physicians in absolute
                                           value; ratio of marginal product of
                                           aids to marginal product of primary
                                           care physicians

2. WPAP            .185       .030          Wage of a physician aids relative to
                                            wage of primary care physicians;
                                            PCPNI divided by NE


3. RPAP           1.644      1.356          Marginal rate of substitution between
                                            physician aids and primary care phy-
                                            sicians divided by relative wage of
                                            aids; RPAP = (MRSPAP) (WPAP)1


4. EPA             .906      1.229          Index of inefficiency in the use of
                                            aids relative to physicians;
                                            EPA = IRPAP-1l


      Panel    B: Other Medical Personnel versus Primary Care Physicians

1. t.iRsop         .075       .229          Marginal rate of substitution in pro-
                                            duction between other medical per-
                                            sonnel and primary care physicians in
                                            absolute value; ratio of marginal
                                            product of other personnel to mar—
                                            ginal product of primary care physi-
                                            cians

2. wop             .144       .027          Wage of other personnel divided by
                                            wage of primary care physicians;
                                            ORPE divided by PCPNI



                                                         (continued   on next page)
                                     — 57   —




                             TABLE   8 (continued)


                        Standard
Variable        Mean    Deviation                      Definition



 Panel B: Other Medical Personnel versus Primary Care Physicians (continued)

3, ip           .554      1.424         Marginal rate of substitution between
                                        other personnel and primary care phy-
                                        sicians divided by relative wage of
                                        other personnel; ROP = (MRSOP) (WOP)

4.   EO         .539       .821         Index of inefficiency in the use of
                                        other personnel relative th physi-
                                        cians; EO =    IRop—li


                 Panel C: Determinants of Inefficiencya
1. POV        19.375     12.048         Percentage of population in poverty in
                                        county in which a given center is
                                        located
2.   SOURCE     .147       .400         Number of sources of medical care for
                                        poor people per thousand poor people
                                        in county in which a given center is
                                        located in 1978. Number of poor
                                        people equals population of the
                                        county in 1978 multiplied by the per-
                                        centage of the population in poverty
                                        in 1969. Sources include number of
                                        hospitals with outpatient departments,
                                        number of maternal and infant care
                                        projects, number of children and
                                        youth projects, and number of commu-
                                        nity health centers other than the
                                        one in question. All sources per-
                                        tain to 1978




                                                       (continued on next page)
                                         — 58   —




                                TABLE 8 (concluded)



                             Standard
Variable          Mean       Deviation                     Definition



             Panel C:    Determinants of Inefficiencya (continued)


3.   SIZE1        .271          .445            Dichotomous variables that indicate
                                                size of county in which a given cen—
                                                ter is located. SIZE1 equals one
4.   SIZE2        .209          .407
                                                for greater metropolitan counties
                                                (counties in SMSAs with population
5.   SIZE3        .286          .453            of one million or more in 1970);
                                                SIZE2 equals one for lesser metro-
                                                politan counties (counties in SMSAs
                                                with population of less than one
                                                million in 1970); SIZE3 equals one
                                                for adjacent counties (counties
                                                adjacent to the metropolitan coun—
                                                ties and having easy access to the
                                                central city in the metropolitan
                                                area); omitted category pertains to
                                                semirural or rural counties


     at.ants from Table 2 are not listed in this table.
                                      — 59   —




variability is   highlighted in Table 9, which contains frequency distributions

of RPAP (Panel A) and ROP (Panel B). Note that, although CHCs employ too

few physician aids on average (RPAP exceeds one on average), approximately

31 percent of all centers employ too many aids (RPP is smaller than one

for 31 percent of the centers). Similarly, although the centers employ too

many other personnel on average approximately 21 percent of all centers

employ too few other personnel. Given the degree of variability in these

measures, it is very worthwhile to study the determinants of inefficiency

in the selection of inputs.

     In Section III it was indicated that the relative prices of physician

aids and other personnel used here may understate the true prices because

the AHA earnings   data exclude fringe benefits. To examine the impact of
this potential bias, it   was   assumed that the ratio of fringe benefits to
wages equals 25 percent. Location—specific relative prices were multi-
plied by a factor of 1.25, and RPAP and P were recomputed. Clearly, this

adjustment lowers PPAP and ROP, but the former remains significantly

greater than one, while the latter remains significantly smaller than one.

Moreover, the results of the study of the determinants and effects of in-

efficiency are very similar to those reported in Sections V.B and V.C.

     Instead of calculating PPAP and IP for each center and then averaging,

one can compute them at the sample means (see equation (9)]. Denoting the

resulting measures by RPAP and POP, one obtains RPAP = 1.791 and ROP =     .958.

These estimates are misleading in two respects. In the first place, rela-

tive input prices vary among locations and centers. In fact, the coeffi-

cients of variation of WPAP and WOP (16.2 percent and 18.8 percent, respec-

tively) exceed the coefficients of variation of PCPNI, NE, and OHPE
                           — 60 —




                          TABLE   9

Frequency Distribution of Marginal Rates of
Substitution Divided by Relative Wage Rates


      Interval                        Percent



                      Panel A: RPAP
(mean =      1.644,    standard deviation =    1.356)

      <0.00                             0.31
   0.01 — 0.49                          8.62
   0.50 — 0.99                         22.46
       1.00                             5.85
   1.01 — 1.49                         22.15
   1.50 — 1.99                         14.46
   2.00 — 2.49                          8.31
   2.50 — 2.99                          6.15
   3.00 — 3.49                          4.61
   3.50 — 3.99                          2.77
     > 4.00                             4.31



              Panel B: POP
(mean = .554, standard deviation = 1.424)

     <       0,00                      3.08
   0.01 — 0.49                        30.15
   0.50 — 0.99                        45.23
       1.00                            0.31
   1.01 — 1.49                        16.00
   1.50 — 1.99                         3.38
         >   2.00                      1.85
                                  — 61 —




(11.3 percent, 9.7 percent, and 12.2 percent, respectively). These patterns

emerge because physicians are relatively well paid in rural areas, while

nurses and other hospital personnel are relatively well paid in large urban

areas. Therefore, even if all centers desired to produce the same output in

the least—cost manner, they would employ different combinations of inputs.

In the second place, even if relative input prices do not vary, incentives

for inefficient input choices may differ among CHCs.42

     Our results with respect to the underutilization of physician aids and

the overutilization of other personnel may be compared with studies of the

efficient selection of inputs by private sector physicians. Using samples

of physicians for 1965 and 1967 from Medical Economics, Reinhardt (8) con-

cludes that physicians underutilize aids. The aid input in his study per-

tains to the sum of registered nurses, medical technicians, and office aids.

Since he does not distinguish among inputs, his findings cannot be compared

directly with ours. Using data from the 1976 HCFA Physician Practice Cost

Survey, Brown and Lapan (13) conclude that physicians underutilize regis-

tered nurses, practical nurses, and physician assistants, overutilize

secretaries, and use about the correct number of technicians. Except for

the last finding, these results are very similar to ours. Moreover, Brown

and Lapan exclude from their sample physicians who belong to equal cost

sharing groups because they argue that such physicians may not have incen-

tives to minimize costs. The point we wish to emphasize is that there is

little evidence that profit—motivated private physicians make more effi-

cient selections of inputs than CHCs.43
                                   — 62 —




B.   Determinants of Allocative Inefficiency

     Table 10 contains regressions in which the dependent variable is the in-

dex of inefficiency in the selection of physician aids relative to physi-

cians (EPA). This index is highly correlated (r = .675) with the index of

inefficiency in the selection of other personnel relative to physicians

(Eo).44 Results obtained with the latter index as the dependent variable

are very similar to those obtained in Table 10. We focus on the determi-

nants of EPA because it has a larger impact on average cost than E0 (see

Section V.C). Seven regressions are presented in the table because we view

the analysis of the determinants of inefficiency as tentative and explora-

tory rather than as definitive and conclusive. In all regressions the mea-

sures pertaining to the age distribution of medical users are included. We

have no specific hypotheses concerning the effects of these variables, but

it is worth controlling for differences in casemix among centers. In any

case, only four of the twenty—eight age distribution effects are signifi-

cant at the 5 percent level——those associated with the fraction of users

ages 65 and over in regressions (10—3), (10—4), (10—5), and (10—7),

     We have already developed hypotheses with regard to the impacts of the

fractions of receipts obtained from various sources on inefficiency (see

Section III). Dramatic evidence in support of these hypotheses is revealed

by the regressions. Regardless of the other variables held constant, in-

creases in the fractions of receipts received from Medicaid and from private

health insurance companies cause statistically significant increases in in-

efficiency, while an increase in the fraction of receipts received from

patients leads to a statistically significant reduction in inefficiency.

The coefficient of the Medicare variable has the "wrong sign," but it is
                                  — 63 —




                                 TABLE 10

             Determinants of Inefficiency in the Selection of
                  Physician Aids Relative to Physicians



                                   Regression Number
Variable     10—1      10—2      10—3        10—4      10—5     10—6      10—7



FMO4          .426     —.449      .607        .169      .241    —.110      .301
             (.49)    (—.50)     (.95)       (.27)     (.38)   (—.12)     (.47)

FMS9         3.332     2.388     4.308       3.348    2.588     4.617     2.677
            (1.27)     (.89)    (2.26)      (1.79)    (1.39)   (1.66)    (1.42)

FM1019     —2.890    —3.008    —1.890      —1.787    —1.450     —2.516  —1.403
           (—1.66)   (—1.68)   (—1.50)     (—1.43)   (—1.17)   (—1.36) (—1.12)

FM65          .428      .933     2.019      2.548     2.778     2.018     3.211
             (.30)     (.63)    (1.98)      (2.47)    (2.72)   (1.30)    (3.02)

AGE           .105                .035                  .038               .039
            (5.04)              (2.20)                (2.47)             (2.53)
OCH         —.663                —.210                —.114              —.068
           (—3.76)             (—1.61)               (—.88)              (—.49)

MEDICAID              4.339                 2.092     1.941              1.789
                      (7.15)                (4.75)   (4.38)              (3.83)

MEDICARE              —.774                —1.161   —1.708              —1.338
                      (—.40)                (—.86) (—1.27)              (—.96)

PVTINS                 2.179                1.191     1.377              1.305
                      (3.80)               (2.95)    (3.43)              (3.20)

PATIENT              —1.585                —.811   —.589                 —.537
                     (—3.61)             (—2.63) (—1.88)                (—1.65)

OME                               .027       .027       .025               .024
                               (17.01)   (18.32) (15.70)                (15.45)

i'ov                                                             .002    —.005
                                                                (.26)   (—1.04)




                                                       (continued on next page)
                                    — 64 —




                              TABLE 10   (concluded)


                                        Regression Number
 Variable         10—1    10—2     10—3         10—4    10—5       10—6    10—7



 SOURCE                                                            —.067   —.052
                                                                  (—.40)   (—.48)


 SIZE1                                                             —.531    —.032
                                                                 (—2.89)   (—.24)

 SIZE2                                                           —1.164    —.142
                                                                 (—5.41)   (—.86)


 SIZE3                                                           —1.106    —.081
                                                                 (—5.29)   (—.50)


 CONSTANT        1.175    1.054     .091         .063   —.012     1.536      .042
                 (2.34)   (2.19)   (.21)        (.19)   (—.03)    (3.09)    (.11)


 R2                .228     .220       .597      .622    .634       .146     .638


 F               15.70    11.14    67.00        57.67   49.38      5.98    33.98




      at_ratios in parentheses. The critical t—ratios at the 5 percent level
are   1.64 for a one—tailed test and   1,96   for a two—tailed test. The F—ratio

associated with each regression is statistically significant at the 1 per-

cent level of significance,
                                          — 65 —




not    significant. Moreover, as already noted, CHCs receive a very small

proportion of their receipts from Medicare. Of the three significant f i—

nancing effects, that associated with the Medicaid variable is the largest.

In the most complete specification [regression (10—7)], a hypothetical cen-

ter that is fully funded by Medicaid would have an inefficiency index 1.79

points larger than a center that is fully funded by grants. To gauge the

magnitude of this differential, note that the inefficiency index has a

mean of .91 and a standard deviation of 1.23. Hence, the differential is

very large; it amounts to 196.7 percent of the mean of the inefficiency

index and to 145.5 percent of the standard deviation of the index. Put

differently, an increase in the fraction of Medicaid receipts from zero to

one raises the inefficiency index by almost one and one—half standard devi-

ations.

       It was indicated in Section III that non—NHCs are likely to receive a

larger percentage of receipts on a prepaid basis than NHCs. This percent-

age also is likely to be negatively related to the number of years that a

center has been in operation. These factors suggest a positive effect of

AGE on inefficiency and a negative effect of OCH. Another reason for ex-

pecting these effects is that the newer non—NHCs designs emphasize small

group practices which offers a somewhat limited range of services. To the

extent    that large   scale operations   promote inefficiency (see below), non—
NHCs   should be more efficient than NHCs, and newer centers should be more
efficient than older centers. A final reason for expecting such effects
is that the design and funding of newer centers and non—NHCs occurred at a
time when the emphasis of U.S. health policy shifted from a concern with
equity    in   the l960s to a concern with efficiency in the 1970s. Support
                                      — 66 —




for   these hypotheses is contained in the regressions in Table 10. The co-

efficient of AGE is positive and significant in all regressions in which

it is included. The coefficient of OCR always is negatIve, but it is sig-

nificant only when the number of onsite medical encounters is excluded

from the regression. Of course, AGE and OCR are negatively correlated.

When the former variable is omitted from the regressions, the coefficients

of the latter are negative and significant.

      Theoretically, the effect of output, measured by the number of onsite

medical encounters, on inefficiency is expected to be U-shaped. That is,

inefficiency first should decline as output rises, reach a minimum value

at a certain output, and then begin to rise as output rises. The forces

that generate this relationship are similar to those that generate a

U—shaped average cost function. The principal source of declining ineffi-

ciency is randomness of demand. On any given day, the administrator of a

CRC cannot predict with perfect certainty the number of patients who will

require   services. Hence, in order   to treat a certain percentage of poten-

tial patients, some excess amount   of   the key physician   input is required.

As output   rises, the variability in demand tends to decline and a more
appropriate   input mix can be selected. The increasing complexity of large

scale operations is the basic cause of an increase in inefficiency beyond

some output. If the chief administrator of a CRC is a nonphysician, he

may find it difficult to select the cost—minimizing mix of a large number

of highly skilled physicians relative to other inputs. Even if the admin-

istrator is a physician, the limited amount of his own time input may

inhibit the selection of an appropriate combination of inputs at large

output levels.
                                        — 67   —




       The estimated output effects, given by the coefficients of the number

of   onsite medical encounters (ONE) in regressions (10—3), (10—4), (10—5),

and (10—7), are positive and very significant; the t—ratios range from

15.45 to 18.32. Moreover, the impacts are numerically large. Based on

regression (10—7), a one standard deviation increase in output causes the

inefficiency index to rise by .42 of a standard deviation.         Linear,

rather than quadratic, output effects are shown in Table 10. If the

square    of output (OMESQ) is   added to the set of independent variables in

regression (10—7), the coefficient of OMESQ is negative and significant,

while that of ONE is positive and significant.45 The output that "maximizes"

inefficiency occurs, however, beyond the range of observations. These re—

suits suggest that the forces associated with the complexity of large scale

operations dominate those associated with randomness of demand throughout

the range of output. Although the output effect diminishes in the qua-

dratic specification, it is larger than in the linear specification even

when evaluated at an output two standard deviations above the mean output

(.039 versus .024). Therefore, the coefficient of ONE in regression (10—7)

is a conservative lower bound estimate of the impact of output on ineffi-

ciency.

       The natural logarithm   of the weighted number   of onsite medical   encoun-
ters   is the dependent variable in the production function. Therefore, the

parameter estimates of output in Table 10 would be biased if the disturbance

term in the production function were correlated with the disturbance term in

the inefficiency equation. To examine the extent of this bias, the total

number   of medical users (TMU)   was   substituted for the number of onsite
medical encounters in regression (10—7). The coefficient of Thu       was
                                        — 68   —




 .063 (t = 12.88).     This result strengthens our confidence in the importance

and   magnitude   of the output effect.

       It is possible the impact of randomness of demand on inefficiency de-

pends on the characteristics of the county in which a given center is

located rather than on output per se. For example, demand might be more

unpredictable     in a sparsely populated county, in a county with a small
percentage    of the population in poverty, and in a county with numerous

alternative sources of ambulatory medical care for         poor persons. To ex-
plore this    notion, the following county—specific variables are included in

regressions (10—6) and (10—7): the percentage of the population in poverty

(POV); the number of sources of ambulatory medical care for the poor per

thousand   poor   people   (SOURCE); and dichotomous variables that   identify

greater metropolitan counties (SIZE1),         lesser metropolitan counties (SIZE2),

adjacent   counties (SIZE3), and semirural or rural counties       (the omitted

category).    These measures,    which are defined precisely in Panel C of

Table 8,   are constructed from the BCRR tape and from the Area Resource
File. 46
      There   is little evidence in the regression analysis that county charac-

teristics are important determinants of inefficiency. In regression (10—6),

which omits all center characteristics except the age distribution of users,

the coefficients of POv and SOURCE have the wrong signs and are not sig-

nificant. County size does appear to have a U—shaped effect on ineff i—

ciency. CHCs in small rural or semirural counties are less efficient than

those in other counties, and these differentials are significant. Centers

in lesser metropolitan and in adjacent counties are equally efficient

(compare the coefficients of SIZE2 and SIZE3), while centers in greater

metropolitan counties are less efficient than those in the two preceding
                                   — 69 —




types of counties. The county size differentials are not, however, signif-
icant once all center characteristics are held constant [see regression

(10—7)]. In the full regression the poverty variable has the correct

negative sign, but it is not significant. The coefficient of SOURCE still

is negative and not significant.

     In summary, it is notable that our exploratory regression analysis

"explains" up to 64 percent of the variation in the inefficiency index.

Consistent with a priori notions, alternative mechanisms for financing

CHC5 affect the efficient choice of inputs in the predicted directions.

Older centers are less efficient than newer centers, and larger centers

are less efficient than smaller centers.


C. Effects of Inefficiency on Costs

     To estimate the cost savings associated with movements toward optimal

input mixes, the inefficiency indexes are included in average cost func-

tions in Tables 11 and 12. Table 11 contains simple regressions of average

direct medical care cost (ADMC) and average total medical care cost (ATMC)

on the index of inefficiency in the selection of physician aids relative to

physicians (EPA) or the index of inefficiency in the selection of other per-

sonnel relative to physicians CEO). Either index has a positive impact on

average cost, but the effect of EPA exceeds that of EA. Moreover, the co-

efficients of EPA are significant at the 1 percent level, while the coeff i—

cients of EO are not. In the full average cost specifications in Table 12,

the coefficients of EPA fall somewhat relative to those in Table 11 but

retain their significance. In particular, the average direct cost effect

is significant at the 5 percent level, while the average total cost effect

is significant at the .5 percent level. On the other hand, when EO
                               — 70 —




                              TABLE 11

      Regressions of Average Cost on Inefficiency Indexesa



                   ADMC Regressions         ATMC Regressions

Variable             11—1      11—2           11—3     11—4



EPA                  1.579                    2.213
                     (4.83)                   (5.33)


E0                               .876                   1.365
                               (1.74)                   (2.12)



CONSTP1NT           19.968     20.927        26.662    27.932
                   (40.00)    (42.26)        (42.06)   (44.19)



R2                    .067       .009           .081      .014


p                    23.31       3.01         28.37      4.49




     at_ratios in parentheses. The critical t-ratios at the

5 percent level are 1.64 for a one—tailed test and 1.96 for

a two—tailed test. The F-ratios associated with regressions

(11—1) and (11—3) are significant at the 1 percent level;

those associated with regressions (11—2) and (11—4) are not

significant at the 1 percent level.
                          — 71 —




                         TABLE 12

           Estimates of Average Cost Functions,
               Inefficiency Index Includeda



                          ADMC                       ATMC
                       Regression                 Regression
Variable                  12—1                       12—2



EPA                        .931                      1.986
                         (1.90)                     (3.16)

OME                       —.059                      —.092
                        (—3.24)                    (—3.96)

PCPNI                      .074                       .097
                         (1.33)                     (1.36)

NE                         .825                       .962
                         (1.80)                     (1.63)

OHPE                       .397                       .647
                          (.92)                     (1.17)

FPAE                     —4.243                     —5.666
                        (—2.39)                    (—2.49)

FMSSE                   —4.988                      —6.143
                         (—.68)                     (—.65)

FOE                      —4.121                     —8.917
                        (—1.11)                    (—1.86)

FMO4                    —3.692                      —4.615
                         (—.68)                     (—.67)

FM59                   —34.782                     —38.939
                        (—2.20)                    (—1.92)

FM1O19                   4.039                       3.000
                          (.38)                      (.22)

FM65                   —13.745                    —12.845
                        (—1.52)                    (—1.11)




                                    (continued on next page)
                               — 72 —




                     TABLE   12   (concluded)




                             ADMC                      ATNC
                          Regression                Regression
Variable                     12—1                       12—2



OCH                           —3.576                  —3.593
                             (—3.12)                  (—2.44)

AGE                               .401                   .417
                              (3.05)                   (2.47)

MEDICAID                      11.046                  12.817
                              (2.66)                   (2.40)

MEDICARE                     —15.510                 —20.973
                             (—1.31)                  (—1.38)

PVTINS                         8.656                   7.157
                              (2.46)                   (1.58)

PATIENT                       —6.488                  —9.226
                             (—2.43)                  (—2.69)

CONSTANT                      11.346                  15.131
                              (1.54)                   (1.60)


R2                                .321                   .316


F                                 8.03                  7.84




     at_ratios in parentheses. The critical t-ratios at the 5

percent level are 1.64 for a one—tailed test and 1.96 for a

two—tailed test. The F—ratio associated with each regression

is statistically significant at the 1 percent level of sig-

nificance.
                                      — 73 —




replaces   EPA in regressions similar to those in Table 12, its coefficient in

the ADMC function is not significant at the 5 percent level. In addition,

the coefficient of EPO in the ATMC function is not significant at the .5

percent level.

       The above points are emphasized because EPA and EO are highly correlated

(r =   .675).   When both variables are included in average cost functions with

no additional regressors, the coefficients of EPA rise relative to those in

Table 11, while the coefficients of EO become negative. When both are in-

cluded in regressions similar to those in Table 12, the coefficients of each

are positive. In some instances the coefficient of EPA alone is signifi-

cant, while in other instances neither is significant.47 In all cases the

coefficient of EPA exceeds that of EO. Given the strong positive relation-

ship between EPA and E0 and given the greater precision with which the EPA

effects are estimated, the cost savings computations are based on regres-

sions that exclude EO. These computations should be interpreted as the

joint impacts of movements toward the optimal mixes of physicians relative

to physician aids and of physicians relative to other personnel on average

cost. To the extent that EPA is positively related to the inefficient use

of such additional inputs as space and capital equipment, these inefficien-

cies also are reflected in the computations.

       The inefficiency index equals zero if the actual input mix selected

corresponds to the cost—minimizing input mix. Hence, the regression co-

efficient of the inefficiency index multiplied by its mean value gives

the cost associated with allocative inefficiency or the cost savings asso-

ciated with the elimination of this phenomenon. Based on regressions

(11—1) and (11—3), average direct medical care cost would fall by $1.43

in 1978 dollars and average total medical care cost would fall by $2.00
                                       — 74 —




in   1978 dollars if allocative efficiency were eliminated. Since the average

value of onsite medical encounters equals 21,283 encounters, these savings

amount to a $30,435 reduction in total direct cost on average and a $42,556

reduction in total cost on average. Put differently, the total direct

cost of the entire CHC system would fall by 6.7 percent and the total cost

of the system would fall by 6.6 percent. The comparable estimates from

Table 12 are a $.84 drop in average direct cost, a $1.80 drop in average

total cost, a $17,878 decline in the total direct cost of a typical center,

a $38,309 decline in the total cost of such a center, a 3.9 percent reduc-

tion in the total direct cost of the CHC system, and    a 6.3   percent decline

in the total cost of the system.48

      The calculations based on Table 11 are upper bound estimates of cost

savings because EPA is related to variables that influence average cost

with inefficiency held constant. For instance, an increase in the fraction

of receipts received from Medicaid raises EPA and also raises average

cost. Since EPA effects in Table 12 are smaller than those in Table 11,

the coefficients of EPA are biased upward by the omission of correlated

regressors. The calculations based on Table 12 are lower bound estimates

because   intercorrelations among EPA and   other variables lead to somewhat

imprecise   estimates   of the partial effect of each variable. In any event,

the system—wide cost reduction due to the elimination of allocative ineff i—

ciency appears to be rather modest; it ranges from 6.3 to 6.6 percent of

total cost. In sunmary, the empirical results in Section V indicate that

there are statistically significant departures from cost—minimizing be-

havior. These departures have statistically significant determinants and

statistically significant positive effects on average cost. But the

magnitudes of the average cost effects are not large.
                                   — 75 —




     The estimated parameter of a given variable in the complete average

cost function in Table 5 or 6 (regression (5—4) or (6—4)] is the sum of the

direct effect of that variable on average cost and the indirect effect that

operates through allocative inefficiency. The inclusion of the inefficiency

index in the average direct or average total cost function in Table 12 per-

mits us to isolate the direct effects and to compare them with the corre-

sponding total effects. These comparisons are made in Panels A and B of

Table 13 for the variables that are important determinants of inefficiency:

the center's age; the fractions of revenues obtained from Medicaid, private

health insurance companies, and patients; and the number of onsite medical

encounters. Note that, if the signs of the figures in the last column are

ignored, they give the indirect effect through allocative inefficiency as a

percentage of the direct effect.

     The most dramatic parameter changes pertain to those associated with

onsite medical encounters. The negative output effect in the average di-

rect cost function rises by 68.6 percent when the inefficiency index is

held constant. The corresponding increase in the average total cost func-

tion is a whopping 119.0 percent. These results occur because the total

impact of output on average cost reflects two forces that go in opposite

directions. The direct effect is negative due to the existence of econo-

mies of scale. But the indirect effect is positive because larger centers

use less efficient input mixes than smaller centers. Although the effects

of output on average cost rise in absolute value when inefficiency is held

constant, the elasticities of average cost with respect to output remain

fairly small. In the average direct cost function these elasticities are

-.059 at the point of means, -.159 at an output one standard deviation
                                      — 76 —




                                     TABLE   13

Total and Direct Effects of Selected Variables in Average Cost Functions



                      Total Effect       Direct Effect         Percentage In-
                                                               crease (+) or
Variable         (absolute value)        (absolute value)      Decrease (_)a



                                  Panel A: ADMC Regressionsb

AGE                        .434                     .401               —7.60

MEDICAID                12.728                    11.046              —13.21

PVTINS                   9.777                     8.656              —11.47

PATIENT                  6.951                     6.488               —6.66

OME                        .035                     .059              +68.57



                                  Panel B: ATMC RegressionsC

AGE                        .486                     .417              —14.20

MEDICAID                16.407                    12.817              —21.88

PVTINS                   9.550                     7.157              —25.06

PATIENT                 10.213                     9.226               —9.66

OME                        .042                     .092          +119.05




   aDfid as the ratio of the direct effect to the total effect minus

one multiplied by 100.

   bTotai effects are taken from regression (5—4) in Table 5. Direct

effects are taken from regression (12—1) in Table 12.

   C
      Total effects   are taken from regression (6—4) in Table   6.     Direct

effects are taken from regression (12—2) in Table 12.
                                  — 77 —




above the mean output, and —.280 at an output two standard deviations above

the mean output. In the average total cost function the corresponding

elasticities are —.068, —.188, and —.337. Therefore, the average cost

functions in Table 12, like those in Tables 5 and 6, are fairly flat; the

departures from constant average cost are not dramatic.

     The direct effect of each variable in Table 13 except for output is

smaller than the corresponding total effect because the indirect effect

associated with that variable works in the same direction as the direct

effect. In the average direct cost function the largest percentage de-

cline caused by the inclusion of the inefficiency index is associated

with the Medicaid coefficient, which falls by 13.2 percent. In the aver-

age total cost function the 21.9 percent decline in the Medicaid coeff 1—

cient ranks second to the 25.1 percent decline in the private health

insurance coefficient. Note that with one exception the direct effects of

age and the three financing variables are statistically significant in the

regressions in Table        Therefore, the total effects of these variables

are not due solely to their impacts on allocative efficiency. It cannot

be ascertained whether the direct effects are attributed to differences in

casemix, scope of services, technical efficiency, or other factors.


                        VI. Summary and Implications

    The purpose of this paper has been to assess the economic performance

of community health centers in delivering ambulatory medical care to pov-

erty populations. Throughout the paper the focus has been on the extent

of departures from cost minimization, the determinants of such departures,

and their impacts on the cost of services. The main empirical results in

the paper and their policy implications can be summarized as follows.
                                    — 78 —




     Input   decisions by CHCs do reflect departures from cost—minimizing be-

havior. In particular, the centers employ too few physician aids (nurses

and physician assistants) relative to primary care physicians and too many

medical support and ancillary personnel relative to primary care physicians.

These findings suggest that it is misleading to criticize CRCs for employ-

ing too much non—physician labor, as has been done by the General Accounting

Office (14). Instead, it is important to distinguish among different types

of inputs. When compared with similar studies of the efficient selection of

inputs by private sector physicians, these findings also suggest that CHCs

do not make less efficient selections of inputs than profit—motivated

Drivate physicians. To be sure, the incentives of private physicians to

minimize cost are diluted somewhat by third—party reimbursement on a fee—

for—service basis. Moreover, incentives exist for CHCs to minimize cost,

particularly if they seek to maximize a utility function that depends on the

quantity and quality of services delivered and operate on budgets whose size

is determined by the number of enrollees rather than on the amount of ser-

vices delivered.

     Allocative inefficiency responds to alternative financing mechanisms in

the expected direction. Specifically, Medicaid or private health insurance

reimbursement on a fee—for—service basis increases allocative inefficiency

which in turn raises average cost. This calls into question the recommenda-

tion made by the General Accounting Office (14) that centers should try to

maximize their nongrant revenue. Our results indicate that centers who

receive a relatively large percentage of their revenues from grants select

more appropriate input mixes than other centers and therefore have lower

costs. This does not mean that Medicaid financing of CHCs should be dis-

couraged per Se. For instance, the level of allocative efficiency would
                                    — 79 —




not   fall and might even rise if the Medicaid program were used to promote

the delivery of services on a prepaid capitation basis. Under one such

plan, the state Medicaid programs could make the prepayments for Medicaid-

eligible persons who choose to enroll in CHCs. Under a second plan,

Medicaid—eligible persons could be issued vouchers directly which they

could use to enroll in CHCs. Both plans have been promoted by the

Reagan Administration in an attempt to promote competition and control

inflation in the health care sector. Our findings imply that a CRC system

financed to a large extent by Medicaid prepayment is not inconsistent with

these goals and even might help to achieve them.

      The average cost function of CHC5 is characterized by moderate econo-

mies of scale, but smaller centers select more appropriate input mixes

than larger centers. Since the average cost function is fairly flat, the

costs of building a number of centers in the same area to encourage access

are not substantial. Moreover, if per capita transportation costs are con-

sidered, such a policy might even lower costs. This is because per capita

transportation costs are negatively related to the number of centers in an

area. In turn, the fewer the number of centers the larger is the output of

any one center.

      Under the assumption that the centers in our study are representative

of the roughly 800 centers in existence in 1980, the CRC system—wide cost

reduction due to the elimination of allocative inefficiency amounts to

$32 million in 1978 dollars. At a time of tight Federal and state budgets

and a rapid rate of inflation in the cost of medical care, a cost reduc-

tion of this magnitude should be encouraged if it is not too difficult to

achieve. But the decline in cost is modest; it equals approximately 6

percent of the CRC system—wide total cost.
                                       — 80 —




       The above results seriously question the conventional wisdom that ser-

vices in the public sector are produced less efficiently than in the pri-

vate sector. We find no evidence that allocative inefficiency is more

widespread among CHCs than among private sector physicians. Moreover,

although there are statistically significant departures from cost—minimizing

behavior in the CHC system, their impacts on the cost of care are relatively

small. Elsewhere, we have shown that the CHC program has played an important

role in the decline in infant mortality, especially black infant mortality,

since 1965 [Goldman and Grossman (17)]. Thus, we conclude from our two stud-

ies that the CHC program is an effective vehicle to achieve the goal of im-

provements    in   the health of the poor. Substantial improvements appear to

have   been   accomplished, and the costs in terms of departures from the

optimal utilization of inputs appear to be small.
                                         F—i


                                       Foothotes


        *
         Research for this paper was supported by Grant Number 5 ROl HS 04047

from the National Center for Health Services Research, DHHS, to the National

Bureau of Economic Research. We are indebted to Richard Bohrer of the

Bureau of Community Health Services, Health Services Administration, DHHS,

for helping us to obtain the BCHS Common Reporting Requirements data tape

(the BCRR tape) which is the basis for some of the research in this paper.

We are also indebted to Robert Nelson of the Division of Monitoring and

Analysis, BcHS, for preparing our version of the BCRR tape and to Robert

Berry and Peter McMenamin for helping us to obtain data from the Health Care

Financing   Administration   Physician Practice Cost Surveys of 1977 and 1978.

Finally, we wish to thank Allison Mann for research assistance. This paper

has not undergone the review accorded official NBER publications; in par-

ticular, it has   not been submitted for     approval   by the Board   of   Directors.

        LFor detailed descriptions of the development of CEC5, see Lave and

Leinhardt (1), Hollister et al. (2), Reynolds (3), Seacat (4), Davis and

Schoen (5), Plaska and Manseau (6), and Roemer (7). The CHCs studied in

this paper are not limited to those that follow the Neighborhood Health

Center, Rural Health Initiative, or Urban Health Initiative program

designs. Also included are those that follow the Family Health Center,

Community Health Network, and Hospital—Affiliated Primary Care Center

designs. The first      two designs, which date to the early l970s, emphasize
the   delivery of services on a prepaid capitation basis, the former in

rural areas and   the   latter in   urban areas. The original    intent was for

the   state Medicaid program to make the prepayment for Medicaid—eligible
                                         F- 2



persons. This did not meet with great success, and          the   family health center

and network terms were dropped. Support for these centers through Medicaid

fee—for—service payments has gradually increased [Roemer (7)]. The latter

design       is more recent and pertains to a primary care group practice oper-
ating in a hospital outpatient department with a billing and cost structure
that is distinct from the rest of the hospital. For more information on

these designs, see Plaska and Manseau (6).

         2
          Maternal   and   infant care projects originated in the 1963 amendments
to   Title V of the Social Security Act of 1935. Children and youth projects

originated in the 1965 amendments to Title V. Federal subsidization of

clinics that deliver family planning services to low—income women initially

can be traced to the 1967 amendments to Title V. Federal efforts in this

area were expanded in 1970 with the passage of the Family Planning Services

and Population Research Act (Title X of the Public Health Services Act).

Note that other types of clinics within the Federal delivery system, such

as Appalachian health       centers, black lung clinics, and migrant health cen-
ters, are not      considered either conceptually or empirically in this paper.

This is because these clinics are few in number and relatively new. More-

over, unlike CHCs, black lung clinics focus on one particular disease,

while migrant health centers service transitory population groups.


         3See, for example, Reinhardt (8), ICehrer and Zaretsky (9), Smith et al.

(10), Gollady et al. (11), Zeckhauser and       Efliastam   (12), and Brown   and

Lapan (13).
                                         F— 3



        41n addition to efficiency in the production of ambulatory care, there

are two other standards to evaluate the CRC system. These are the effi-

ciency of this public health system in identifying low—income, medically

underserved areas with poor initial health levels and the impact of the

centers on health outcomes. We have studied these issues elsewhere

(Goldman     and   Grossman (17)].



        51f factor supply curves are not perfectly elastic, condition (3) still

holds provided each supply curve has the same constant elasticity.



        6We have experimented with a second measure of inefficiency given by



                                 e •    = Cr.. — 1)2
                                  ijt



Results     obtained with this measure were very similar to those obtained with

the measure described in the text.


        7
         See, for example, Reinhardt (8), Kehrer and Zaretsky (9), Brown and

Lapan   (13),   Feldstein (25), Boaz (26), and Pauly (27).
                                      F— 4




        8Empirically, we examine both the efficient choice of physician aids

relative to physicians and the efficient choice of other personnel relative

to physicians. Sometimes the actual value of the physician input as well

as the natural logarithm of this input is included in the transcendental

production function. We experiment with this specification in Section IV.

The properties of the production function highlighted below are not altered

by the inclusion of y in the function.


        9mis follows because


                                              —l
                                         =   2a1   a3
                                '2t


which is positive if a3 exceeds zero.


    '0Boaz (26) computes a measure which is similar to r21 but does not ex-

amine the determinants of inefficiency or its role in the average cost func-

tion.


    11For detailed discussions of allocative and technical efficiency, see

Leibenstein (28) and Welch (29).


    12The   above definition   of economies or diseconomies of scale is more

general   than one based on the returns to scale parameter in the production.
A production   function has constant returns to scale if output doubles when
all inputs double, increasing returns to scale if output more than doubles,
and decreasing   returns to scale if output   less than doubles. If   input

prices   are independent of the level of inputs, increasing returns to scale

implies falling average cost, decreasing returns implies rising average
                                           F- 5



cost, and    constant     returns implies constant average cost. The definition

in the text is more comprehensive because a production function could have

constant returns to scale, but average cost could rise with output if some

inputs could not be varied and fall with output if input prices fell as

the amounts of the inputs purchased rose.


        '3Let c be the total    product     cost of output x, and let q be total

patient and     employee transportation cost associated with output x. Total
cost inclusive of transportation cost is

                                      c=      c+q

and   average   cost is

                             (c*/x)   =     (dx)   +   (q/x)


or

                                 ac* =      ac+t

Differentiate the last equation with respect to x to obtain



                          (dac*/dx)       (dac/dx) + (dt/dx)



If dt/dx exceeds zero, dac*/dx may          exceed     zero even if dac/dx is less than

zero.


        14Suppose   that a policy maker wants to minimize the total cost of a
given output of the entire CRC system in the United States, and                 suppose

that all centers have identical cost functions.                To   accomplish this goal,
                                      F- 6



output should be allocated among centers such that marginal cost is the same

in each center and    each   center is producing at the minimum point on its

average cost function. If the total output of the system is less than the

output of each center multiplied by the number of centers, some centers

should    be closed down.    (For proof of this proposition and modifications
in the    case when cost functions differ, see Patinkin (37)]. Normatively,

since    cHCs service all parts of the United States, minimization of the

total cost of the combined output of the system is not a realistic policy

goal.


        151f the average cost function is linear, the parameter estimate of

   still is biased away from zero. In particular, the estimated value is

negative if the true value is zero.


        16For a detailed description of the BCRR tape, see   Bureau of Community
Health   Services (39).


        17The BCRR tape contains data for 1977, but there is an extremely

large   number of missing values for that year. Neighborhood    health   centers

are not designated as such on the tape. We identified them based on an

earlier BCIIS publication (40).


     18Psychiatric encounters are reported as a separate category, but they

account for less than 1 percent of all medical encounters. These encoun-

ters are excluded from the medical encounter variable used in this study.


        9In the case of NHSC personnel, the centers must reimburse a portion

of their salaries to the Federal government. The reimbursement formula is

based in part on the revenues generated by these personnel.
                                      F— 7




        20 fact the initial service date must be June 1978 or earlier. This

eliminates centers who began to operate in the latter part of 1978 and thus

have limited data for that year.


        21This count excludes centers who failed to file at least one report

during the period from 1977 through 1980. It also excludes centers lo-

cated in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.


        22Strictly speaking, missing values cannot be distinguished from zero

values on the BCRR tape. The algorithm used here is to assume that zero

values for the above variables denote missing data, while zero values for

other variables are "true zeros."


        23Offsite encounters are reported separately. They pertain to en-

counters both between CRC users and CRC staff and between CRC users and

nonetaff. These two types of of fsite encounters cannot be distinguished.


        24Other   inputs, such as medical equipment, floor space, and adminis-
trative personnel, are omitted from the production function. These ex-
clusions    are due to the absence   of disaggregated measures in physical
units and due to the problem     of allocating inputs that generate   indirect

costs.


       25For   a justification of the use of average cost weights, see Feld—

stein (25).


       26Feldstein (25) argues that the average cost weights obtained by the

above   procedure   can be viewed as useful approximations even when average

cost   depends on output and other variables.
                                              F—8




        27The regression      also was estimated with average total medical care

cost    as the dependent variable •        The   weights obtained were almost identical
in relative terms to those reported in the text. Note that little should
be inferred about the wage rate of physician aids relative to primary care
physicians from the regression results because an aid may spend a longer
amount of time with a patient at an encounter than a primary care physi-
cian.

        28The above measure differs from but is highly correlated with
(r =    .984)    a simple two—year average of unit cost in each year. The
variable used is a weighted average of annual unit cost, where the
weight    is the fraction of encounters in each year.


                should   be stressed   that   the   assumption of constant   average cost
in the production context simply is used to approximate a set of weights
to   calculate weighted output. Moreover, our main              reason for fitting
production       functions is to examine inefficiency in the selection of in-

puts rather than to examine the extent of economies of scale.


        3Ol centers are small          employers     relative to their local market

areas.     Therefore, there is little reason to expect them to have sig-
nificant aunts of monopsony power.

        31The ten Federal regions and the states within each region are as
follows:
                                            F- 9




           Boston             (Maine,   Vermont, Mass., Conn., R.I., N.H.)
           New York      (N.Y., N.J.)
           Philadelphia (Penn., Del., D.C., Maryland, Va., W. Va.)
           Atlanta       (Ala., Fla., Georgia, Ky., Miss., N.C., S.C., Tenn.)
           Chicago       (Ill., Indiana, Minn., Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin)
           Dallas             (Arkansas, N.M., Oklahoma, Texas, Louisiana)
           Kansas City        (Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska)
           Denver             (Cob., Montana, N. D., S.D., Utah, Wyoming)
           San Francisco      (Ariz., Calif., Hawaii, Hey.)
           Seattle            (Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, Washington).


These designations are based        on    the city in which each of the ten   Federal
regional offices is located.


              the computation of mean net income by region and size of county,

observations are weighted by the inverse of the probability of selection.

The resulting weighted means are, however, very similar to unweighted means.

Net income of medical and surgical specialists is excluded from the cost

function because     it is highly correlated with net income of primary care
physicians    Cr =   .652).    Moreover, as mentioned above, we do not study the

efficient choice of these two types          of   personnel.

      33
           The above analysis also applies if CHCs reimburse the Federal gov-

ernment for k   percent of the wages of NHSC personnel. In         that case, the

relevant price of input y is the net price:


                                   w. = w. (1 — k)
                                    i    1


where w. is the gross price (the wage actually received by input                  It is
clear that



                                   (wj/wj) =
                                               (wj/wj)
                                            F — 10




         34Wlien   the marginal product of an input becomes negative, the isoquant
begins to slope upward.

         35Statements concerning statistical significance in the text are based
on   one—tailed tests except when the direction of the         effect is unclear on a
priori    grounds or when the estimated effect has the "wrong sign." In the

latter cases two—tailed tests are used.


         361f a2 is the regression coefficient of PA and a3 is the regression

coefficient of PASQ, the output elasticity of PA is a1 PA + 2cz2 PASQ.

Output elasticities of 0 and MS are obtained in the same manner.


               above comments also apply     to the    average cost functions       that
include the inefficiency index in Section V.


         38Sometimes the elasticity of the average cost function is defined as

the elasticity of output with respect to average cost. If this convention

is used, the ADMC elasticities are —28.57 at the mean, —10.59 at one stan-

dard deviation above the mean, and —6.54 at two           standard   deviations above

the mean. The corresponding ATMC elasticities are —32.26, —12.35, and

—7.41.


         390ne explanation of the negative Medicare reimbursement effect is

that the variable is a proxy for the percentage of elderly medical users

who are eligible for Medicare, and         these   users have minor medical prob-

lents. Davis       and Schoen (5) report   that the   elderly poor   are   under—

represented in the population of patients treated in CUCS. This may be

because the    CHCS cannot provide   adequate medical care for some of the

serious     medical problems associated with old age or because the elderly
                                      F — 11




are less mobile than other groups in the population. Hence, elderly medical

users of CHCs probably are relatively healthy. Note that an increase in

the fraction of users ages 65 and over (FM65) leads to a reduction in aver-

age cost.


         40The omission of OHPE or NE slightly weakens the coefficients of

PCPNI because as explained in Section V PCPNI is negatively correlated

with these two variables. But the coefficients of PCPNI retain their

significance at the 10 percent level.


        4mis is the relevant test because the direction of the effect is

unclear   on a priori grounds. To the extent that offsite encounters occur
in hospitals,     they should be more expensive. It is likely, however, that

some of the costs of of fsite encouners are not reported.


        421n the computation of RPAP, the mean of NE divided by the mean of

PCPNI   is   used rather than the mean of WPAP.     The mean of WPP is, however,
almost   identical to NE/PCPNI. The same conmtent applies to the computation

of HOP. As shown     by equations (9) and   (10),   RPAP exceeds RPAP and HOP ex-

ceeds POP. The difference between POP and HOP is larger than that between

RPAP   and RPAP because the standard deviation of other personnel exceeds
that of physician aids and because     the simple correlation between other

personnel and physicians Cr = .880) exceeds that between physician aids

and physicians Cr =     .675).

        43Both Reinhardt (8) and Brown and Lapan (13) make efficiency compu-

tations at sample means rather than making them separately for each physi-

cian and then averaging. In the latter study this may not introduce much
                                    F — 12




bias because equal cost sharing groups are excluded. Note that our inter-

pretation of Brown and Lapan's results differs somewhat from their own

interpretation. They estimate a production function with six inputs and

examine the efficient choice of each input relative to physicians. But

they also compute a weighted (by hours worked) average of the marginal

product of all five aids. From this computation, they conclude that

physicians employ the appropriate number of aids. We question the value

of this calculation since the composite aid input is disaggregated in the

production   function.

       44                                                     for one center
         The marginal product of physician aids is negative

and   that of other personnel is negative for ten centers. Hence, RPAP has

one negative value and ROP has ten negative values. When RPAP is negative,

the inefficiency index is given by a simple average of EPA and a value

slightly greater than the maximum value of EPA for the 324 centers for

whom RPAP is positive. A similar procedure is employed when ROP is nega-

tive. This estimate is used because, if the marginal product of one input

is negative, the inefficiency index may be a misleading indication of the

magnitude of the departure from cost minimization. Since very few centers

have negative marginal products, the results in Sections V.B and V.C are

not sensitive to this procedure.


       45Coefficients of independent variables other than 0MB are not af-

fected by the inclusion of OMBSQ.


       46The Area Resource File is a county—based data service prepared by

Applied Management Sciences, Inc., for the Bureau of Health Professions,

Health Resources Administration, U.S. Department of Health and Human

Services.
                                        F — 13




      471n aU      cases   EPA and EO taken   as   a set are significant determinants

of average cost.


      48Estimates of cost savings are not sensitive to alternative compu—

tational methods. For       example, the estimates are similar to those re-

ported in the text if the computations are made separately for regressions

with EPA   or   EO and then averaged.


      49The exception pertains to the coefficient of private health insur-

ance in regression (12—2).
                                  References



1. Lave, Judith R., and Leinhardt, Samuel. "The Delivery of ambulatory

         Care to the Poor: A Literature Review." Management Science, 19,

         No. 4, Part 2 (December 1972).


2. Hol].ister, Robert M.; Kramer, Bernard M.; and Bellin, Seymour S.

        Neighborhood Health Centers. Lexington, Massachusetts:

         Lexington Books, 1974.

3. Reynolds, Roger A. "Improving Access to Health Care among the Poor —

        The Neighborhood Health Center Experience." The Milbank Memorial

        Fund Quarterly: Health and Society, 54, No. 1 (Winter 1976).

4. Seacat, Milvoy S. "Neighborhood Health Centers: A Decade of Experience."

        Journal of Community Health, 3, No. 2 (Winter 1977).


5. Davis, Karen, and Schoen, Cathy. Health and the War on Poverty.

        Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1978.

6. Plaska, Mary, and Manseau, William J. "A Community Health Center

        Information Guide." U.S. Department of Commerce, National

        Technical Information Service, July    1980.

7. Roemer, Milton I. Ambulatory Health Services in America: Past, Present,

        and Future. Pockville, Maryland: Aspen Systems Corporation, 1981.

8. Reinhardt, Uwe E. "A Production Function for Physician Services."

        Review of Economics and Statistics, 54, No. 1 (February 1972).


9. Kehrer, Barbara H., and Zaretsky, Henry W. "A Preliminary Analysis of

        Allied Health Personnel in Primary Medical Practice." Working

        Paper, American Medical Association, 1972.
                                      R- 2




 10. Smith, Kenneth R.; Miller, Marianne; and Golladay, Frederick L. "An

           Analysis of the Optimal Use of Inputs in the Production of

           Medical Services." The Journal of Human Resources, 7, No. 2

            (Spring 1972).


11. Golladay, Frederick L.; Manser, Marilyn E.; and Smith, Kenneth R.

           "Scale Economies in the Delivery of Medical Care: A Mixed

           Integer Programming Analysis of Efficient Manpower Utiliza-

           tion." The Journal of Human Resources, 9, No. 1 (Winter 1974).


12. Zeckhauser, Richard, and Eliastam, Michael. "The Productivity Poten-

           tial of the Physician Assistant." The Journal of Human Resources,

           9, No. 1 (Winter 1974).


13. Brown, Douglas M., and Lapan, Harvey E. "Analysis of Physicians'

           Input Decisions." In Issues in Physician Reimbursement, edited

           by Nancy T.   Greenspan. U.S. Department of Health and Human
           Services, Health Care Financing Administration, August   1981.

14.   General Accounting Office. "Are Neighborhood   Health Centers Providing

           Services   Efficiently and to the Most Needy?" HRD—77—124,
           June 20, 1978.

15.   Link, Charles R.; Long, Stephen H.; and Settle, Russell F. "The Impact

          of Medicaid and Bureau of Community Health Services Projects on

          Access to Care." Presented at the annual meeting of the American

          Public Health Association, Los Angeles, California, November 1981.

16. Duggar, Benjamin C.; Balicki, Brian; and Zuvekas, Ann. "Costs and

          Utilization Patterns for Comprehensive Health Center Users."

          Presented at the annual meeting of the American Public Health

          Association, Los Angeles,   California, November 1981.
                                     R- 3




17. Goldman, Fred, and Grossman, Michael. "The Responsiveness and Impacts

           of Public Health Policy: The Case of Community Health Centers."

           Presented at the annual meeting of the lunerican Public Health

           Association, Los   Angeles,   California, November 1981.

18.   Shepard, Ronald W. Theory of Cost and Production Functions.
           Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,      1970.




19.   MarschaJ(, Jacob, and Andrews, William H. "Random Simultaneous Equa-
          tions   and the Theory of Production." Econometrica, 12,

          No. 3—4 (July—October 1944).


20. Nerlove, Marc L. Estimation and Identification of Cobb—Douglas

          tion Functions. Chicago: Rand McNally and Company, 1965.

21. Mundlak, Yair. "On Estimation of Production and Behavioral Functions."

          In Studies in Mathematical Economics and Econometrics in Memory

          of Yehuda Greenfeld, edited by Carl Christ. Stanford, California:

          Stanford University Press, 1963.

22. Hoch, Irving J. "Simultaneous Equation Bias in the Context of the

          Cobb—Douglas   Production Function." Econometrica, 26, No. 4
          (October 1958).

23. Konijn, Hendrik, S. "Estimation of an Average Production Function from
          Surveys." Economic Record, 35,      No. 70 (April   1959).

24. Griliches, Zvi. "Estimates of the       Aggregate Agricultural Production

          Function   from Cross—Sectional Data." Journal of Farm Economics,
          45, No. 2 (May 1963).
                                   R- 4



25. Feldstein, Martin S. Economic Analysis for Health Service Efficiency.

          Chicago: Markham Publishing Company, 1968.

26. Boaz, Rachel F. "Manpower Utilization by Subsidized Family Planning

          Clinics: An Economic Criterion for Determining the Professional

          Skill—Mix." The Journal of Human Resources, 7, No. 2 (spring

          1972).


27. Pauly, Mark V. Doctors and Their Workshops. Chicago: University of

          Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1980.


28. Leibenstein, Harvey.. "Allocative Efficiency versus 'X—Efficiency'."

         American Economic Review, 56, No. 2 (June 1966).

29. Welch, Finis. Education in Production." Journal of Political Economy,

         78, No. 1 (January/February 1970).

30. Johnston, Jack. Statistical Cost Analysis. New York: McGraw Hill

         Book Company, 1960.


31. Friedman, Milton. Price Theory. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company,

         1962.


32. Walters, Alan A. "Production and Co8t Functions: An Econometric Survey."

         Econometrjca, 31, No. 1—2 (January—April 1963).

33. Stigler, George J. The Theory of Price. New York: The Macmillan

         Company, 1966.

34. Becker, Gary S. Economic Theory. New York: Alfred A. lCnopf, 1971.

35. Chiswick, Barry R. "Hospital Utilization: An Analysis of SMSA Differ-

         ences in Occupancy Rates, Admission Rates, and Bed Rates."

         Explorations in Economic Research, 3, No. 3 (Summer 1976).
                                          R- 5


36.   DuBois, Donald M.       "Group Medical Practice: Determinants of Success or

           Failure." Ph.D. dissertation, University of California at

           Los    Angeles,   1966.


37. Patinkin, Don. "Multiple—Plant Firms, Cartels and            Imperfect   Competi-

           tion" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 61, No. 2

           (February      1947).

3.    Friedman,   Milton. "Comment on Caleb A. Smith's 'Survey of the Empir-
           ical Evidence on        Economies of Scale'." In   Business Concentration
          and Price Policy. Princeton,         New Jersey: Princeton University

          Press    for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1955.

39. Bureau of Community Health Services. "Instruction Manual for the BCHS
          Common Reporting Requirements." U.S.        Department of Health,
          Education,      and Welfare, Public Health Service, January 1980.

40. Bureau of Community Health Services. "Neighborhood Health Centers,

          Summary    of   Project Data, Report 16." U.S. Department of Health,

          Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, April 1978.

41. Bureau of Community Health Services. "Instruction Manual for Neigh—

          borhood Health Center Reporting Requirements." U.S. Department

          of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service,

          October 1975.
