NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON CONSUMPTION—INDEXED PUBLIC PENSION PLANS

Robert C. Merton

Working Paper No. 910

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
June 1982

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #910
June 1982

ON CONSUMPTION—INDEXED PUBLIC PENSION PLANS

ABSTRACT

Using the known result that life—cycle investors will optimally hold
portfolios whose returns are perfectly correlated with aggregate consumption,
this paper uses a simple intertemporal general equilibrium model to explore
the merits and feasibility of pension plans where both accumulations and
benefits are linked to aggregate per capita consumption. Although the
analysis is made within the framework of a public pension plan, it applies
equally well to organized private pension plans where participation is
virtually mandatory and where individually designed programs are not practical. An additional feature of the plans examined is that they provide
for life annuities during both the accumulation and retirement phases of the
life cycle.

Robert C. Merton
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Building E52/Room 243D
02139
Cambridge, MA
(617) 253—6617

ON CONSUNPTlON-li'I)EXED PUBLIC PENSION PLANS

Robert C. Merton
Massachusetts Institute of

Technology

I. Introduction
Most economists using a standard life cycle analysis would probably
agree that the primary objective of a pension system is to provide a
standard of living in retirement comparable to that enjoyed during the

working years. There is, nevertheless, considerable disagreement as to
how that objective can best be achieved. Broadly, the disagreements are
on the appropriate roles for private pension plans and a public pension
plan in the pension system and on whether or not the pension system

should also be used for redistribution or transfers. The most elegant
approach to the problem would undoubtedly be to solve for the optimal overall
pension system with a simultaneous determination of the optimal forms for

both the public and private parts. However, the analysis here ismore
limited in its scope because its focus is principally on the public part
of the system and because it examines only one of the many possible
functions that such a system might serve in any real—world implementation.

That is, the sole intent of the system is assumed to be the retirement
objective, and not, for example, to also provide for a redistribution

of wealth. The paper should thus be viewed as only a prologue to a more
complete functional analysis of the overall pension system including
the important issue of the degree of integration between private and
public pension plans.

Analysis of the public part of the system is a natural starting
place because whatever form the overall pension system takes, it will

—2—

surely include a significant public pension plan coniponent. As will be
discussed, there are a number of thecretical arguments to support such

a component as part of an optimal system. Moreover, as a practical
matter independent of any theoretical welfare arurnents that economists
might provide to the contrary, the public pension system in the United
States, after almost half a century of operating experience, is not
going to be eliminated, especially when a significant fraction of the

population is not covered by any private pension plan. The current
problems with Social Security do however, present the possibility for

major changes in the structure of the public pension system. It would
therefore seem to be somewhat difficult to analyze the optima]. design

of private pension plans and the associated issue of integration until
the structure of the public system is more firmly established.
In theory, the characteristic differences between a public and a
private pension system are that participation in a public system is

mandatory and that the public system cannot be "custom tailored" to

meet the specific preferences of each individual participant. Such a
clear distinction is valid if the private system were solely laisse faire

individual saving. However, as the private system has in fact evolved,
the operational significance of this distinction, at least at the level

of analysis presented here, is less clear. Participation in most
existing private pension plans is virtually mandatory. In a typical
defined—contribution plan, individual choice is quite limited as to the
amounts contributed and where the funds are invested, and in defined—

benefit plans, there is typically no choice at all. The analysis

—3.--

presented here in the context of a public system is therefore readily
adaptable to an "organized" private pension system.

The arguments for a public pension system with mandatory

participation fall into two basic categories: externalities and

private market "failure" An important example of the former is the
utility externality that other people's welfare is one of the arguments

of individual utility functions. That is, people care about others and
among other things, will not let them starve in retirement. From this,
we get a classical example of the "free—rider" problem which cannot be
solved by the private markets, but can be solved by an appropriately

designed mandatory public pension system. A second example is the
possibility of economies of scale in information costs. Virtually
everyone faces the decision problem of how much to save for retirement

and what to invest those savings in during their working years. The
marginal cost of obtaining the education and gathering the necessary
data to make informed decisions as well as the time spent implementing
these decisions will, of course, vary substantially across individuals

as a function of their prior education and their wealth. Presumably,
a professor of finance by virtue of his training would have a lower
marginal cost than, a professor of physics. The cost of buying the
service of informed decisions will be lower (as a percentage of wealth)

for those who are wealthy than for those of modest means. While this
cost could be reduced by "pooling," this solution almost assumes away
the problem because such an undertaking requires adequate information
and opportunity to form a cohesive group.

—4.-

If therefore, a pension plan were designed which reasonably
approximates the plan which most individuals would choose if they were
informed, then by making participation in the plan mandatory, the
resources used in individual education and data gathering would be
saved and th maximuni benefits of pooling to reduce operating costs

could be achieved. The benefits of such mandatory participation must,
of course, he compared to the cost in terms of loss in individual

freedom of choice. As already noied, existing private pension plans
permit little choice. Although this data point favors the hypothesis
that the benefits outweigh the costs, it is hardly a sufficient basis
for a policy decision.

The second basiccategory of arguments for a public pension plan

is that the efficiency of risk—bearing can e improved. That is, the
government can provide diversification possibilities which are not
available in the private markets, and thereby, issue finanical

instruments which the private sector cannot. One example would be
intergenerational risk sharing which cannot be covered by private

markets (cf. Fischer (1982)). Another would be to use either taxes
and transfers (cf. Nerton (1981)) or taxes and the issue of securities
within the pension system to provide diversification of some of the
risks of assets which are not tradeable (as is the case for much of
human capital).
With these general reasons for a public pension plan as background,
the consumption—indexed plan to be studied is briefly summarized before
turning to a formal analysis in the context of a simple intertemporal

—5—

equilibrium model in Section II. This is then followed in Section III,
by a discussion of the merits and feasibility of such plans.

The plan is a mandatory fully—funded savings plan of the "defined
contribution" type where required contributions by each member of the

plan are a fixed proportion of his consumption. As with current private
defined—contribution plans, each member has an individual account which
is credited with his contributions (less any deduction for operating
expenses of the plan).
Contributions and earnings in each member's account are invested in
"aggregate per capita consumption—indexed life annuities" where these
are defined to be an instrument which pays a constant fraction of
aggregate per capita consumption to its holder (the member) each period
and

such payments begin at a prespecified commencement date (the

date at which the member begins to receive his benefits) and continue

until the member dies. If the member dies before the commencement date,
the annuity is worthless. Benefits, therefore, are in the form of a
life annuity indexed to aggregate per capita consumption.

The commencement date for benefits is at a specified age (e.g., age

60), independent of whether or not the recipient has retired. This
provision is to avoid possibly undesirable distortions of the decision

to retire. However, provision could be made for delaying the receipt of
benefits to a later age. Contributions are mandatory from some
statuatory beginning age (e.g., age 21) until the commencement date.

One way to administer such a plan would be to create a public
corporation which would be responsible for issuing the indexed

—6—

life—annuities to plan members where these annuities would

its

constitute

senior liabilities. The US government iou]d he the residual

liability or equityholder of the corporation and would have unlimited

liability. The assets of the corpcrtion come from inmber contributions
and are invested in the broadest available portfolio of marketable
securities.

The number of units of life annuities issued to an account is on
a "mark—to—market" basis at the time each contribution is received.
That is,

the value of a unit of a life annuity issued is determined by

current market prices and mortality tables. To make this possible, it
would be necessary for the government to issue aggregate per capita
consumption—indexed bonds of various maturities.

To prevent attempts to circumvent mandatory participation in the
plan, retirement benefits are assumed to be neither assignable nor

attachable. For similar reasons, integration of private pension plans
with the public plan are permitted, but only to the extent that the combined
benefits received by the individual arc no less than he would have
received from the public plan alone.

—7—

II. A Simple Intertemporal Equilibrium Model
In this section, a continuous—time consumption choice model of the
type presented in Merton (1971) and (1973) is used to analyze the
system of mandatory saving and consumption—linked retirement benefits.
Consider an economy where all people have the same lifetime utility

of consumption which is given for a person born at time t0 by

r

0

(1)

I

Et

Jc(s;s — t0)j

—p(s—t0)

ds

J
to

Y<1

where c(t;T) is consumption at time t of a person of age T and

E

is the conditional expectation operator conditional on knowing all

relevant information available as of time t. Each person has an uncertain
lifetime where

denotes the random variable age of death, and the

probability that the person will die between I

on being alive at age I

is

and

i

+ dT, conditional

given by X(T)dT where ACt) >

0.

Each

person acts so as to maximize (1) subject to his initial wealth w0
If the event of death is independent of other economic variables,
then along the lines of the proof of Theorem VI in NertOn (1971, p. 400),
we can rewrite (1) as:

-8—

ii

r

(2)

E f

where f(-r;T')

conditional

f(s —

is

—r(s—t0)

ds

t0;O)e

the probability that the person will be alive at age T

on being alive at age T'.

satisfies
(3)

Ic(s;s -. t0)J

f(T;T')

= exp

[

f

By the definition of X(T),

f

?(s)ds]

By assumption, each person has no bequest function. Hence, it will

be optimal for each person to enter into a life annuity contract where
his wealth goes to the issuer if he dies and he receives a payment if he

lives. One such arrangement would be a series of "short—term" contracts

where at age T, he agrees to bequeath his wealth, w(t;T), to the issuer
if he dies between T

and

T

+ di and the issuer agrees to pay him a

"dividend" D dt if he lives. If there are a large enough number of
people in the economy to diversify away completely the risk of
individual deaths and if the contracts (like futures contracts) require
no side payments between issuer and purchaser, then the competitive

equilibrium "dividend" will be X(T)w(t;T)dt.
In addition to the annuity contract, the person will choose an
optimal portfolio allocation of his wealth. As shown for example in
Nerton (1971), the fractions of his optimal portfolio allocated to the
available investments are independent of his wealth or age because his

—9—

utility function is of the isoeltic form. Therefore, all investors in
the economy will hold identical portfolios (except for scale). Heice,
without loss of generality, I assume that all people invest in a single

security, and the rate of return on this security, dM/M, is assumed to
follow an Ito Process given by

4=ct+z

(4)

where the instantaneous expected rate of return

cr., and the instantaneous

variance of the return o2, are constants over time. it follows from (4)
that the return on this security is lognormally distributed. Moreover,
as a necessary condition for equilibrium, this security must be a

"market portfolio," i.e., a portfolio which contains all available
investments and holds them in proportion to their market values.

The accumulation equation for the wealth of a person of age T

at

time t can, therefore, be written as
dw(t;T) =

[(X(T)-fcz)w(t;T)-c(t;T))dt-fcTw(t;T)dz

(5a)

if he does not die between t ond t + dt, and as
(5b)

dw(t;T) = — w(t;T)

if he dies between t and t +

dt.

Along th2 lines of the derivation in Merton (1971, p. 390), the optimal

consumption demand for a person of age t a time t can be written as
(6a)

c(t;T) =

a(T)w(t;T)

where a(T) is a solution to the differential equation

—i o—

=

(6b)

â(r)

a(-t) + X(T)

a (T)

with p

+p

Ep— yctj/(l — y) + -yo212 y inspection, optimal consumption

is a function of both wealth and age, and the marginal propensity to
consume (out of wealth) will be an increasing function of age if 3(T)
Similarly, the distribution

of

> 0.

a person's wealth who is alive at time

t + s given his wealth at time t, will not only depend upon his wcalth

at time t and the return experience on his portfolio between t and
t + s but also on his age at time t
Using It&'s Lemma, we have from (6) that

(7)

dc(t;°T)

c(t;T)

dw(t;T) + (T)
a(T)
w(t;T)

dt

Conditional upon the person not dying between t and dt, we have by
substitution from (5) and (6) that (7) can be rewritten as

(8)

de(t; 'r)

c(t;-r)

=

(ci—

p)dt +

odz

and of course, if he dies then dc(t;T)/c(t;-r) =

-1.

By inspection of

(8), the dynamic path of a person's optimal lifetime consumption follows
a Narkov process, independent of either his wealth or his age (except

for the "stopping point"). That is, given his consumption at time t,

c(t;T), his concumption (if alive) at time t + s has a lognormal
distribution which can be represented by
(9)

c(t + s;T + s) =

c(t;T)exp[(ct

—

p)s +

c}

—ii—

where c is a standard normal random variable. Thus, unlike the
percentage change in wealth which is age dependent, the percentage

change in consumption is the same for all people alive. It follows,
therefore, that
c(t + s;T + s)
c(t;T)

(10)

c(t + s;T'
c(t;T')

s)

for ell people alive at tine t + s and T,T' > 0.
Armed with (8) and (10), we can now proceed to derive the dynamic

properties of aggregate per capita consumption, C(t). If L(t;r)
denotes the number of people of age T in the economy at time t,
then the total population size, L(t), equals

fL(t;T)dT. Therefore,

aggregate per capita consumption is equal to

C(t) =

(11)

f

L(t;T)c(t;T)dT

/L(t)

0

If the birthrate at time t i given by b(t), then the change in
aggregate per capita consumption is given by

(12)

dc(t) =

f

L(t;T)dc(t;T)dT

/L(t) -

H(t)C(t)dt

0

where• 11(t)

{b(t)[C(t) -

c(t;0)]

A(T)L(t;T)[C(t) -

c(t;T))dT/L(t)}/C(t).

The properties of 11(t) are, of course, dependent upon demographic
assumptions. However, they also depend upon the distribution of
consumption per capita. If, for example, the distribution of per capita

—1 2-

consuaption were uniform [i.e., c(t;T)
11(t) =

0,

C(t), for all T}, then

independent of demcgraphics. In a stable population

X(T)L(t;T)dT/L(t)1
[b(t)

0

H(t) =

X(T)L(t;T)[c(t;0)

—

c(t;T)]dT/[L(t)C(t)],

and the

sign of H

will depend primarily on the distribution of per capita consumption
between the very young and the 'ery old (where the marginal death rate,

X(T), is largest). If that distribution is approximately equal
[c(t; 0)

c(t;T) for large T] and the population is growing, then the

sign of H(t) will equal the sign of [C(t) —

c(t;0)],

the difference

between the general population per capita consumption and per capita
consumption of the very young.

Even without taking into account the interaction between population
growth and economic conditions, the analysis of stochastic demographic

models is formidable. And, while the death rate (at least in the
shortrun) may be exogeneous, the birth rate is surely affected by economic

conditions. Therefore, although explicit consideration of the process

for H(t) is important for many issues in this paper, no such analysis
will be undertaken here. Instead, I simply postulate that H(t) =

O.--'

If H(t) = 0, then we have by substitution from (8) that (12) can
be rewritten as

—13—

dC(t)

-

=

{ [J L(t;T)c(t;T)dT]/L(t)}[(a

)dt + odzj

(13)

=

(a — ij)C(t)dt + 0C(t)dz

A comparison of (8) with (13) shows that (except for scale), each
person's optimal consumption follows a stochastic process identical to

the one for aggregate per capita consumption. That is, conditional on
being alive at time

t + dt, dc(t;T)/c(t;T) =

dC(t)/C(t),

of the person's age T. Therefore, we have for person j

independent
that his

consumption (if he is alive) at time t can be written as

c.(t) =

(14)

3

where ,.
J

E

.C(t)
J

c(t.;O)/C(t ) and r
J

is his birth date.

j

j

Consider now a mandatory saving and retirement plan where

beginning at age T0, each person must contribute at rate

times his

consumption until at age T1, the person begins to receive his life
annuity retirement benefits. During the accumulation period of

length Ta

T1 — T0, each person's contribution is invested in a per

capita aggregate consumption—linked life annuity contract matched to his
age at the time of the contribution.

Let A(t,T;T1) denote the equilibrium price at time t of a life
annuity contract which begins its payments at age T1 and the purchaser
is currently age T. The promised stream of payments is equal to C(s)
per unit time from time s =

t

+ T1 — T

until the purchaser dies. Let

P(t;T) denote the equilibrium price at time

t of a consumption—linked

—1 "i —

pure discount bond of maturity T which pays $C(t

i) at time t + T.

If, as has been assumed, indivda1 death risk can be diversified away,
then the competitive equilibrium price for A can be written as

(15)

f(s + T1;T)P(t;s + T1 — T)ds

A(t,T;T1)

where, as previously defined, f(T;T') is the probability of being

alive at age T conditional on being alive at age T'.
For the economy of this section, an explicit fo-rrnula for the P(t;T)

can be derived by competitive arbitrage. From (13),

t+T
C(t + T) =

C(t)exp

—

p

+ a2)T + a f

dz(s)]

realized return on the discount bond between t and

Therefore, the

+ T is
t+r

C(t + T)/p(t;T) =

However, from (

4),

C(t)eT/P(t;T)

exp [(

-

a) + of

dz(s)]

the return per dollar from investing in the market

portfolio between t and t + T is

exp [(ci —

- 04)T + 0f dz(s)]

Therefore, to avoid arbitrage, P(t;t) must satisfy

(16)

P(t;t) =

C(t)eT

It follows from (.16), that the instantaneous rate of return on the bond,

dP/P dt + adz, is the same as on the market. Substituting for P
from (16), we can re'rite (15) as

—15—

(17)

C(t)e

A(t,T;T1)

—p(T 1-T)

j

ef(s + T1;T)ds

(-I

Moreover, it is straightforward to show that for T < T1

[a + ?(T)]dt + cdz

(18)

if the owner of the contract is alive at t + dt and dA/A = —l

if the owner dies between t and t

dt.

Let V(t;T) denote the value of the accumulated retirement account

for a person of age T at. time t. Under this retirement plan
with accumulations in units of a consumption—linked life annuity, the
value can be expressed as

V(t;T) =

(19)

N(T)A(t,T;

T1)

where N(T) equals the number of units accumulated at age T. By
Ito's Lemma, dV

and dV

N(t)dA + I(T)Adt if the person lives to time t + dt

—v if he dies between t and t + dt. Under the mandatory

saving plan, I(T)A(t,T;T1) = cSc(t;T)
c(t;T)

and N(T0) = 0.

From (14),

C(t), and if the retirement plan is designed to provide

fraction r (0 <

<

consumption, then

cS

1)

of the person's optimal retirement period

should be chosen so that at retirement, the number

of units accumulated, N(T1), equals r.
If the retirement plan is fully—funded and actuarially fair, then

at age T0, the present value of the future contributions by the person
should be equal to the present value of the annuity payments to be

received

ir retirement. Under the terms of the mandatory saving plan,

—16—

3C(t) (as long as
the person will contribute at the rate ,c(t;
Therefore, at age T0 , the
he is alive) until he reaches T1
T)

present

value of his future contributions, F(t;T0), is given by
T -"

f

F(t;T0)

f(s

+

f(s

+ T0;T0)P(t;s)ds

0;T0)P(t;s)]ds

T

(20)

= f

If the plan is to provide N(T1) r units in retirement, then the
present value of these retirement benefits at age T0 is

F(t; T0) =

A(t,T0;T1)

,

and from (15) and (20), we have that

Jf(s + T1;T0)P(t;s + T)dS

fl

(21)

must be chosen such that

Therefore,

nM(t;T0;T1)

6
T

f f(s

+ T0;T0)P(t;s)ds

Substituting for P from (16), we can rewrite (21) as
-pT

°
+

T1;T0)eds

f f(s +

T0;T0)eds

aff(
(22)

By inspection of (22), the required contribution fraction does not

—17—

depend upon endowments or the individual contributor's age. It does,
of course, depend upon the statuatory retirement age T1 ,

the

accumulation period Ta, and the target fraction of retirement period
consumption provided by the plan, r .

Therefore,

can be kept

constant over time, and still meet the objectives of the plan. The
only changes required would be in response to large cumulative changes

in the mortality tables f or

1, and these would probably be infrequent.

Moreover, because the plan is fully—funded and accumulations earn a

fair market return, such changes in f or p that might occur will
were not adjusted over time.

cause no significant distortions even if

To provide a crude estimate of the magnitude of ,

following: (i) the accumulation period Ta = 45 years;

I

assume the

(ii) during the

accumulation period, the mortality rate is a constant, I ,

equal

to

.0138 per year; (iii) during the retirement period, the mortality rate
is a constant, A ,

equal to .0666 per year and that, in no event, will

anyone live longer than thirty years after retirement. The average
rate of growth of aggregate per capita real consumption from 1947 to

1981 is approximately two percent per year. If the expected real rate
of return on all wealth in the economy, a ,
then from (13), we derive an estimate for

iS

taken to be four percent,

p of two percent.

Substituting these numbers into (22), we have that
(23)

.10 ri

That is, to provide for all of retirement consumption (r = 1)

would

require about a ten percent contribution rate. While such a rate may
scam large (requiring contrIbutions of the order of $200 billion in 1981),

—18—

ten

percent is a common contributioa rate (on income) in mn c::istiug

private defined—contribution plan3, and the current (iiaximum)

contribution

rate for Keogh Plans is fifteen percent. To provide

further perspective, I would also note that the combined omp1oye—
employer

contributions to

at an annual rate of $245

Social Security in

billion. It is,

fourth

quarter 1981 as

of course, unlikely that a

public pension plan would be expected to provide for all retirement
consumption and therefore, the necessary contribution rate would he
considerably less than ten percent.

—19—

III. On the Merits and Feasibility of a Consumption—
Indexed Public Plan
While the analysis in the previous section demonstrates a consumption—
indexed public retirement plan, it is presented within the context of a

model where such plans crc redundant. That is, with perfect markets for
both assets and annuities, no utility externalities, and rational and
informed people, there is, of course, no need for such public intervention.
From this base, however, imperfections can be introduced to provide at

least a qualitative analysis of the benefits of the plan for comparison
with alternative plans if, and when, such intervention were deemed appropriate.
For example, a significant feature of this plan is that
contributions be invested in aggregate consumption—linked life annuities.

If important assets within the economy such as human capital and real
estate are either nontradeable or not available in divisible lots, then
even a broad—based portfolio of tradeable assets will not provide a

fully—efficient diversified portfolio. However, an individual's
consumption is likely to be strongly correlated with his wealth (or
permanent income) whether that wealth is tradeable or not, and
therefore, a security whose return is perfectly—correlated with
aggregate par capita consumption is likely to represent a better—
diversified holding than a portfolio containing only marketable

securities. Moreover, even when all securities are traded, Breeden
(1979) has shown that all efficient portfolios will be perfectly—
correlated with aggregate consumption.

If there are systematic differences among large segments of the
population as to the types of nontradeable assets they hold, then it

—20-

is possible to improve diversification efficiency still further.

An

example would be that the young in the economy are forced to hold too
large a fraction of their wealth in human capital because ft is not
tradeable while the old huld tou small a fraction in human capital

because they cannot buy it. As I have shown elsewhere (1981), risk—
bearing can be improved by a system that taxes wages and pays wage—

linked retirement benefits. However, as that analysis amply demonstrates,
such further diversification gains are earned at the expense of having a
"pay-as—you-go" retirement system with a risk of significant distortions
from the associated taxes and transfers.

Diamond (1977) has suggested that one reason for a Social Security
system is the absence in the private markets of "real" or "indexed"
investments by which people of normal means can accumulate savings for

retirement. However, "real" fixed—income bonds would only protect such

savers against the uncertainties of inflation. They would not protect
the saver against the risk of real increases in the standard of living.
As shown in Table 1, real per capita consumption in the United States
has increased at an average rate of 1.96 percent per year from 1947 to

1981. Moreover, the annual standard deviation of that growth rate is

1.68 percent. Hence, if a person's sense of "how well off he is"
depends not only on the absolute level of his consumption, but also on
its level relative to those around him, then the risk in utility—terms
of a price—level—linked investment can be considerable, especially over

a long accumulation period. A consumption—linked investment protects
against both inflation and real changes in the standard of living. It

—21—

TABLE 1

Lev1s and Growth Rates
US

2/

Aggregate Real Consumption and Over—Age—16 Population—
1947 — 1981

Aggregate Consumption
(billions/1972 $)

%Change

Year

Level

1947

305.8

———

1948
1949

312.2
319.3

2.1
2.3

1950
1951
1952

337.3
341.6
350.1
363.4
370.0
394.1
405.4
413.8
418.0
440.4

5.6
1.3
2.5

1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981

452.0
461.4
482.0
500.5
528.0
557.5
585.7
602.7
634.4
657.9
672.1
696.8
737.1
768.5
763.6
780.2
823.7
863.9
904.8
930.9
935.1
958.9

3.8
1.8
6.5
2.9
2.1
1.0

5.4
2.6
2.1

4.5
3.8
5.5
5.6
5.1
2.9
5.3
3.7
2.2
3.7
5.8
4.3
—0.6
2.2
5.6
4.9
4.7
2.9
0.5
2.5

Population
(millions)

Lee1

Change

103.4
104.5
105.6

———

106.6
107.7
108.8
110.6
111.7
112.7
113.8
115.1
116.4
117.9
119.8
121.3
123.0
125.2
127.2
129.2
131.2
133.3
135.6
137.8
140.2
142.6
145.8
148.2
150.8
153.4
156.0
158.6
161.1
163.6
166.2
168.6

1.0
1.0
1.0

1.1
1.0

1.6
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.1

1.3
1.6
1.3
1.3

1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7
2.2
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.6

1.6
1.6
1.6
1.4

Per Capita Consumption
(thousands/1972 $)

Level

Z(Thnge

2.957
2.987
3.023

———

3.163
3.171
3.217
3.286
3.313
3.496
3.562
3.596
3.592
3.736
3.774
3.802
3.919
3.999
4.150
4.314
4.465
4.521
4.680
4.773
4.794
4.887
5.056
5.183
5.063
5.084
5.279
5.448
5.618
5.689
5.625
5.688

4.6
0.3

1.0
1.2
1.5

2.1

0.8
5.5
1.9
1.0

—0.1
4.0
1.0
0.7

3.1
2.0
3.8
3.9
3.5

1.3
3.5
2.0
'0.5
1.9
3.5
2.5

—2.3
0.4
3.8
3.2
3.1
1.3
-1.1
1.1

Average Growth Rate

3.44%

1.45%

1.96%

Standard Deviation

1.75%

0.32%

1.68%

—22--

has

the further practical advantage of avoiding the index problem

because it is not necessary to distinguish between nominal and

real

changes.

In another context, Fischer (1982) argues that the government

should issue wage—income—linked bonds. hi1e it is likely that such
bonds would be a superior to price—level—linked bonds for most saving
plans, at least in theory, they may not be as efficicnt as consumption—

linked bonds. One reason is that changes in wage income capture the
returns to only one segment (albeit an important one) of national

wealth while consumption changes depend upon all segments. A second
reason is that wage income is more likely to have a significant transient
component than is consumption since by the Life Cycle Hypothesis,

consumption depends upon permanent income or wealth. How important
the difference would be between wage—income and consumption linked

bonds is, of course, an empirical matter, and one that warrants further
study.

There are relatively limited opportunities in existing private
markets to accumulate savings in life annuities and none wrere those

savings are invested in consumption—linked investments. In the absence
of such instiuments, the individual may be forced to save too much

relative to his bequest motive. By investing contributions in life
annuities, the proposed plan permits a person to accumulate adequate

amounts for retirement with smaller contributions. The additional
available funds from this reduced contribution rate can be used either

for more current consumption or to purchase life insurance or other

—23—

saving instruments to meet heuest motives. Thia

feature

is esuecially

important in a mandatory saving plan because, for the same

target

level

of retirement benefits, it reduces the welfare—loss of the plan to those
in

poor

health or those who have no bequest motive.

A second significant feature of tite pl.an is that retiiement benefits

are linked to aggregate per capita consumption. The arguments in favor
of consumption—linked benefits are essentially the same as those given

for consumption—linked accumulations. So, for example, while a number of
people including Diamond (1977), have argued for real or price—indexed
fixed annuities for retirement benefits, per capita consumption—linked
benefits are likely to dominate such annuities because they protect the
retiree against both the uncertainties in the inflation rate and changes
in the standard of living.

The success of a consumption—indexed plan (whether public or
private) depends critically on the existence of per capita aggregate

consumption—linked bonds. In their absence, administrators of the plan
'ould be required to estimate the "fair market value't of such bonds in

order to determine how many units to credit each account with during
the accumulation period and to determine how much to pay in benefits
during retirement.

I need hardly mention the extreme difficulties

associated with making these appraisals especially when such instruments

have never traded. Moreover, for a public plan, there would likely be
times when strong political pressure would be brought to bear on the

administrators to "adjusc" their appraisals. Even if such pressure were
in fact resisted, the mere prospect of a potential "conflict of interest"
could taint the entiie sysLem.

—2—

In thcory, the private sector could create a market for per capita
aggregate consumption—linked
annuities through financial

bonds and provide cocsumption—linked life

intermediaries.

Some might indeed argue

that the fact that such instrune.nts have not been created is strong
evidence

in favor of the hvpothes that there is no need for them.

However, if this hypothesis is correct, then there must already exist
close surrogates for these instruments in the market since, as suggested
for

example by Breeden's (1979) analysis, there is a strong theoretical

foundation for the belief that an aggregate consumption—linked security

would he widely demanded. I know of no such combination of available
securities.

There is, of course, the alternative hypothesis that the nonexistence

of such instruments is an example of private market "failure." That is,
even thcugh there would be a demand for these instruments, there is

insufficient incentive for investment bankers, for example, to undertake
the costs of educating both purchasers and issuers especially when the
latter have no assets which are naturally matched to this type of

liability. Similarly in the absence of a "thick" market for consumption—
linked bonds, financial intcrmediaries would likely be reluctant to
issue such annuity liabilities because there is no asset which can be

purchased to hedge these liabilities. Of course, some intermediaries
might be induced to take some limited amount of risk without being
hedged, but this limited amount would surely be inadequate for the

scale required for pension plans. On the other hand, it appears that
the government is a "natural" intermediary to issue consumptionlinked
bonds because it has available the power to tax expenditures. That is,

—25—

the govcrnmenL could institute a cOflsuiptiOfl tax proportion to the

number of consumption—linked

'ooctds

outstanding ajid

the revenues from

the tax wo'ild exactly match the required liability payments. Moreover,
there appears to be no significant social cost to the government
issuing

consumption-i inked bonds mid there may be social benefits from

the government financing the deficit in this form. Vhile the principal

reason for discussing the creation of such bonds here is their essential
role in pension plans, I believe that, independent of pension plans,
consumption—linked bonds would be an ideal investment instrument f or
private saving generally.
did

issue

If

this belief is correct and if the government

such bonds, then it is likely that private financial inter-

mediaries would introduce consumption—linked annuities and corporations

would issue consumption—linked liabilities. The existence of such
private—sector financial instruInerts wbuld serve to make consumption—

indexed pension plans more efficient by providing better pricing
information for the plans' annuities and by providing a broader—base
of securities in which to invest the plans' assets.

Even if the private sector could efficiently provide consumption—
linked bonds and life annuities, as noted in the Introduction, private
pension plans alone cannot handle either information cost or utility

externalities. While it is of course difficult to measure how other
people's welfare enter into an individual's utility function, I believe

that it is likely to do so in a relative fashion. That is, we are less
inclined to "worry about" or make transfers to those who have a

relatively high tandard of living, and among those with the same
current standard of living, we are more sympathetic towards those who

have fal3en on "hard times" and expericuced a decline from tieir

historical standard of living. If this 3sscssment is correct, then
a public plan along the lines discussed here appears to efficiently
hndlc this utility externality for people in rotl ement. By requlring
contributions proportional to individual consumption during his working
years

life

and investing these contributions in per

capita consumption—linked

annuities, such a plan ensures an accumulated amount sufficient to

support a retirement consumption path for the individual at a level

(relative to aggregate per capita consumption) similar to that which he

enjoyed during the working phase of his life. Linking benefits to per
capita aggregate consumption provides for a continuation of this standard

of living throughout the retirement years. Thus, a plan with these
features meets the objective of ensuring an appropriate relative standard
of living in retirement for everyone and it handles the "free—rider"
prob lenm.

These features do not, of course, solve the redistribution problem
for those people whose relative standard of living is too low during

their work years. However, a reasonable argument can be made that it is
more efficient to make the necessary transfers by other more—direct

means at

the time (during the working years) when they are

needed instead

of attempting to do so indirectly by redistributing future benefits

within the retirement plan. There are other good economic arguments
for keeping the transfer system and the retirement system separate, but

that is not the focus of this paper. I would note however, that the
plan analyzed here would automatically handle much of the redistribution

—27—

problem for people in their retircment years if a proper transfer
system ware devised for people during their working years. Transfers
received and consumed during the working years will

increase

future

retirement bonefits proportionately because the reuircd contributions
to the plan are proportional to consumption. Transfers in
a

the

form of

total or partial credit for the individual's required contribution

to his retirement account would work in a similar fashion, provided

that the cost of this transfer is not borne by the retirement plan itself.
ilaving reviewed the merits of a consumption—indexed pension plan,

I now turn to the issue of its feasibility. Although the idea of
investing accumulations in consumption-linked life annuities is new,
the basic structure of the, plan is simple and is essentially the smne

as a standard defined—contribution pension plan. It is therefore a
relatively easy plan to explain and understand. Its format also has the
attraction of "stability" in the sense that neither its basic structure
nor the parameters of the structure such as the contribution rate or the
period of accumulation would require much change over time even in the

face of significant variations in economic conditions. It does however
require that an appropriate measure for aggregate per capita consumption

be ehosen.-" To select the proper measure would require further study to
determine how consumer durable purchases should be treated and whether
or not to include items such as leisure time which are not normally

included in measures of consumption. There is also the issue of what

population neasure to use. While investigation of these issues is
surely beyond the scope of this paper, their resolution is as surely not

—2 —

on

insurmountable problem. With this nicasuremrnt problem solved, there

does

not appear

to be any major difficulty with the government issuLnc

consumption—linked bonds

and using their prices to determine the value

of consumption—linked life annuities.
The. main feasibility problems with a public plan as described here

are likely to be associated with the method of collecting the required
contributions and the maintenailce of the individual accumulation

accounts. While 1 have not investigated in detail the amount of computation
and record keeping required in the current Social Security system, it

appears that the amount required for individual account maintenance would

not be significantly larger for a consumption—linked plan. However, the
mechod of collection in such a plan is likely to be more difficult than
for current Social Security because the base is consumption rather than

income. As outlined, the plan requires that the amount of each contribution
be identifiable in the same way that individual federal income tax

payments are identified. Therefore, the method of collection necessary
for its implementation would probably be like that of the income tax
with consumption determined as the residual from a cash flow analysis.
The feasibility of such a collection system is currently a topic of
considerable discussion among economists principally in the context of
the feasibility of an individual expenditure tax (cf. Aaron and Boskin

(eds.) (1980) and Pechman (ed.) (1980)). Although a serious analysis
of feasibility will not be undertaken here, I would note that there is
an important difference between an expenditure tax and the mandatory

contribution part of a fully—funded retirement plan. Because it is a

— •) U_

defined—contribution

plan and accumulations earn a competitive rate,

cheating is less of •a problem to the extent that people treat contributions

as saving and not as a tax. Indeed, the rich, high—income, and well—
informed people who might be Lhought to have the greatest incentive and
opportunity to cheat on a tax are probably the most likely to view sucji

contributions

as saving, since these are the people who now voluntarily

enter into deferred compensation and Keogh plans. In general, those
who cheat on contributions are primarily cheating themselves. However,
one slight modification which might make the collection part of the plan
more effective would be to have withholding of the required contribution
based upon income as is currently the practice for Social Security, and
then to have refunds or additional contributions based upon the

computation of consumption made in conjunction with the filing of
federal income tax returns.

A more—radical modification of the plan as described here was

suggested to be by Lester Thurow of NIT. The collections for the plan
would

be done at the aggregate level by a value—added tax. The aggregate

amount collected would then be distributed as contributions to individua)
accumulation

accounts in proportion to the amount of income reported on

•the individuals federal tax return. The administrative benefits of
this modification depend upon the relative costs of collection for a VAT

versus a residual cash flow computation on the income tax return. It
does have the attractive feature that those who cheat by underreporting
income on their federal tax will lose some of their retirement benefits

(which they presumably paid for through the VAT). The principal

--30—

disadvantage

will

now he

of this modification is
treated

that

the aggregate contributions

as a consumotion tax which can distort the labor—

leisure decision. However, the credit to individual retirement accounts
based upon income will act as a subsidity to wage income which may

offset this distortion at least in part. This modification would
become considerably more attractive if the government chooses to use
a VAT to finance general government expenditures.

In summary, although the method of collecting contributions roses
the principal feasibility problem for such a public plan, a number of

different methods would seem to serve as close substitutes provided that
it remains essentially a defined—contribution plan which earns a fair
rate of return on accumulations and pays benefits indexed 1:o consumption.

If a policy decision were made to adopt a public pension plan with
a basic structure like the one analyzed here, there would still be the
further critical policy decision of what fraction of retirement period

consumption should be the target for the plan. Presumably, those who are
most concerned about the plan's success in dealing with information
cost and utility externalities would advocate a high fraction and those
who are most concerned about preserving individual choice would advocate

a low fraction. The correct policy decision will surely depend upon the
amount of other retirement saving that people are likely to make,

especially in housing andprivate pension plans. The resolution of this
policy issue, therefore, requires an ana].ysis of the overall pension

system. Since that was the note on which the paper began, it seems an
appropriate place for it to end.

—31—

Footnotes

*Ajd from the National Bureau of Economic Research and the National
Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. My than1s to F. Black,
S. Fischer, D. Holland, L. Summers, and I.. Thurow for many helpful
discussions and to L. Sumrcrs for providing me
for
Table 1. Any opinions expressed are mine and are not necessarily
those of my helpful colleagues, NBER, or NSF.

;ith the data

1. On the matter of the assumed stability of H(t), I note that
because c(t;O) depends strongly upon the initial endowments of the
very young, c(t;O)/c(t) is likely to be larger when the value of
human capital relative to other factors of wealth is larger. It
also

seems reasonable that the birth rate will be higher when the relative

economic value of children is high. However, if c(t;O)IC(t) < 1,

then
comparative statistics reveal that these two effects work in opposite
directions
in a stabilizing fashion.

on H(t)

2. Consumption data from US Department of Corraerce, Bureau of Economic
Analysis, National Income and Product Accounts of the United States,
Table 1.2. Noninstitutional Population Aged 16 and Over data from US
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
3.

Fischer

4.

It is, of course, not true that

(1982) discusses a number of social benefits from the
government issuing wage—income—linked bonds, including possible
intergenerational risk sharing that private markets cannot provide.
Many of the same benefits would come from consumption—linked bonds, and
indeed, if a consumption tax is less distorting than a wage tax, then
the consumption—linked bonds may be superior.

every model of lifetime consumption
choice will lead to an efficient allocation of retirement consumption
which depends only upon aggregate per capita consumption. For example,
Breedan's (1979) important theorems on this matter will not apply if
utility of consumption is state—dependent.

5. As I have shown elsewhere (1981), the distortion of the labor—
leisure decision of a consumption tax can be offset by linking future
retirement benefits to current wage income.

— 32--

B ILLlOGiAPiY
H.J. and M.J. 3oJ:in (ads.), 1980, The Economics of Taxation,
Studies of Government Finance, The Brookings Institution (Washington,
D.C.).
Breedari, D.T. , 1979, "An 1nt€rtampora1 Asset Pricing Model With
Stochastic Consumption and Investrnnt Oportunit ies,' Journal of
Financial Economics, 7 (September) : 265--296.

Aaron,

Diamond,
Journal

Fischer,
Bonds,"

P.A.,

1977, "A Framework for Social Security Analysis,"

of Public Economics, 8 (
S.,

): 275—298.

3982, "Welfare Aspects of Government Issue of Indexed

unpublished (January), Hoover

Institution.

Merton, R.C., 1971, "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a
Continuous—Time Model," Journal of Economic The7, 3 (December):
3 73—413.

—, 1973, "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,"
—
Econornetri-ca, 41 (September): 867—887.
_____________ 1981, "On the Role of Social Security as a Means for
Efficient Risk—Bearing in an Economy Where Human Capital is Not
Tradeable," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #743

(September).

Pechman, J.A. (ed.), 1980, What Should Be Taxed: Income or Expenditure?
Studies of Government Finance, The Brookings Institution (Washington,
D.C.).

