NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A COMPARISON OF METHODOLOGIES IN '4PIRICAL
GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODELS OF TAXATION

Don Fullerton
Yolanda K. Henderson
John B. Shoven

Working Paper No. 911

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

June 1982
Paper presented at the NBER Conference on Applied General
Equilibrium Models, San Diego, California, August 21—28, 1981. The
papers from this conference will appear in Applied General
Equilibrium Analysis, edited by Herbert E. Scarf and John B.

Shoven, forthcoming from the University of Chicago Press. We have
received helpful comments on an earlier draft from Alan Auerbach,
Charles Ballard, Wouter Keller, Larry Kimbell, Laurence Kotlikoff,

Peter Mieszkowski, Jaime Serra, Joel Sleinrod, and Wayne Thrisk, as
well as other participants in the conference. We would like to

thank Thomas Kronmiller for research assistance. This material is

based on work supported by the National Bureau of Economic Research
and by the National Science Foundation under Grants Nos. SES8025101
and DAR8019616. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors

do not necessarily reflect the views of NBER or the National
Science Foundation. The research reported here is part of the

and

NBERtS research program in Taxation.

NBER Working Paper #911
June 1982

A Comparison of Methodologies in Empirical
General Equilibrium Models of Taxation

ABSTRACT
Computational general equilibrium models have proven useful in the area of
long run analysis of alternative tax policies. A sizable number of studies have
been completed which examine policies such as a value—added tax, corporate and
personal income tax integration, a consumption or expenditure tax, housing subsidies, and inflation indexation., This paper reviews the methodologies used in
these models. We focus on eight specific models and review in turn: levels of
disaggregation, specification of the foreign sector, financial modeling, the
measurement of effective tax rates, heterogeneity and imperfect mobility, factor
supply, treatment of the government budget, and technical issues associated with
implementation.
The paper includes some new experiments in connection with simulations of
integration of the personal and corporate income tax systems in the United
States. We compare the resulting welfare gains in models with different levels
of disaggregation, and we discuss alternative justifications for specific
disaggregations. We also examine the sensitivity of results to alternative specifications of households' endowments of labor and leisure.
Our survey underscores the importance of the assumed elasticities of labor
supply with respect to the net of tax wage, and of saving with respect to the
net of tax rate of return. Unfortunately, these are also parameters for which
there is not a consensus in the economics profession. The survey finds that
there are several aspects of modeling that are especially ripe for further
progress: the roles of government and business financial decisions, the dynamics of a life—cycle approach, and the measurement of incentive tax and transfer
rates.

Don Fullerton
Woodrow Wilson School
of Public and
International Affairs
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

Yolanda K. Henderson
National Bureau of
Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

(415) 497—3273
(617) 868—3943

(609)

452—4811

John B. Shoven
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Introduction
Since Arnold Harberger (1962, 1966) introduced a general equilibrium

model of taxation twenty years ago, his approach has been amended for the study

of many economic issues. This paper is concerned with the methodology of one
line of the descendants of the Harberger model: empirical models of government

expenditures and taxes. We have chosen for comparison eight models that meet
our criteria of "empirical" and "public finance." Although many small models,
including Harberger's, have been outfitted with plausible parameters and used
for policy analysis, we have focussed on models that have greater disaggrega—

tion, either in the number of producers or consumers, or both. These models are
large enough so that they require computers for their solution. We have
restricted our comparison to models whose primary purpose is evaluation of
fiscal reform, rather than, for example, international trades economic develop-

ment or regional issues. Though tax policies undoubtedly are an integral part
of some of these other models, they are associated with additional methodological issues that are outside the scope of this paper.1

This is primarily a paper about methodologies. We look at how these
empirical public finance models have generalized the Harberger method. We also
look at differences among them in their specifications. Sometimes these
variations are due to differences in applications of these models. When the
models

are used for evaluating similar reforms, however, we examine results to

determine the implications of alternative specifications. More briefly, we
discuss some extensions

that

that appear imminent, as

well

as theoretical innovations

have not yet been incorporated into empirical general equilibrium models.

We view this comparison of empirical general equilibrium models of
taxation as an exercise that might eventually be conducted jointly by the

proprietors of these various models. The authors of the current paper are asso—

—2—

ciated with the Fullerton, Shoven, Whalley model and its extensions. As such,
we are more knowledgeable about sensitivity experiments using our models, and
also have been able to perform some new experiments specifically for this paper.

We have inferred sensitivity results for other models analytically by examining

published results. We recognize that this is only a second—best approach. The
design and execution of common simulations have been tried successfully by
builders of macroeconometric models (see Froinin and Klein 1976), but only in a

preliminary way for models of tax incidence (see Devarajan, Fullerton, and

Musgrave 1980). We hope that we have identified areas here where joint ventures
might provide further understanding of general equilibrium models.

The discussion starts with brief overviews of the Harberger model and
our selected models.

I. Harberger Model
The Harberger model has been expounded in many articles in addition to

his own. These include Mieszkowski (1969), McLure (1975), and Atkinson and
Stiglitz (1980, lecture 6). Here, we set out the assumptions verbally; the
other sources may be used for an algebraic description. Harberger's model was
designed to examine the interindustry distortion from the corporate income tax.

He assigned industries to the corporate and noncorporate sectors based on
whether they were "heavily" or "lightly" taxed, according to data of Rosenberg
(1969) for the U.S., 1953-59.

2
Harberger s noncorporate sector included agri-

culture, housing, and crude oil and gas, while his corporate sector included all

others. Each sector produced a single output in perfect competition using
homogeneous, perfectly mobile labor and capital, the supplies of which were

fixed in the aggregate. Harberger's results on the burden of the corporate

-.3—

income tax depended in part on the substitutability of labor and capital in production. This "factor substitution effect" (Mieszkowski 1969) was due to the
fact that the corporate income tax was viewed as a differential tax on capital

income only. Harberger simulated his model under a variety of assumptions on
the elasticity of substitution in each sector.

On the demand side, the model was simpler. There was only one
consumer, so that Harberger was limited to analyzing the functional, but not the

personal, distribution of income. The government was assumed to display the
same preferences as the consumer in spending its tax revenues. This specification is formally equivalent to a model in which consumer preferences are homo—

thetic, and in which tax revenue is returned as a lump-sum subsidy. Thus, using
Mieszkowski's terminology, there was no "demand effectt' because the model did

not have different consumers purchasing different bundles of goods. There was
an "output effect," however, because the extra tax was on output of only the

corporate sector. Each sector's output could have a different price elasticity of demand, and each output could have different factor intensities.3
Harberger had data on factor intensities and used a range of assumptions about
demand elasticities.

The solution technique involved total differentiation, so that, technically speaking, the model was appropriate only for small changes in the tax

code. As originally formulated, the model assumed no pre—existing tax distor-

tions but this was amended by Ballentine and Ens (1975). Shoven (1976)
corrected Harberger's model for conceptual errors in the measurement of the

surtax, as well as arithmetic errors. The often—quoted outcome of all these
studies was that capitalists bear the full burden of the corporate income tax.

Harberger's estimate of the efficiency cost, corrected by Shoven, was between
six and fifteen percent of the revenue generated, or 0.3 to 0.6 percent of GNP.

—4-

II.

Empirical General Equilibrium Models of Taxation
The general techniques of Harberger were quickly applied in models

that relaxed some of the restrictive assumptions. The empirical models in our
study are further elaborations of these earlier extensions. Shoven and Whalley
(1972, 1973) and Shoven (1976) used the Scarf simplicial search algorithm to

solve disaggregated versions of the Harberger model. With this new computational technique, they could properly examine large changes in the corporate

tax rate. Feldstein (1974a, 1974b, 1978) studied capital income tax incidence
by comparing steady states in a one—sector model with variable factor supply,
and Ballentine (1978) developed the dynamic (steady—state) counterpart to

Harberger's two—sector model. Boadway (1979) examined transitions between
steady states. In the area of financial analysis, Feldstein and Slemrod (1980)
examined the effects of the corporate income tax on portfolio allocation, and
F'eldstein, Green, and Sheshinski (1978) and Ballentine and McLure (1980) exa-

mined its effects on dividend payouts.
As might be expected, the results of these studies indicated a

substantial range of answers on incidence of the corporate income tax. Particular findings will be mentioned below as we review specific features of applied
general equilibrium models.

What is the profile of a "typical" applied general equilibrium model

of taxation? Figure 1 provides an example. The prototypical model has several
industrial sectors, in which fully mobile and homogeneous labor and capital are

used in production in a profit—maximizing combination. There are several household groups, defined by income, who are endowed with labor and capital in

varying amounts. These groups also derive income from government transfers.
Households allocate their income across consumption goods according to prin-

ciples of budget—constrained utility maximization. There are usually ad valorem

—5—

Figure 1

Diagram of a Typical

Consumer Side

General Equilibrium
Price System

Tax Model

Producer Side

Competitive equilibrium achieved when:
1. Demands equal supplies for all goods and factors;
2. Zero profits (net of taxes) prevail in all industries; and
3. Agents are on their budgets (e.g., total government expenditures
equal to receipts from taxes and from selling endowments of
capital or "bonds").

—6—

taxes on incomes, factors, and outputs, and these enter into the appropriate

production and consumption decisions. Equilibrium is reached when demand and
supply are equal for all goods and factors. Generally, other features of the
equilibrium are that producers receive no excess profits and that all agents are

on their budget constraints. Solution for the equilibrium is accomplished by
using a computer algorithm. Features such as endogenous factor supplies and
financial assets are not part of the prototype model. As will be shown, none of
the models in our survey adheres strictly to this blueprint.
The models included in our comparison are:

(1) Piggott—Whalley (PW) (1976, 1982)

(2) Fullerton—Shoven—Whalley (sw) (1978, 1981, 1982)
(3) Ballentine-Thirsk (BT) (1979)

(4) Keller (1980)
(5) Serra—Puche (1979, 1982)
(6) Slemrod (1980, 1982)
(7) Fullerton—Gordon (pa) (1982)
(8) Auerbach—Kotlikoff (AK) (1982)
The key features of these models are summarized in Table 1, which pro-

vides a structure for the discussion. The first five models in the list, those
of Piggott and Whalley, Fullerton, Shoven, and Whalley, Ballentine and Thirsk,
Keller,

and Serra—Puche, are large, general—purpose models for different

countries, the United Kingdom,

the United States, Canada, the Netherlands, and

Mexico, respectively. They each have considerable disaggregation of production

and demand. They are desied to study a variety of taxes, transfers, and subsidies in addition to the corporate income tax. Despite these similarities, the
authors have made different decisions on modelin€ factor mobility, aggregate

Factors of
Production

Parameter
Deviation

Method

K,L, each
mobile and
homogeneous

homogeneous

parameters

homogeneous;
land used in
two sectors

K,L, each
mobile and

sensitivity
analysis

Backward
solution
and

Backward
solution
with
selected

ogenous

1973

1969

1973

capital

labor,

labor,
imports

separate

solution

homogeneous,
but risk
varies by

K,L, each
mobile and

solution,
exogenous
parameters,
and sane

exogenous
parameters
with some
backward

homogeneous,
but risk
varies by use

K,L, each
mobile and

estimation

Backward

Plausible

Backward
solution

1973

Algorittin

Merrill's

groups

1962/1977

K, rural
labor, urban
labor, and
unskilled

CES

12 income

19

U.S.

(7)

Gordai

Fullerton

1977

K, skilled

By assumption
and backward
solution

Al

gorittin

Merrill's

Linear

Geuss—Seldel
iteration

groups

rraI)

groups (urban
&

9 income

Douglas

4 Cobb—

U.S.

(6)

Slemrod

10 Income

Douglas

approximation

groups

2 Income

14

4CES
Cobb—

Mexico

(5)

Serra—Puche

Netherlands

(4)

Keller

Linear
approximation

groups

12 Income

7CES

nada

(3)

Ballentine
Th)rsk

Al goriThn

Merrill's

groups

12 income

19 CES

U.S.

(2)

What ley

Shovon

K,L, each
mobile and

estimation

exogenous
parameters, and
some separate

Backward
solution,

1973

Year(s)
Data

of

Newton

I ncane

groups by
occupation and

100

Solution
Technique

Consumers

of

33 CES

Number of
Producers

Number

U.K.

Country

(1)

Plggott
Whalley

Ful lerton

Features of Applied General Equilibrium Taxation Models

Table 1

Cobb—

K,L, each
homogeneous
(one sector)

analysis

By assumption
and sensitivity

Plausible/
Hypothetical

Gauss—Seidel
iteration

cohorts

55 age

Doug las

I

U.S.

(8)

Auerbech
Kotlikoff

Myopic

Fares ight/

ffering
Portfolios?

Di

Expectations

endogenous,
K fixed in
static
calculation

i
ng

in

model, no

in the data,

yes; in the
model, no

the data,
yes; in the

Myopic

augments K
through time

say

(no saving)
I

in the data,
yes; in the
model, no

propensity
to save

i

Fixed
ma rg na

calculation

endogenous,
K fixed
in
static

capital
stock?

Say I ng

Fixed danestic
capital,
variable use
of foreign
capital

Mot in one
period, but

Say i ng

En dogenous

equilibria

Mo

Myopic

fixed in
static
Ca lcul at ion

K

Same as FSW,
but tax rates
on different
assets reflect
different
portfolios
portfolio
danands

Myopic

Different
returns on six
financial and
real assets
based on

(no saving)

one

in

period, but
saving
augments K
through time

Not

Fixed total
capital

Saving

endogenous

only

equil Ibria

No

Perfect

over time

endogenously

Growing

solution for
200 years

Simul taneous

Mo

Yes

Sequence of
static

No

(8)

Kotlilff

Auerbach

Yes

(7)

equilibria

(6)

Fullerton
Gerdon

Static
equilibria
only

Static

equilibria
only

Static

Static
equilibria
only

Sequence of
static

Static
equil ibria
only

Time path?

Mo

Mo

Yes

Mo

Yes

Yes

Labor/Leis*re
choice?

(Cont'd)

Slemrod

No

(5)

Serra—Puche

Taxation Models

Yes

(4)

Keller

Yes

(3)

Bailentine
Thirsk

Equilibrium

Yes

Yes

Yes

(2)

Whalley

Shoven

Ful lerton

Input/itput
matrix?

(1)

Piggott
Whalley

Features of Applied General

Mo separate

Foreign
Sector?

assunption

Balanced trade
with Armlngton

No

Bankruptcy

Gosts

Included

major U.K.

Al I

taxes and
subsidies

Taxes

major

goods;

elasticity

trade with
flow of K

balanced

distinct

Imports and
exports are

stbsidies

nad ian
taxes and
Ca

All

Balanced
trade with
constant

taxes

U.S.

tax,

Pb

VAT, tariffs

sales

Unbalanced
Foreign
household
trade, but
sells dIstinct exogeneous
good (fixed
world prices);
balanced
trade with
flow of K

Linear Income
factor
taxes, sales
taxes

tax,

None

Pb

property

tax

income tax,

and personal

Cbrporate

in

each good

constant real
value of trade

trade,

Balanced

Yes

taxes

All U.S.
taxes,

I unp—sun

taxes or
I ncreased

All

rates

I ncreased
personal

through

Al lowed

each period

personal rates

government
spending

through

Al towed

ndustry

Balanced

I

dependent on
asset and

Separate risk
premla,

(7)

Fullerton
Gordon

personal rates

adjusting any
rate

Income

lump—sun

sales tax
ta,ces or
I ncreased

No

changed

broad based

through

through

Allowed through

Yield

No. Al lows

Balanced

Deficits
at towed with

rates of
return

rlance

ExpI iclt

(6)

in

(Cont'd)

Slemrod

Models

Pb separate
risk premia,
all returns
certain

Equal Tax

Allowed

Balanced

I

certa n

No separate
risk premia,
all returns

(5)

Serra—Puche

bonds

Allowed

Balanced

Pb separate
risk premia,
all returns
certain

(4)

Keller

goverrment

Balanced
each period

Pb separate
risk premia,
all returns
certain

(3)

Ballentine
Thirsk

solution

calculate

Balanced, can

a II returns
certain

risk premia,

(2)

Whalley

Shoven

Fullerton

Equilibrium Taxation

Li ndaht

Budget

Government

Risk

(1)

Plggott
Whaliey

Features of Applied General

initial

through

None

Capital tax,
labor tax,
consunptlon tax

rate

towed

adjusting any

Al

period)

debt (not
balanced each

PV of expenditures
= PV of revenue —

Pb separate
risk premla,
all returns
certain

(8)

Auerbach
Kotlikoff

Housing
subsidies,
VAT, overall
effects of
each tax

No

No

No

lnterteinporal

No

Efficiency
Effects:
Intersectoral Yes

coefficients,
Atkinson
measure
social welfare

Distributional lculates
Ef facts
CV, EV, Gini

So far
use to
Evaluate:

Involuntary
Unemployment?

Monetary
P01 Icy?

Imperfect
Competition

(1)

Piggott
Whalley

I

ntergovern—
mental grants

subs idi as,

i-busing

No

from

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

static
uti I ity

EV

indices CV or

Change to
Changes to
current income current
income
with Paasche
or Laspeyres

Integration,
consumption
tax, VAT,
capital or
labor tax
cha nges

No

(3)

Yes

variations

Equivalent

Compensating
and

factor taxes,
overall
effects

levies,

Changes in
VAT, import

No

(4)

sures

No

Yes

niea

utility

Changes in

VAT

(5)

Yes

income and
risk bearing

current

changes to
utility
measures,
based on

Integration,
effects of
inflation

No

Liquid
assset is a
use of K

No

(6)

Yes

Yes

reported

Same as FSW
but not

integration

No

(7)

Whalley
(2)

trdon

Slemrod

Fullerton
Serra—Puche

Thirsk

Keller

llontine

Shoven

Ful lerton

Features of Applied General Equilibrium Taxation Models (Conttd)

Yes

No

utility measure

Mong age
cohorts using

capital vs. labor
taxation

Consumption tax,

No

No

(8)

Auerbach
Kotlikoff

0

No

No

Dividend

Paut

No

No

No

(3)

Thlrsk

Whalley
(2)

llentIne

Debt/Equity

(1)

Plggott
Whalley

ted

Fullerton
Shoven

Features of Appi

(4)

Keller

General

No

No

(5)

distortion

efficiency
loss of

Mjuslinents,
but no

efficiency loss
of distortion

Mjustments,
but no

(6)

Slemrod

Taxation Models (Cont'd)

Serra—Puche

Equtlibritin

"Measured"
at zero

Yes

(7)

Fullerton
Gordon

No

(8)

Kotlikoff

Auerbach

—12—

factor supplies, budget balance, and the foreign sector.4 They also employ dif—
ferent solution techniques.

The next two models, of Slemrod and of Fullerton and Gordon (an extension of the FSW model), are more fully specified than the previous models in the

area of financial behavior. Yet they have interesting differences between them
in how financial decisions are made by households and firms, in saving behavior,

in disaggregation, and in parameter derivation. The PG model also differs from
all the other models in that marginal tax rates on capital differ from average
tax rates.5

The Auerbach—Kotlikoff model was designed for study of intergenerational

incidence. It is also unique in its use of perfect foresight rather than myopic
expectations.

III. Model Comparisons
The remainder of the paper is organized by methodological areas in

which the applied models have contributed to the tax incidence literature. We
review in turn: disaggregation, specification of the foreign sector, financial
modeling, the measurement of effective tax rates, heterogeneity and imperfect
mobility, factor supply, treatment of the government budget, and technical
issues associated with implementation.

1. Disaggregation
a. Production Sectors
The applied general equilibrium taxation models use disaggregated data

on both production and consumption. We can delineate two levels of disaggrega—
tion of the production data: medium, including Slemrod (4 sectors), Keller (4),

—13—

BT (7 domestic plus 1 foreign), and high, including FSW (19), Serra—Puche (14),
PW (33

domestic

plus 27 foreign). The AK model, designed to evaluate taxes on

consumption and labor income, has no disaggregation of production.
Sleinrod and BT preserved Harberger's specification of a homogeneous

corporate sector, though each has refined the definition somewhat. For example,
Sleinrod correctly observed that the crude oil and gas industry is largely cor-

porate despite its low rate of capital taxation. Each also disaggregated the
noncorporate sector further. Slemrod's breakdown was composed of agriculture6 and two types of housing, owner—occupied and rental. Because imputed
rents and capital gains in the owner—occupied housing sector are virtually
untaxed, there is a subsidy which causes misallocation of resources within

housing and which is aggravated by inflation. BT separated out agriculture, as
well as a homogeneous housing sector. Because of their interest in government
expenditure programs, they distinguished urban transit services and local public

services from other services. There are separate import and export sectors, as
discussed in Section 111.2 below.
The FSW and F,'! models have disaggregation by industry, with each

industry representing a fixed mix of corporate and noncorporate enterprises.

With this specification, the effects of the corporate income tax are modeled

directly. FSW, for example, have simulated elimination of taxation at the corporate level by deleting this component of capital income taxation in each
industry, and assigning corporate profits to taxation at the household level.

This is in contrast to the Harberger approach, which equalized taxes in the cor-

porate and noncorporate sectors. Tax rates differ from industry to industry not
only because of the extent of incorporation, but also because of the differential tax reductions from investment tax credits and depreciation allowances.

-14-

The U.K. tax system, by contrast, has provided substantial relief from
double taxation of dividends since 1973, when a partial integration measure was

introduced. The advantage of disaggregation by industry in the W model lies
instead in the ability to evaluate specific capital subsidies, such as regional
development grants and borrowing subsidies to nationalized industries.
These two models (Fsw, PW) may be compared with the previous two

(Slemrod, BT) with respect to housing and the foreign sector. The FSW model
does not disaggregate the housing sector. The PW model, on the other hand, has
private housing services and public (local authority) housing services. The
latter category consists of subsidized rental housing and accounts for the

majority of the rental housing stock in the U.K. This ad valorem rent subsidy
causes misallocation of resources.

Most industries in the PW model are composed of competing domestic and

foreign producers, each subject to different tax rules. This treatment is described in section 111.2 below.

b. The benefits from disaggregation of production
The foregoing description has shown that the applied general equili-

brium models have disaggregated the Harberger sectors in many ways. In this
section, we examine which degree of disaggregation is necessary on the grounds
that Harberger argued were important, namely differences in tax rates, capital
intensity, consumer price elasticities of demand for outputs, and degrees of

factor substitution. We then take advantage of a feature of the FSW model that
allows the level of aggregation to be changed. We use this feature to measure
the importance of disaggregation in simulations of integration of corporate and
personal income taxes.

—15—

The evidence on disaggregation appears to be
disaggregation ——

to

that

the "first level"

a corporate sector, housing, and agriculture —-

is

worth-

while because of differences in factor intensities. Further disaggregation of
production is justified on other grounds, expecially the existence of different
tax rates by industry.

The disaggregated models show that production of housing services is

by far the most capital intensive industry. Other industries that rank fairly
high in capital intensity are agriculture (in FSW and Pw), utilities (in PW),
and paper and printing and mining (in Fsw).

In general, the evidence on demand elasticities for outputs and factors is not robust enough to point to significant interindustry differences.
The FSW and Sleinrod models assume Cobb-Douglas demands, so that, within an

income class, relative expenditures on consumption goods are constant. Even
though BT assume differential price elasticities, they conclude that the coni—

bined effects from capital—labor ratios and consumer demands generally produce a

weak output effect. The one exception occurs when the relative price of land
changes, since land is assumed to be used in only some sectors. The F.'! model

has two layers of substitution elasticities among domestic goods. The elasticity of substitution between similar consumption items, such as coal and gas, is
generally higher than the substitution between their aggregate and other "blocks"

of goods. The elasticity of substitution between each pair of "blocks" is the

same, 0.5. Keller has similar blocking of commodities. In light of the 1' findings, however, these differences in consumer demand elasticities may not be very
important.

On the substitutability of capital for labor in production, Slemrod

assumes Cobb—Douglas functions. The FSW, BT, and PW models use CES production

—16—

functions, but the elasticities are close to 1 for most industries.7 The most
dramatic departure from this pattern is in housing, where Slemrod assumed that
only capital is used in production, and where BT and PW posited a very low elas-

ticity of substitution between capital and labor. There is another production—
based argument for separating out housing and agriculture in the I' model,

because land is a separate factor of production and is used only in these
industries.

We turn next to our experiments with disaggregation of production. In
the first part of Table 2, we review the results of Shoven (1976), who corrected

two errors of Harberger (1966). He then applied the algorithmic approach to

Harberger's two—sector model and an alternative 12—sector model. When
Harberger's simple arithmetic error was corrected, the efficiency gain from

capital tax rate equalization was reduced. When his conceptual error on the
definition of capital units was corrected, however, the efficiency gain estimate

was increased approximately back to the original estimate. These corrected
Harberger estimates are shown in row 1 of Table 2.

Row 2 shows that when the same data are used in the algorithmic
approach, rather than the linear approximation, welfare gain estimates are

changed only slightly. Row 3 shows that disaggregating the data to 12 producers
has the effect of raising the estimate. This result can be explained intuiti—
tively as follows. The two—sector model captures only the misallocation of
capital between the two sectors, not within each sector. If the corporate sector is disaggregated into some high—tax industries and other relatively low—tax
industries, as is possible with a 12—sector model, then further inisallocations

can be captured. Welfare gains from eliminating these misallocations will be

greater. A proof that welfare gains must

increase

with disaggregation for a

policy which equalizes capital tax rates is given in Shoven (1973).

—17—

Table 2

Disaggregation Experiments*

Elimination of Surtax in the Corporate Sector

Efficiency Gain

$ billions (1957)

of

%

NNP

(1) Corrected Harberger model, 2 sectors

.625—1.79

0.3—0.6

(2) Shoven—Whalley model using Scarf
algorithm; 2 sectors and 2 consumers

.69—1.49

0.3—0.5

(3) Shoven—Whalley model using Scarf
algorithm; 12 sectors and 2 consumers

.92—2.11

0.4—0.7

Integration of the Corporate and
Income Tax

Personal

"Dynamic" Efficiency Gain

of

"Static" Efficiency Gain

$ billions
(1973)

P.V. income

(1973)

% of
expanded income

(4) FSW model, 2
sectors (A)

87.8

.176

—1.77

—.10

(5) FSW model, 2
sectors (B)

219.8

.441

.79

.05

(6) FSW model, 5
sectors

251.0

.503

.27

.02

(7) FSW model, 19
sectors

344.4

.691

2.34

.14

%

$ billions

eSee text for further description. Lines (1)—(3) are taken from Shoven (1976).

-18-

In the second part of Table 2, we display results from new simulations

with the FSW model. These results are not really comparable to the earlier
Shoven (1976) results, because the model is quite different. The "dynamic"
efficiency gains refer to the present value of the sum of 12 consumers' compen-

sating variations. This concept captures both intertemporal and intersectoral
distortions, each of which is reduced through the integration of personal and

corporate taxes. The "static" efficiency gains refer to the mean of Paasche and
Laspeyres measures for the change in expanded national income (including leisure
valued at the net—of-tax wage).
The two parts of Table 2 are also not comparable because full integra-

tion does not imply complete capital tax equalization. Some other tax distortions remain, including the low taxation of real estate caused by the nontaxable

nature of imputed owner—occupant net rents. Integration is, however, comparable
to the policy proposals simulated in some of the other models reviewed here.

Integration, as we have defined it, includes the elimination of the corporate
income tax, the full taxation of corporate income at the personal level, and the

indexing of capital gains for inflation.8 Table 3 shows the wide variation of
the 19 capital tax rates of the P5W model before any policy change, as well as
the lower and less varying capital tax rates implied by full integration.

Row 7 of Table 2 shows the results of integration for the full—sized

(19 sector) P5W model. Static welfare gains as a percent of income are much
lower than for Shoven (1976) for at least two reasons. First, capital tax rates
are not completely equalized as just discussed. Second, and more important,
this model uses an equal yield feature which increases personal tax rates
multiplicatively until government can attain the same utility level as in the

benchmark. Because all 12 personal tax rates are multiplied by the factor 1.16

-19-

Table 3

Capital Tax Rates (on Net Income) Before and After Integration,
for Each Aggregation

Capital Tax Rates
Before
19 Industries
(1) Agriculture
(2) Mining
(3) Crude Petroleum and Gas
(4) Construction
(5) Food and Tobacco
(6) Textile, Apparel and Leather
(7) Paper and Printing
(8) Petroleum Refining
(9) Chemicals and Rubber
(10) Lumber, Furniture, Stone
(ii) Metals and Machinery
(12) Transportation Equipment
(13) Motor Vehicles
(14) Transportation, Comm., Util.
(15) Trade
(16) Finance and Insurance
(17) Real Estate
(18) Services
(19) Government Enterprises
(Weighted Average)
5 Industries
Agriculture
Real Estate
Services
Government Enterprises
All Others
(Weighted Average)

After

.54
.95

.46

1.02
2.10
3.47
2.53

.70
.68
.88

1 .63

.46

1.87
.91

.71

.75
.63
.44
.60
.52

1.72

.66

23.50

4.88

1.29
1.70
1.85
1.99
.63
.86

.47
.89
.83

1.35

.26

.56
.57
.26

.97

.61

.54
.63
.86
.26

.46
.56

.57

1.57

.26
.76

.97

.61

2 Industries, Version A
Agric., Crude Pet., Real Estate (1,3,17)
All Others
(Weighted Average)

.61

.54

1.37
.97

.69

2 Industries, Version B
Agric., Crude, Refined Pet., Real Estate,
Gov. Ent. (1,3,8,17,19)
All Others
(Weighted Average)

.58

.51

1.62
.97

.77

.61

.61

—20-

in the new equilibrium, labor/leisure choices are further distorted. Welfare
losses on that margin offset the gains from capital allocation improvements.

The dynamic measure includes the same offsetting effect but also includes the
gains on the intertemporal margin from capital tax reductions.

We are now prepared to address the following question: how much of
the difference between the FSW results and other results are due to disaggrega—

tion in production? Our experiments make use of a variable aggregation procedure designed and built for the FSW model by Lawrence Goulder. We first aggregate to the two sectors defined by Harberger (and used by Shoven). In this two—
sector model, called Version A in the tables, the first sector includes agriculture, crude petroleum, and real estate, while the other sector includes all

other private industry. Harberger divided the economy this way because the
first sector was supposed to represent low—taxed industries.9

Our Table 3 shows that approximately the same ordering exists in the
1973 data set for the FSW model, except that the tax rate for petroleum refining

is even lower than that of agriculture. This data set also includes "government
enterprises" as an industry that was not considered in the 1957 data of

Rosenberg (1969). This sector also has a very low tax rate on capital.
It thus makes sense to add petroleum refining and government enter-

prises to the low—tax sector, and we refer to this two—sector model as Version B.
The bottom of Table 3 shows that the selection of industries for a two—sector

model is very important. Benchmark capital tax rates for Version A, corresponding to the Harberger aggregation, are conaiderably closer together than are

the tax rates for Version B. Equalization or integration cannot be expected to
provide as great a gain in efficiency, especially since these distortions vary
with the square of the surtax.

—21—

The efficiency gain results in rows 4 and 5 of Table 2 bear this out.

Welfare gains from the "Harberger aggregation" are considerably smaller than

from Version B where the industries are more appropriately grouped.°
Next we aggregate the FSW model into groups of industries that are

similar to the models of Slemrod (1982) and Keller (1980). Those models use
four industries corresponding to agriculture, real estate, services, and other

"corporate" industries)1 We also break out government enterprises as a fifth
industry, since this activity is not similar to other corporate activities.

When this model is used to simulate integration, the welfare effects are shown
in row 6 of Table 2.

Compare the dynamic measure for the "correct" two-sector model of

Version B, the 5—sector model, and the 19—sector model. This measure increases
from $220 billion (in 1973 dollars) to $251 billion, and to $344 billion,

respectively. It would seem from this evidence that the 5—sector model does not
do much to improve upon the two—sector model. Indeed, when we look at the capital tax rates of Table 3, we see that the rates for the three private
"noncorporate" industries are quite similar (.54, .63, .86) in the benchmark

equilibrium. If the point of disaggregation is to capture differing effective
tax rates, this is not the place to do it. The top of Table 3 reveals that
there is more variance of tax rates among the industries of the corporate sec-

tor. This contrast explains the further change in welfare estimates from
disaggregating to 19 industries. It is difficult to say whether further
disaggregation would be warranted.

—22—

c. Disaggregation of Households
Most of the applied general equilibrium models have disaggregated

households by income class. A couple have also distinguished households by age,
occupation, and family composition. In this section we survey what differences
there are in the sources and uses of income by these classes, and what addi-

tional insights may be gleaned by this disaggregation. The information on
disaggregation is relevant not only for the basic tax structure that is under
review, but also for the financing of the tax change, which may now have distributional effects as well.

The BT, FSW, Serra-Puche, and Slemrod models divide households into

about a dozen groups by incomes. Serra-Puche distinguishes between urban and
rural groups. Piggott and Whalley have 100 groupings by income, family composition, occupation, and work status. The latter two categories specify
whether a household head is not employed, retired, or working in one of the
following three occupations: manual employee, non-manual employee, or self—

employed. The Auerbach—Kotlikoff model has 55

ae

cohorts. During its working

years, each cohort's wage grows at the fixed rate of increase of labor
productivity; upon retirement, income consists of earnings from previous saving.
Where there is a progressive income tax, the range of marginal income
tax rates may be taken as one indication of the degree and pattern of disaggre-

gation of households by income. Comparing the P3W and Slemrod models of the
U.S., we see that the first disaggregates more finely at the low end of the

scale, while the latter disaggregates more at the high end. The ranges of
marginal tax rates in these models are 1 to 41 percent arid 14 to 82 percent,

respectively. This pattern corresponds to the emphasis of the Slemrod model on
portfolio behavior; the distribution of wealth is more concentrated at the top

—23—

than is income. Consumption data for very high income groups, by contrast, are
not available, and were imputed in Slemrod's study. Sleirirod's data on tax rates

also reflect the tax law prior to the Revenue Act of 1964.

The use of marginal tax rates is less satisfactory for comparing the
levels of disaggregation in models of different countries, since personal tax

systems differ significantly. We can, however, compare incomes for the lowest
and highest groups relative to the group with median income, and look at the

numbers of groups below and above the median income level. By these measures,
the BT model's pattern of aggregation is roughly similar to that of the PSW
model.

12

We turn now to evidence on the differences among household groups in

the sources and uses of income. On the factoral distribution of income, all the
models with disaggregation only by income show a siin±lar U-shaped pattern for

the capital-labor ratio of income: the lowest and highest income groups receive
the highest shares of their income from capital. Slemrod's data indicate that
the very rich, those with income over $50,000 in 1962, derived almost all of

their earnings from capital. For the low income group, the data reflect the

earnings pattern of retired persons. On this last point, the F data are more
specific. At least for the UK (and the range of incomes PW consider), the capital share of income is very high for retired persons13 and self—employed per-

sons. The differences among income groups within an occupation are in fact much
less obvious. The AK model, with its stylized income pattern across households,
has the capital income share rising monotonica].ly with age.

There are two aspects to the uses side of household behavior: allocation to consumption categories and allocation to saving categories. For con—
sumption, the models indicate that the expenditures on food and housing each

—24-

decline markedly with income. Expenditures on services, on the other hand, tend
to rise somewhat with income. These patterns leave a progressive profile of
consumption of manufactured products, which are produced by heavily corporate

industries. The evidence on consumption, then, supports disaggregation of the
production sectors into agriculture, housing, and other.

While consumption data support some disaggregation of income groups, a
stronger argument for disaggregation may be made in models that have portfolio

behavior. Slemrod's data show tremendous variation in asset holdings by income
groups. In version "B" of his model, Slemrod distinguished six assets: corporate equity, taxable and tax—exempt debt, rental and owner—occupied housing,

and liquid assets. The portfolio of the lowest group is about 70 percent in
owner—occupied housing and liquid assets, while for the top group it is almost

entirely in corporate equity and tax—exempt debt. Owner-occupied housing is the
most important single asset for households with incomes under $25,000 (in 1962
dollars).

2. Foreign Sector
The general equilibrium approach has long been used in models of

international trade. Boadway and Treddenick (1978) extended this literature in
modeling the effects of tariff policies on the allocation of resources across

domestic industries. International trade is now part of the FSW model of the
United States, as described in Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley (1982),14 and of all

the models that we review of other developed countries. All these models
feature some form of balanced international trade, which sometimes refers just
to net exports of goods and services, and sometimes encompasses capital flows as

well. No models include flows of international reserves or a role for monetary
policy.

—25—

Even within the area of commodity flows, there has been unexpected

variation in modeling exports and imports. This may be due to data limitations
in different countries. In the BT model, imports are aggregated to form one
good and are considered to be imperfect substitutes for all other consumption

goods. In Keller's model, imports are quasi—intermediate: producing output
involves substituting among domestically—produced goods and foreign-produced

goods as inputs. In PW, there is an explicit distinction between imports used
for intermediate inputs and for final consumption. Consumers have CES demand
functions between pairs of competing domestic and foreign goods while intermediate imports are used in fixed proportions in production.

The treatment of exports is somewhat more uniform. In most cases,
trade elasticities govern what fraction of a sector's output will be exported.

In the Ballentine and Thirsk model, however, export production takes place in
two export sectors, one of which is a price—taker in supply and the other of
which has some market power in international trade.

These differing specifications make parameterization of elasticities

of substitution difficult. Often the simplifications used in modeling do not
correspond to the specifications in other empirical studies which are used to
provide parameters (see Section III.8a for a discussion of parameterization).
In this situation, performing tests of alternative assumptions is important.

The model of the foreign sector is critical in evaluating changes from

an origin—based tax to a destination—based tax, or vice versa. The corporate
income tax is an example of the former: it is collected in the production of
goods used for export but not for import. On the other hand, the value—added
tax is generally rebated on exports and applied to imports. Shifts from one to
the other could cause large changes in import and export prices, and, depending

—26—

upon trade elasticities, large changes in net exports. PW (for the U.K.) and
Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley (for the u.s.)

found that

movements in terms of

trade caused significant welfare changes.

Endogenizing capital flows may significantly change the evaluation of

changing capital taxes, as Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley found for the U.S. They
estimated that the domestic welfare gain from corporate tax integration would be

significantly increased if there were a fluid world capital market. The reduced
tax would attract additional capital for which the U.S. economy would pay only

the world net—of-tax rate of return to capital. However the U.S. social benefits are equal to the gross of tax productivity of capital. On the other hand,
Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley found that a world capital market may reduce the

attractiveness of a consumption tax. In section 111.5, we discuss some implications from the one—way capital flows assumed in the T model.

3. Financial Behavior
The aspects of general equilibrium tax models discussed so far have

highlighted their use in studying intersectoral distortions. Models with financial behavior may be used for analysis of three additional distortions caused by

personal and corporate income taxes. These are inefficiency in portfolio
allocation, in the choice between debt and equity finance, and in dividend payout
rates.

The general equilibrium tradition has been to define a unit of capital

as that which earns one dollar net of all taxes in any use. Feldstein and Slemrod
(1980) pointed out, however, that the income tax system in the U.S. leads to differences in net—of—tax earnings from capital in different uses and for different

owners. As an example, take two individuals in different tax brackets, each of

-27—

whom owns an unincorporated business in the same industry. Their gross returns
would be identical, but the individual in the lower income bracket would earn a

higher net rate of return. Feldstein and Slemrod have shown, on the other hand
that investment in the corporate sector is relatively more attractive -—

compared to investment in the noncorporate sector ——

for

individuals in higher

income brackets. It is relatively less attractive for lower income groups.
Differences in these returns cause inefficiency in risk—bearing. In addition,
because these two types of capital are observed to be held by both income
groups, a comparison of expected rates of return is not sufficient to describe

portfolio behavior. Slemrod has incorporated these observations in his model.
Capital is measured according to stocks, not capital income. Individuals make
their portfolio choices by balancing off expected net rates of return against
variances in returns.

Modeling portfolio choice is useful in examining the effects of income

tax integration. This reform would make the after-tax rates of return in the
corporate and noncorporate sectors more equal. Because of the initial discrepancies in these rates for different income classes, the tax reform would cause

different shifts in asset holdings by income class. This finding is discussed
in section 111.5.

Another application of general equilibrium tax models that is affected
by portfolios is the study of the effects of inflation on capital allocation.

The deductibilty of nominal interest payments from personal income tax liabili—
lities provides a larger incentive for upper income groups to leverage their

investments. Reforms such as indexing for inflation would lower inefficiency
caused by this discriminatory incentive to bear risk.

Corporate financial behavior has been modeled by Slemrod and by

Fullerton and Gordon. The corporate income tax encourages debt rather than

-28-

equity finance because of the deductibility of interest payments on debt but not

of payments to shareholders. The personal income tax system taxes capital gains
and dividends differently. For most holders of corporate equity, capital gains
are taxed more lightly. This encourages firms to retain earnings rather than
paying out dividends.

Slemrod has modeled endogenous financial behavior by specifying that
firms vary debt—equity ratios and dividend payout ratios in response to tax dif-

ferentials. These response rates were taken from regression analysis. In his
simulations of tax integration and indexing the distortions in financing behavior turned out to be of secondary importance relative to the distortions in
portfolio behavior.

Fullerton and Gordon have proceeded differently. By examining the
marginal after—tax returns to investors from debt and equity finance, they
concluded that investors as a group could save on taxes by any increases in the

firm's debt—capital ratio. Offsetting this tax advantage of debt, however, a
higher debt-capital ratio would imply a higher probability of default. Thus
they modeled the firm's financing decision as a tradeoff between tax advantages

and bankruptcy costs. Their simulation results indicated that this distortion
in debt—equity choices accounts for a large efficiency loss. Motivated by the
uncertainty of economic explanations for dividend behavior, on the other hand,
PG posited that dividend payout rates were immaterial by

equilibrium
a

dollar

the firm

assuming

that in

must value a dollar of dividends at the margin the same as

of retentions.

Although the addition of endogenous financial behavior has enriched
the study of distortions resulting from income taxes, it has also added to data

collection problems. For the United

States, the last comprehensive study of

—29-

asset behavior was the 1962 Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer Finances. These
data do not provide information on how portfolios are allocated when there is

high inflation. This is particularly unfortunate because one of the purposes of
adding endogenous financial behavior is to xasure how the interaction of nonin—
dexed taxation of capital and high inflation has affected financial decisions.

The importance of distortions to financial behavior, indicated by Slemrod and
FG, however, supports continued modeling efforts in this direction.

4. Measurement of Effective Tax Rates
In modeling a country's tax code, there is the issue of whether

average tax rates on income apply also at the margin. More generally, modelers
face the problem of how to measure effective tax rates. These concerns arise
both for the personal tax system and the corporate tax system.

Under a progressive personal income tax structure, marginal tax rates
will be higher than average tax rates, and both will be higher at higher levels

of income. To capture the progessivity of the personal income tax, some models
(FSW, 1W, Slemrod) treat the tax as a separate linear function of income for

each household group. Under this treatment, however, each household faces a
marginal tax rate that is unchanging even if simulations of a policy change show

a redistribution of income. Slemrod (1982) has gone on to endogenize the marginal tax rate, a significant modeling improvement. In his model, households make
portfolio choices on the basis of the real after—tax rate of return to each

asset, as well as its riskiness. The taxable income from each asset depends on
provisions such as the taxation of nominal instead of real gains, the use of

historical cost depreciation, and the tax—exempt status of some bonds. Taxable
income is determined on the basis of the assets that are selected by the house—

-30-

hold. It may also be affected by other aspects of the simulation that tend to
redistribute income. In the end, the marginal tax rate is calculated by
applying an approximation of actual tax tables to the household's computed
taxable income.

There are further reasons why average and marginal personal income tax

rates may differ. For example, transfer payments, through their eligibility
requirements, may impose an implicit high marginal tax rate on labor income.

The extent of tax evasion may vary with the level of marginal tax rates. These
are propositions that have arisen in the economics literature, but which have
not been included in the general equilibrium models covered in our survey.

It is possible to model differences in average and marginal household

tax rates even apart from the income tax. For example, property tax payments
and contributions to public pensions may be non—distorting to the extent that
they are payments for benefits received from the government, in the form of

local public services and retirement income, respectively. The Fullerton—Gordon
model includes such treatment.

The measurement of marginal income tax rates for industries is, if

anything, more problematic. All models with the exception of that of Fullerton
and Gordon assume that the average tax rate on capital income in each sector

applies also at the margin. In most cases, the industry's total observed tax
paid is divided by observed capital income to obtain a tax rate for use in the
producer's decision of whether to employ the next unit of capital.

This procedure greatly simplifies the data requirements as well as the

model itself. Average tax rates provide a relatively simple and complete sum-

mary of the actual tax law. They capture the low tax payments attributable to
investment tax credits, accelerated depreciation allowances, and depletion, and

—31-

they capture the high tax payments attributable to insufficient depreciation

allowances based on historical cost when there is inflation. Average tax rates
also capture the effects of many complex details of the tax law, such as export
subsidies, treatment of financial intermediaries, and possibilities for alter-

native accounting practices. In contrast, use of marginal tax rates requires
explicit treatment of individual features of the tax code. In practice, therefore, marginal tax rates have provided a measure of the tax that might be

expected by looking at a few major statutes. Because actual marginal tax rates
are not observable, and because there are a variety of ways of incorporating a
variety of features of the tax law, correct measurement of marginal tax rates
has not been agreed upon.
The procedure of using observed tax rates as incentive tax rates,

however, assumes away a number of reasons for why average and marginal tax rates

might differ. First, the marginal investment may be financed by a composition
of debt and equity which is different from the composition of previous invest-

ment. If these sources of finance are taxed differently, then the average and

marginal investments are taxed differently. Second, unanticipated inflation
reduces the real value of depreciation allowances on past investments without
necessarily affecting the expected real value of depreciation allowances on the

current marginal investment. Jorgenson and Sullivan (1981) argued that recent
inflation rates have been higher than expected in the U.S., and have acted as a

lump—sum tax on investments already in place. Third, the average tax rate mixes
investments with different tax treatments. The P5W average tax rates from 1973,
for example, include taxes paid on some investments that were made before the
1971 liberalization of depreciation allowances, while the marginal rate in 1973

should reflect only the then current law. Fourth, transitory or windfall pro—

—32—

fits on past investments are subject to the statutory corporate tax rate, while
the expected normal return to the marginal investment is affected also by

investment tax credits and accelerated depreciation allowances. Fifth, firms
may have reasons unrelated to the marginal investment for using charitable
decuctions, FIFO accounting, longer than minimum asset lives, and other features
affecting the average tax rate without necessarily affecting the marginal tax

rate. Finally, if some of the return to capital is treated as a risk premium,
and if losses on the marginal investment can be used to offset profits on other
investments, then the corporate tax can be viewed as risk sharing by the govern-

ment. As such, at least part of the tax receipts would not reflect any marginal
investment disincentives. Fullerton and Gordon have argued that marginal tax
rates are considerably less than average tax rates for this reason.

Fullerton and Henderson (1981) estimated marginal tax rates for the 18
private industries of the FSW model, iguoring risk and using cost of capital

formulas similar to those of Hall and Jorgenson (1967). Just the first five
points above are sufficient to eliminate any similarity between the average tax

rates and these marginal rates. Using different formulations of the average tax
rates from Commerce Department data and different formulations of the marginal
tax rates from cost of capital formulas, Fullerton and Henderson obtained
correlation coefficients that varied around zero and never exceeded 0.3.

Fullerton and Gordon used a more complicated version of the same cost

of capital approach. Noting that the 7 percent government bill rate in 1973
included some inflation risk if not default risk, they started with 5 percent as

the nominal risk-free rate of return. Since the actual (and possibly expected)
inflation rate was 6 percent, the real risk-free return may have been zero or

negative. Thus the total return to equity is a risk premium and essentially all

-33—

of the corporate tax becomes nondistorting. The tax is related to benefits in
that, with full loss offsets, the tax payments are just proper compensation to

government for accepting a fraction of the risk. It is perhaps not surprising
that when FG simulated the removal of this corporate tax, together with a yield—
preserving increase in the personal income tax (which distorts labor/leisure
decisions at the margin), they found resultant welfare losses.

A couple of objections have been raised to this modeling. First, corporate profits in the United States have always been positive since the end of

the Great Depression. If there is no significant risk of negative corporate
profits, then at least some positive part of the return must be risk—free. This
point really raises some inconsistencies among the various sets of data and

available theories. For if some positive part of corporate profits is a real
risk-free return, and if investors can arbitrage, then why would the government

bill rate provide a zero or negative real return? Fullerton and Gordon reparaineterized their model with a small positive risk—free return and obtained
substantially the same results as before.

Second, Bulow and Summers (1982) came to conclusions that are very
different from those of Fullerton and Gordon when they considered risk, cor-

porate profits, and the corporate income tax. They argued that most of the
investment risk is not in the income flow from the investment. Rather, it is
from recapitalizations of that income stream, or changes in stock and bond

prices that result in capital gains or losses to the investor. The corporate
income tax does not offset these price changes. Depreciation allowances, for
example, are not adjusted for ex post changes in the value of the capital stock.
Since these unexpected accrued capital gains are not subject to the same corporate tax rate, and unexpected accrued capital losses do not have the same loss

-34-

offset,

the PG story does not apply. The corporate tax does not reduce this

important source of risk. Bulow and Summers concluded that the efficiency cost
of the corporation income tax is close to what might be predicted from a model
with marginal tax rates that are, on the whole, as high as average tax rates.

Our own conclusion, then, is that the PG model opens up the important

possibility of different average and marginal tax rates. The data to implement
that capability, however, are still subject to dispute.

5. Heterogeneity and Imperfect Mobility
Harberger introduced a framework in which capital and labor are each

homogeneous, mobile across industries, and fixed in total supply. As general
equilibrium models are increasingly applied to policy issues, this specification

becomes less helpful in analyzing tax incidence, particularly over time. There
has been relatively little improvement in this area, however, in the empirical

general equilibrium models. The assumption that capital moves from industry to
industry more quickly than it is added in the aggregate, for example, is a con-

venient though not compelling assumption in all the models. The PW model has
households disaggregated by occupation, on the one hand, but, on the other hand,

has labor being homogeneous and fully mobile in production. These examples of
anomalous specifications should be viewed as temporary compromises along the

path of development of these models. Some have modestly relaxed the homogeneity
assumptions. Specifically, Keller has two different skill types for labor,
Serra—Puche has both rural and urban labor, and BT include land as a separate
factor of production.

In this section, we examine several attempts to relax assumptions of

perfect mobility and homogeneity of factors. The examples here are quite

—35—

diverse,

and include problems of time and geography. Although introduction of

constraints affects efficiency gains, we show that this type of innovation is
particularly instructive in analyzing incidence.
There are two, very different studies that concern time constraints:

AK's examination of rigidity of lifetime patterns of work and retirement, and
Fullerton's (1982a) modeling of constraints in reallocation of capital across
industries during finite time periods. The 14K model has been applied to the
study of replacement of an income tax by a wage tax and by a consumption tax.

Their model traces the effects on 55 age cohorts, and is particularly insightful
in tracing the effects on different cohorts in the transition to the steady

state, which they estimate takes about 40 years. Because the wage and consumption tax structures would have different effects on workers as opposed to
retirees, and because cohorts are not mobile between these two occupational
categories, these taxes would impose different burdens on different cohorts.

Retirees, for example, would be worse off under a consumption tax than under an
income tax of equal yield in present value terms because the overall tax rate

would have to be higher under the consumption tax. Conversely, retirees would
be better off under the wage tax, since most of their income is derived from

capital. On the other hand, some younger cohorts would lose in the transition
to the steady state with a wage tax because their income loss from the tax rate

increase is not fully offset in the short run by higher wages. In the long run,
the higher capital-output ratios resulting from taxation of only labor income

raise productivity and wage rates. Given that individuals are fixed in their
pattern of work and retirement throughout their lives and given the infeasibi—
lity of levying age-specific taxes, AX found that the only way to obtain a
Pareto-superior transition turns

out

to provide lower welfare gains for genera—

—36—

tions

living in the post transition years than the consumption tax would pro-

vide.

The other study that explored imperfect mobility of factors is

Fullerton's alternative specification of the FSW model. His application concerned imperfect mobility of capital between industries. Because existing capital was modeled as industry—specific, capital could not be observed to move out

of an industry at a rate faster than its rate of depreciation. In other words,
capital could increase in an industry only as a result of saving being greater
than depreciation and could not be physically moved from one industry to

another. This is perhaps an upper bound to capital immobility, since it takes
no account of the moveability of items such as office equipment and trucks.

Fullerton resimulated income tax integration under this specification and found
that movement of capital out of several (largely noncorporate) industries was

constrained. This implied a substantial reduction in efficiency gains in the
first year, but not in subsequent years, when the constraint proved not to be
binding.1

Another example of a heterogeneous capital stock is found in the BT

model. Foreign—owned and domestically—owned capital were assumed to be perfect
substitutes in production. Domestic capital was fixed in aggregate supply and
totally mobile across industries within the country. The specification of the
*
supply of foreign—owned capital to Canada proved to be a key factor in incidence
results, however. In the BT model, foreign capital moves into Canada based on
gross rates of return rather than net rates of return. This was justified
because Canadian corporate income tax payments are credited in computing tax
liabilities in the home country; as long as the Canadian rate is below the home

country rate, it does not affect capital flows into Canada. As a result of

-37these assumptions on capital supply, a substantial portion of the burden of an
increase in the corporate income tax in Canada is shifted onto foreigners.
In yet another context, Slemrod found that inflexible supply of some

assets affected tax burdens. He found that a fixed supply of tax—exempt debt,
in conjunction with a particular model of portfolio choice, caused those whose

income was above $50,000 to lose with the passage of tax integration. The logic
is as follows. The corporation effectively shelters income for upper income
groups, since the sum of the corporate income tax on a dollar of retained ear—
flings plus the effective personal income tax on the resulting capital gains16 is

lower for them than the tax paid on a noncorporate investment, which is taxed at
their (high) marginal personal income tax rate. For lower income households,
the opposite it true: the tax rate on income from corporate capital is higher

than from noncorporate capital. With the passage of integration, the upper
income group would prefer to shift out of corporate capital because for them it

would be taxed at a higher rate. In Slemrod's model, they were limited in their
possibility to invest in alternative assets that are taxed at a rate below their

ordinary personal income tax rate. Housing is less heavily taxed, but this
group's Cobb—Douglas preferences for owner—occupied housing restricted them to
spending a fixed proportion of their income on housing, and the price of housing
did not fall enough for them to transfer their entire desired reduction of cor-

porate holdings into housing. Another possibility was tax—exempt debt. They
were not able to transfer their holdings into this asset because its supply was
held constant by the government.

-38-

6. Dynamic Models
In this section, we discuss how factors of production have been

allowed to grow over time. Of the models in our survey, only the AK, FSW, and
FG models may be solved for a time sequence. In the AK model, each generation
decides on its consumption and saving allocation for its entire lifetime, using

perfect foresight expectations. Labor supply is exogenous.17 The FSW and FG
models have endogenous allocation over present and future consumption under
myopic expectations, and allow the current period's saving to augment capital in

the next period.18 Labor supply depends endogenously on the after-tax wage
rate. While the PW model is solved for only one period, two versions of it
have, respectively, labor—leisure choice and saving behavior. The Serra-Puche
model of Mexico also is a one period model with saving but has no labor—leisure

choice. We discuss saving aspects of the latter models here because these
features make them readily adaptable to solving a sequence of equilibria.

a. Labor—Leisure Choice
The approach to modeling labor—leisure choice in the FSW and the F'1

models is based on applying an average figure from the literature for the

elasticity of labor supply with respect to the after—tax wage. While the implementation procedure appears to be straightforward, some of the assumptions that
have to be made can affect the results.

In order to put this information into model—equivalent form, it is
useful to look at the Slutsky equation in terms of labor supply elasticities:

Lw Lw

L

U

-39—

where

L =

labor

w =

net

supply

wage

E = endowment of labor
I = expanded income (wE)
CLw = uncompensated elasticity of L with respect to w
CLI =

U

income elasticity of L

= compensated elasticity of L with respect to w

The compensated wage elasticity is positive, and the income elasticity is

negative, so the uncompensated & is of ambiguous sign.19 Furthermore, if
leisure is defined by £ = E - L then we have:

3L

i

a(E—&)

CLIiy 31

i

E—&

—as.

i

31&

£

-CJ1

In a CES utility function defined over leisure and consumption, for example,
equals one and

would be -&/L. Thus

CLw CLw Now if the modeler uses a separately given estimate from the literature for the

uncompensated elasticity CLw the compensated elasticity will vary directly with
the postulated LIE ratio. In the U.K. model, for example, PW suppose that the
normal laborer supplies 40 hours out of a possible 50 hour work week, so £/E is

1/5. In the U.S. model, FSW suppose a 40 hour week out of a possible 70 hour
week, so £/E is set at 3/7. Thus the P5W income elasticity for labor is —3/4
and the PW income elasticity for labor is —1/4. If the two models used the same
exogeneous estimate for the uncompensated wage elasticity, then the FSW substi—

-40-

tution

effect (compensated wage elasticity) would be larger. For a zero uncom—

pensated ,

for

example, the compensated e, would be 3/7 and 1/5 for FSW and

PW, respectively. Welfare costs depend on the compensated, not the uncompen—
sated elasticity of labor supply. The algebra above helps to explain the relatively large labor—leisure distortions caused in the FSW and PG models when they
raise taxes on labor to achieve the same total tax revenue after full integra-

tion. These labor—related welfare losses offset capital—related welfare gains
in these simu.ations.

To measure the importance of alternative assumptions about labor
endowments, we repeated the tax integration experiment summarized in Table 2,

using a 50 hour maximum workweek in the PSW model. Under this assumption,
integration of the corporate and personal income tax combined with restoration
of a balanced government budget through upward scaling of income tax rates would

produce a welfare gain of $512.5 billion. This is substantially higher than the
$344.4 billion gain obtained earlier, with the assumption of a 70 hour potential
workweek.

The procedure of taking an average elasticity is, of course, a shortcut alternative to specifying different labor supply elasticities and labor

endowments by household groups. The literature on labor supply elasticities
indicates that there are sharp differences in (uncompensated) elasticities

between males and females, primary

and secondary

workers, and prime age and

older workers (Hausinan 1981). This implies a need to reconcile labor supply

behavior of income groups with

There is

in

already

some —

but

evidence

arbitrary —

based on demographic characteristics.

specification

of demographic differences

the P' model, where it is assumed that households headed by a retired or non—

employed person

have no

sensitivity to

tax rates in making

their

labor supply

-41-

decisions. The demographic data on households in this model in fact could be
exploited more in this area. The benefits to differentiating the labor supply
elasticities by income group would be important, for example, in evaluating proposals that affect lower—income households, such as introduction of a negative
income tax or changes in transfer programs.

The importance of modeling labor—leisure choice (using average
elasticities) appears to vary with the experiment being performed and the
existing tax structure, as well as depending on the specification of labor and
leisure endowments.

F,i simulated the effects of elimination of all tax and sub-

sidy distortions in the U.K., with the revenue loss being made up by a broad—

based sales tax. They reported only minimal differences in efficiency gains in
simulations assuming, in turn, exogenous labor supply and a .125 elasticity of

labor supply with respect to the after—tax wage rate. The labor—leisure distortion is apparently small compared to the the very large interindustry distortions in the U.K. tax system caused by indirect taxes, especially housing subsidies and differential sales taxes.

An alternative view of the importance of the labor—leisure choice may
be seen in simulations of full integration of personal and corporate income

taxes by Fullerton, King, Shoven, and Whalley (FKsW) (1981). Given an assumed
labor supply elasticity of .15, XSW found that the efficiency gain from
integration when the yield preserving tax was multiplicative scaling of personal
income tax rates was only one-half of that when a lump—sum tax was used.

b. Saving and Capital Formation
In
purchase

tions,

the Serra—Puche, FSW, and W

models, saving Is equivalent to the

of a fixed—weight bundle of capital goods. To simplify the computa-

these models assume that the capital stock is augmented with a one—year

-42-

lag. Thus, the FSW model computes a sequence of static equilibria rather than

dynamic equilibria. (The Serra—Puche and N models compute only one equilbrium
rather than a series).

The specification of the mix of capital goods ignores composition
effects, for example, between residential and non—residential investments.
Residential investment would be produced largely by the construction industry,

while nonresidential investment goods would be produced by the manufacturing
sector.

Saving behavior in the Serra-Puche model is based on a fixed proportion of income. In the FSW and N x'iodels, it is based on the expected return,

assuming myopic predictions. Both models take as their central estimate
Boskin's (1978) 0.4 elasticity, but simulate elasticities between 0 and 2 for

sensitivity analysis. The importance of this elasticity had been pointed out by

Feldstein (1974a). The N model then approximates the elasticity of substitution between current and future consumption as 1 plus the saving elasticity,
while in the P5W model, the relationship is solved explicitly.

P1 found that the saving distortion is also a small factor compared to

the largely intersectoral distortions of the British tax system.2° They did
find, however, fairly sizeable efficiency gains if the income tax were replaced

by a pure consumption tax, particularly when there was inflation. The large
response in saving in both simulations, however, suggests continued efficiency

gains in the long run. The Fullerton, Shoven, Whalley (1982) study of the con—
sumption tax in the U.S. also indicated potentially large efficiency gains.
They showed huge sensitivity to the savings elasticity assumption, however.

The AX model has been used to examine the differential impacts of
replacing the income tax by two taxes that eliminate the double taxation of

-43—

saving, a consumption tax and a wage tax. Auerbach and Kotlikoff showed that,
from the point of view of future generations, the consumption tax will be
superior to the wage tax if, on average, wages are received earlier in life than

consumption takes place. The utility differential was caused by the difference
in the present value between these two streams of tax payments.

7. The Government Budget
In most models, the authors have assumed that the government budget is

in balance. A tax reform that results in a revenue loss must therefore be
matched by a tax increase or spending cut. In particular, a balanced budget is
a necessary assumption in a model without assets, since deficits must be
financed by an increase in government securities or by money creation.

The conventional wisdom in this field has been that the existence of a

deficit does not change incidence or efficiency results. McLure (1970) has
shown that in a Harberger—type model, allocation of resources depends only on

relative prices, and not on absolute prices. General equilibrium models provide
a solution only for relative prices; typically, the wage rate is taken as

numeraire. Another equation is needed to close the model if absolute prices are
to be derived. McLure illustrated his point by closing the model with the quantity equation for money. If a tax change is financed by money creation, this
has no additional real effects on the economy, and therefore does not change

economic decisions. The unimportance of financing effects does not carry over
to a model with portfolio choice, however. Feldstein and Slemrod (1980) have
shown, for example, that the corporate income tax may distort asset demand deci-

sions even if it does not distort production decisions. Also, since the tax
systems are generally non—neutral with respect to inflation, policies which

-44—

affect absolute prices have allocational impacts. The potential for modeling
unbalanced budgets is discussed below. First, however, we address the treatment
of balancing the budget.

Budget balance in each period is a feature of all the models in the
survey except the AK and Serra-Puche models, which have a government debt

instrument. As shown in table 1, the revenue yield may be equalized by different taxes in different models. With the specification of the behavior of
different consumer groups, the choice of the equal yield tax affects the efficiency and distributional results of the original policy change simulation.

Financing by a consumption or broad-based sales tax usually introduces the least

distortion of any available tax. An income tax should affect both labor—leisure
choice and saving decisions, and may be more progressive.
The choice of a particular budget-balancing technique may in fact

obscure the incidence of a particular tax proposal and limit the usefulness of

a model. Although a lump-sum equal yield feature is not an option for
policymakers, it may provide a useful benchmark for examining the incidence of a

tax. Alternatively, several plausible equal yield options may be compared. An
example that shows how the choice of a budget—balancing measure may limit the
information from a model is found in the set of simulations that Keller has

performed. In this model, government always has a balanced budget, but does not
acquire the same yield. When a tax change increases government revenue, the
additional funds are spent in the proportions that previous revenues were spent.

This amounts to an increased demand for skilled labor, because this factor makes
up a high proportion of observed government expenditures. Thus Keller's siniu—
lated tax increases — whether on commodities or labor — tend to raise the wage

of skilled labor. This result stems only from the higher demand for skilled

-45-

labor caused by the budget—balancing expenditures. Keller compared his model
results with those from partial equilibrium studies, and attributed the dif-

ferences to general equilibrium effects. This is a mistaken interpretation,
since the partial equilibrium experiments did not include budget—balancing offsets to the tax changes.

Where a simulation measures not differential incidence but rather
balanced budget incidence, it is important to model household preferences for
public goods, in order to include the value of the change in government

purchases in calculations of welfare change. This has been done by Keller, but
not by Serra—Puche, despite his modeling of government expenditure policy to
balance the budget.
The equal yield feature is important to consider in comparing simula-

tion results across models. But it is also necessary to be aware of other
features of the models in interpreting the effect of the equal yield tax. As
one example, one may compare the results of tax integration of Slemrod and FKSW.

When both made up revenue losses by multiplicative scaling of personal income

tax rates, Slemrod's efficiency gains were much larger. Comparing the features
of the models, one might conclude that the importance of modeling financing
decisions, considered by Slemrod and not FKSW, is greater than other differences
in specification that would lessen the relative estimate of efficiency gains of

the Slemrod model. These latter differences include having fewer sectors and
the specification of portfolio balance behavior. This conclusion would not be
correct, however, because Slemrod did not have endogenous saving or labor supply

responses, which PXSW had. In this case, the correct comparison of efficiency

gain would use the (SW simulation with a lump sum
done, the results are in fact very similar.

adjustment.

When this is

-46-

In

the AK model, the government budget constraint is that the present

value of expenditures must equal the present value of revenue less the initial

value of debt. (Financing by money creation is not an option.) Private and
government capital are perfect substitutes in portfolios, but government debt is
found

to crowd out private capital formation. This phenomenon lowers potential

efficiency gains when

a tax reform is

financed by

issuing government bonds.

Introduction of money into the AK model would not be difficult on the

supply side, since deficits are already a feature of the model. On the demand
side, however, it would necessitate specifying portfolio decisions in a richer

way. Since the model is not concerned with details of capital taxation, the
distortionary effects of the inflationary impacts of money creation would not be
extensive. A more promising model for this extentiorx might

be

Slemrod's or

Feltenstein's (1982). Serra—Puche's model has an initially unbalanced budget,
and is being expanded to include monetary phenomena. Slemrod already has portfolio behavior, with money and debt as available assets. Debt of the Federal
government would have to be separated from corporate debt in the data to model

an unbalanced budget. Effective tax rates on capital are already a function of
inflation, so that their specification would not be affected.

8. Technical Operations
This section describes three technical aspects of operating applied
general equilibrium models: parameterization procedures, solution methods, and
measurement of efficiency and distributional gains.

-47a.

Parameterization
The paper for this conference by Ahsan Nansur and John Whalley goes

into detail in describing existing methods for parameterizing general
equilibrium models, and comparing these methods with stochastic estimation of

parameters. Our

discussion

here is briefer, in light of their treatment of the

subject, and because models do not differ greatly in this respect.

The primary behavioral equations in general equilibrium tax models are

production and demand equations. Elasticities of substitution between factors
or goods are usually selected from previous econometric studies. This means
either that a range of parameters is used, corresponding to the range of esti-

mated values, or that specific estimates are chosen from particular studies
There are problems with this procedure that are often acknowledged by

modelers themselves. First, estimates of parameters may vary from study to
study. Generally there are no clear rules for deciding among alternatives.
This problem is exacerbated by the unclear time frame of general equilibrium

models. For example, although there seems to be a systematic difference between
cross—section and time—series estimates of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, FSW and if took an average of estimates from these two

types of studies rather than choosing one or the other. A second problem is the
lack of estimates of some parameters. Sometimes the model builders have used
estimates for the same concept for a different country. Piggott and Whalley,
for example, used estimates of savings elasticities for the U.S. in their model
of the U.K. They compensated for this problem, however, by trying a wide range

of estimates. At other times, the authors have estimated the missing parameters
themselves. Fullerton and Gordon derived their own econometric estimates of
parameters associated with bankruptcy costs. This was necessary because there
is little empirical evidence on these costs.

-48-

When there is uncertainty about parameter values, the results are
often subjected to sensitivity analysis, as described in several cases above.

FSW (1978) reported experiments of the sensitivity of results to production

elasticities in an early version of their model. They simulated elimination of
the corporate income tax, varying the elasticity of substitution in production

in all sectors from 0.5 to 2. In all cases consumers had Cobb—Douglas demands.
For this experiment the welfare gain was almost exactly proportional to the pro-

duction elasticity. PW (1982) have also reported sensitivities to both production and consumption elasticities. In both models the results indicate the
importance of developing careful parameterization procedures.

Given exogenously determined substitution parameters, a technique of

"backwards solution" has been used to determine the remaining parameters. For
example, for CES production functions, FSW used outside studies to determine
elasticities of substitution, then used benchmark data on labor and capital and
assumed cost minimization under constant returns to scale to solve for the

weighting parameter and the scale parameter. It must not be overlooked,
however, that this is merely a calibration procedure used to match up the base-

line solution with actual data. The backwards solution is a useful mechanical
check on the programming of these models, but provides no assurance that the

parameter estimates are reasonable. The residual parameters will take up the
slack if there are errors in the substitution parameters. Also, even if the
substitution elasticities are estimated correctly, but the production or con—
sumption relationship is actually stochastic, the stochastic error for that
period will show up in the residual parameters.

In fact, the choice of which parameters to make endogenous and exogenous is arbitrary, even though the results are not independent of the procedure

-49-

selected. Authors have tried to follow the guideline of using outside estimates
for scale—free parameters.

Another, less common, approach, is to let some of the data be the

residual. Slemrod used this procedure because his backwards solution for the
coefficient of risk aversion did not come close to existing estimates. Instead
of using backwards solution for parameters, he solved backwards for risk premia

that were implied by an exogenous risk aversion parameter. The fact that
Slemrod chose this procedure is probably an indication of the non—robustness of

the disaggregated data used in these models in general. Other authors (e.g,
sw) have noted the inconsistency of data, for example, on the sources and uses
of income at a disaggregated level, and have arbitrarily selected some data as
superior and adjusted other data to match.

Reporting sensitivity of model results to the adjustment of data has
not been as common as reporting the sensitivity with respect to parameter
selection.21

Model builders should consider both experiments, however. One

example where implications of data selection were shown was in the PG simulation

of income tax integration. \illerton and Gordon examined the results under two
estimates of the risk—free rate of return. The ambiguity of this concept
stemmed from the fact that short—term government debt is riskiess in nominal
terms,

but

not in real terms.

b. Solution Techniques
The Harberger model was solved by hand by taking linear approximations

to production and consumption equations. Among the empirical models, this
method is used for only the BT and Keller models. Because of the size of the
matrices involved in these models, however, computation is done with the aid of
a computer.

-50-

It is more common to use methods that properly handle large changes in

tax rates. The remaining models are solved by three different techniques: a
Newton-type method (pw), Gauss-Seidel iteration (AK, Slemrod), and a simplicial
search method (FSw, Serra-Puche, and FG use Merrill's version of the Scarf

algorithm).22 In the case of the first two of these methods, successful convergence to an equilibrium depends in principle upon judicial selection of

starting values and step size. Usually the benchmark values are used as
starting values in alternate simulations. In fact, there have been no reports
of cases, using these models, where there were convergence problems, or where
alternative starting points have affected the answer.23
Comparative data on computation costs of these methods are not readily

available. Even when the same model is solved using the same technique on different computers, there may be substantial differences in computation costs (see

PW 1982). It is possible that different solution techniques are preferred for
different models, but there is no evidence on this.
The costs of the Gauss—Seidel method depend on efficient ordering of

equations into simultaneous and recursive blocks. We have not found any
discussion of this in the applied general equilibrium literature, however. The
cost of using simplicial search algorithms varies exponentially with the number

of dimensions on the simplex. The PSW and FG models have three dimensions,
corresponding to the price of labor, the price of capital, and the revenue

yield. Other prices and, in the case of FG, yields on assets are solved for as
functions of the prices on the simplex. The cost structure of these simplex
algorithms is a deterrent to designing models with heterogeneous factors of pro-

duction (see Fullerton 1982a). Future use of simplicial search methods will
undoubtedly take advantage of innovations that reduce costs, such as the

—51—

algorithm of vander Laan and Talinan (1979). For the Newton method, Piggott and
Whalley have reported that increasing the initial step size increases the efficiency of the search for the solution.

c. Measurement of Efficiency and Distributional Effects
In the Harberger model, the efficiency cost of capital taxation was

measured by movement of capital. Since a unit of capital was defined as that
which earns a dollar net of all taxes, this change in capital could be inter-

preted in income terms and compared to GNP. Incidence was measured by the
change in the price of capital relative to the size of the tax. The computational general equilibrium models, on the other hand, measure welfare changes

and their distribution among households in terms of income changes. In the case
of the BT model, this is based on comparison of real incomes between the policy

simulation and the baseline. When there is an explicit utility function
generating demands, the comparison is based on the change in income that would

compensate each household for the tax changes. As is well Imown from index
number theory, compensating and equivalent variation provide bounds on the

welfare change. These should both be computed. When the utility function
includes leisure, as in FSW, the measure used is "expanded" national income,
which adds the value of leisure time to monetary income.

Welfare changes are more complicated in a dynamic model. In FSW
(1982), a present value calculation is used. This of course is sensitive to the
assumption on the discount rate. In addition, FSW cautioned that present value
welfare gains should be measured only for the initial population, so that the
steady state growth rate does not distort the results.

—52—

Nost models indicate distributional effects by measuring welfare changes

for each household group. The Fi model also calculates overall measures of the
change in equality of incomes, such as the Gini coefficient.

IV. Conclusion
Computational general equilibrium models have proven useful in the

area of long run analysis of alternative tax policies. A sizable number of studies have been completed examining policies such as a value—added tax, corporate
and personal income tax integration, a consumption or expenditure tax, housing

subsidies, and inflation indexation. We have surveyed several aspects of eight
models and have found that they differ in structure in several areas. Clearly,
researchers always face a tradeoff between simplicity and accuracy of detail,

and in several areas (e.g., the level of disaggregation, the amount of substitution permitted) there is no "right" approach.

While we feel that the general equilibrium approach is very appropriate for analyzing large tax policy changes, there are a number of areas in

which all existing models of this type could be improved. The first thing that
strikes us in surveying the work in this field is that the profession still
has not reached a consensus on the value of the few "key" elasticity parameters.

First among these is the elasticity of labor supply. Our examination of the
sensitivity of results to this parameter strongly underlines its importance. In
disaggregated models, what are needed are labor supply functions by age, income,

and possibly, marital status. The saving elasticity is probably the second most
important parameter, at least for dynamic models. Again, disaggregated models
call for these elasticities for each consumer class. Studies to date are far
less conclusive on saving

behavior

than on labor supply.

—53—

The specification of the production side of the models could also be

improved. While there is some agreement about the elasticity of substitution of
primary factors, issues such as technical change (induced either by changes in
relative prices or by inventions) and substitution possibilities among intermediate inputs are neither resolved nor for the most part incorporated in the

models we survey. The models uniformly assume perfect competition and constant
returns to scale. Clearly, these assumptions are made as convenient abstractions. Incorporation of imperfect competition and government regulation would
be useful.

Two areas which some of these models have begun to address are dynamic

response and the modeling of financial markets and behavior. The economy may
take a substantial period of time to adjust to the types of tax policies which

are analyzed with these models. The impact may discriminate between generations, and life cycle modeling may be appropriate. With dynamic models, the
issue of uncertainty and expectations regarding the future must be addressed.
General equilibrium models have traditionally emphasized the real eco-

nomy at the expense of analyzing financial markets. This approach is less than
satisfactory for tax analysis where financial flows are being taxed in non—

neutral ways. As we have described in this paper, several steps have been taken
to include the modeling of financial behavior, but substantially more could be

done in this area. Related to this is the treatment of government deficits. In
order to handle adequately a government budget which is out of balance, a treat-

ment of government bond markets is required. Our overall assessment is that
both the areas of dynamics and financial behavior are ripe for further progress.
Finally, there are improvements which could be made in how the tax

policies themselves are captured. For example, many of the models treat the

-54—

personal income tax as a series of linear tax schedules. Higher income households may face higher marginal tax rates, but each faces a constant marginal tax

rate. This fails to capture the fact that a policy such as integrating corporate income into the personal tax base would cause people to be pushed into

higher marginal tax rate brackets. So, one area of possible improvement would
be a more accurate modeling of the progressive rate structure of the personal
income tax.

Another aspect of policy modeling which could be improved is in the

expenditure of the tax receipts. None of the models has correctly included the
implicit marginal tax rates of many income transfer programs or adequately cap-

tured the demand for public goods. To some extent, this failure has been alleviated by those models which compare only tax policies of equal revenue yield.

The assumption is then made that the expenditure distortions are unaffected by
the tax alternatives being considered.

We do not mean to conclude this paper on a negative note. Each of the
models that we have surveyed is vastly richer than the two—by—two Harberger

model from which they were derived. Empirical general equilibrium analysis has
made great strides in the past decade and is now a useful tool for tax policy

evaluation. We feel that these models can become even more valuable with
further work and additional cross-fertilization between models under
development.

-Fl -

Fullerton-Henderson—Shoven

Footnotes

1. This paper is not intended to survey all general equilibrium models related

to taxation. Instead, we hope to learn about problems in designing a tax model
by looking in depth at only a few of them. The choice of these eight models is
ultimately arbitrary, however. By concentrating on nation—wide allocation
effects of tax policy, in particular, we omit regional considerations and

expenditure—side considerations. See, for example, Richter (1975) and Harrison
and Kimball (1982). Other general equilibrium models include Dungan (1980),
which simulates tax and expenditure changes in Canada, but which is primarily
concerned with monetary policy, foreign exchange, and macroeconomic effects.
Whalley (1980) describes a world model with four major trading blocs, while

Boadway and Treddenick (1978) have a trade model of Canada. Aspects of trade,
taxes, and development are addressed in models by Adelman and Robinson (1978)
for Korea, Feltenstein (1980) for Argentina, de Melo (1978) for Columbia, and

Dervis, de Melo, and Robinson (1981). Develoent models are described in
Dervis, de Melo, and Robinson (1982).

2. The Rosenberg (1969) data and the aggregation by Harberger are discussed
below.

3. The term "output effect" refers to the effect on the demand for the output
of the industry where a factor of production is being taxed.

4. A version of the Ballentine—Thjrsk model may be used to examine interre—
gional incidence of taxation. This version is not reviewed here.

-F2-

Footnotes (continued)

5.

Except

where otherwise specified, the description of the

Fullerton—Shoven—Whalley model is applicable to the Fullerton—Gordon model as

well. The PG model is discussed only where it differs from the FSW model.

6. In the earlier version, Slemrod (1980), agriculture was not distinguished
from the corporate sector.

7. These choices do not necessarily indicate that industries have similar rates
of substitution between factors. Fi, for example, estimate production functions
for the U.K. and derive quite varying elasticities which they use in sensitivity

experiments. The "standard case" choices are based on average findings in the
literature, a procedure that tends to minimize interindustry differences.

8. In such a plan, the corporate share price as a basis for capital gains purposes would be increased by the already taxed retained earnings.

9.

If

we look only at corporate income taxes and property taxes in Harberger's

1957 data from Rosenberg (1969), we see that these three industries did not have

the lowest tax rates. Agriculture had the lowest rate, followed by crude
petroleum, refined petroleum, and then the real estate sector. However,
Harberger added imputations for the personal income tax on capital income from

each sector. He assumed that 70 percent of net capital income in real estate
was from untaxed imputed rents of owner-occupants, and that the other 30 percent

from rental housing was taxed at a 20 percent personal rate. He assumed that
farm
crude

income (net of other taxes) faced a 15 percent personal rate, but that

petroleum income

had depletion and similar privileges to offset any per—

-P3-

Footnotes (continued)

sonal taxes. Finally, for all parts of the corporate sector, Harberger assumed
a 20 percent effective rate which reflects a 40 percent personal tax on the half

of earnings assumed to be distributed. Because refined petroleum was grouped
with the corporate sector, Harberger's total tax on that industry was increased

by personal taxes. The FSW model makes similar imputations for personal taxes
of each sector, but these are based on the actual proportions of noncorporate
earnings, retained corporate earnings, and distributed corporate earnings of

each industry. In the 1973 data, petroleum refining starts with a low corporate
rate due to depletion, and retains a low rate after personal tax imputations.

10. Harberger grouped his industries appropriately given his personal tax
imputations. The other grouping is more appropriate given the 1973 data and FSW
personal tax imputations.

11. We were not able to disaggregate real estate into owner—occupied and rental
housing, as in the Slemrod model.

12. The median income for the U.K. was not provided in PW (1982).

13. This statement is less true for their "type III" households, which are composed of either two adults and more than one child, or of more than two adults.
This group has 'significant labor income.

14. The first of four formulations in the Goulder, Shoven, Whalley (1982) paper

has been added as a standard feature of the PSW model. The specification
features: constant elasticity demand functions for foreigners' behavior, no

Armington product heterogeneity, and no international capital flows. This ver—

-P4 -

Footnotes

(continued)

sion of the FSW model was used in the simulations presented in Table 2. An
earlier specification of the trade sector, also described in the Goulder,

Shoven, Whalley article, was used in the previously published papers on the FSW
model.

15. The constraints on movement of capital out of housing might be binding for a
longer period of time if the low economic depreciation rates of Fullerton and
Gordon (1982) were used.

16. This rate is reduced both by statutory preferential treatment and by
deferral of realization.

17. In a very recent version of their model not available in time for this
review, Auerbach and Kotlikoff have modeled labor—leisure decisions.

18. Recent work by Bovenberg and Keller (1981) has added a similar capability
to Keller's model.

19. Estimates of CLw are generally zero or negative for prime age males and
between zero and one for females and other groups. Fullerton (1982b) reviews
thse estimates and finds .15 to be a plausible aggregate elasticity, but household differences here can warrant disaggregation on a basis other than income.

20. The modeling of the personal income tax also diminishes estimates of the

distortion of saving decisions. The top income tax rate in the W model is 3,
reflecting the proportional structure for most income levels. At high income

levels, however, investment income is taxed at a higher marginal rate. This

—F5-

Footnotes (continued)

feature of the tax system was ignored even for groups where it appears to be
operative.

21. In some cases, tests of sensitivity to elasticity parameters may be
interpreted as tests of data as well. In the case of labor supply, selection of
labor supply elasticity and labor endowment affect the results in a similar

manner. See section III. 6a for further discussion.

22. For a short description of gradient methods, including the Newton method
and the Gauss-Seidel procedure, see Goldfeld and Quandt (1972). The Scarf
algorithm is described briefly in Shoven and Whalley (1972, 1973), and in more

detail in Scarf (1973). In their forthcoming book, Piggott and Whalley provide
an excellent discussion of the Newton, Scarf, and Merrill techniques in applied
general equilibrium models (Chapter 7).

23. Existence of a unique equilibrium depends upon the specification of the
model, and testing for multiple equilibria is prudent, regardless of the solu-

tion technique. For discussion of models with multiple equilibria, see Kehoe
(1980).

—Ri —

Fullerton—Henderson—Shoven

References

Adelman, I. and Robinson, S.

1978. Income distribution policy in developing

countries. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.

Atkinson, A.B. and Stiglitz, J.E. 1980. Lectures in public economics. New
York: McGraw Hill, Inc.

Auerbach, AJ. and Kotlikoff, L.J. 1982. National savings, economic welfare
and the structure of taxation. In Feldstein, M.S., ed., Simulation Methods

in Tax Policy Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Forthcoming.

Ballentine, J.G. 1978. The incidence of a corporation income tax in a growing
economy. Journal of Political Economy 86: 863—875.

Ballentine, J.G. and Ens, I. 1975. On the general equilibrium analysis of tax
incidence. Journal of Political Economy 83: 633-644.

Ballentine, J.G. and McLure, C.E., Jr.

1980. Taxation and corporate financial

policy. Quarterly Journal of Economics 94:

351-372.

Ballentine, J.G. and Thirsk, W. 1979. The fiscal incidence of some experiments
in fiscal federalism. Ottawa, Canada: Canadian Mortgage and Housing
Corporation.

Boadway, R.

1979. Long-run tax incidence: A comparative dynamic approach.

Review of Economic Studies 46: 505—511.

Boadway, R. and Treddenick, J.M. 1978. A general equilibrium computation of
the effects of the Canadian tariff structure. Canadian Journal of Economics

11: 424—446.

-R2 -

References (continued)
Boskin, M.J. 1978. Taxation, saving, and the rate of interest. Journal of
Political Economy 86: S3—S27.

Bovenberg, A.L. and Keller, W.J. 1981. tnamics and nonhinearities in applied
general equilibrium models. Nimeo, Central Bureau of Statistics, the
Netherlands.

Bulow, J.I. and Summers, L.H. 1982. The taxation of risky assets. Mimeo,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dervis, K., de Melo, J., and Robinson, S. 1981. A general equilibrium analysis
of foreign exchange shortages in a developing economy. Economic Journal 91:
891—906.

_______________________________________

1982. General equilibrium models for

development policy. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Devarajan, S., Fullerton, D. and Musgrave, R. 1980. Estimating the distribution of tax burdens: A comparison of different approaches. Journal of
Public Economics 13: 155—182.

Dungan, D.P. 1980. An empirical multi—sectoral Wairasian—Keynesian model of
the Canadian economy. Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University.

Feldstein, M.S. 1974a. The incidence of a capital income tax in a growing economy with variable savings rates. Review of Economic Studies 41: 505—513.

References (continued)

1974b. Tax incidence in a growing economy with variable factor

•

supply. Quarterly Journal of Economics 88: S51—S73.

1978.

______________•

The welfare cost of capital income taxation. Journal

of Political Economy 86: S29—S51.

Feldstein, M.S. and Slemrod, J. 1980. Personal taxation, portfolio choice, and
the effect of the corporation income tax. Journal of Political Economy 88:
854—866.

Feldstein, M.S., Green, J. and Sheshinski, E. 1978. Inflation and taxes in a
growing economy with debt and equity finance. Journal of Political Economy
86: S53—S70.

Feltenstein, A. 1980. A general equilibrium approach to the analysis of trade
restrictions, with an application to Argentina. In International Monetary

Fund, Staff Papers, volume 27, #4. Washington, D.C.

______________•

1982.

Money and bonds in a disaggregated open economy. This

volume.

Fromm, G. and Klein, L.R. 1976. The NBER/NSF model comparison seminar: an
analysis of results. In Klein, L.R. and Burineister, E., eds., Econometric

model performance: Comparative simulation studies of the U.S. economy.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Fullerton, D.

1982a. The transition losses of partially mobile industry speci-

fic capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics. Forthcoming.

-R4 -

References (continued)
____________

1982b.

On the possibility of an inverse relationship between tax

rates and government revenues. Journal of Public Economics. Forthcoming.

Fullerton, D., and Gordon, R.H. 1982. A reexamination of tax distortions in
general equilibrium models. In Feldstein, M.S., ed., Simulation methods in

tax policy analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Forthcoming.

Fullerton, D., and Henderson, Y.K. 1981. Long run effects of the Accelerated
Cost Recovery System. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
#828.

1978. General equilibrium analy-

Fullerton, D., Shoven, J.B., and Whalley, J.

sis of U.S. taxation policy. In U.S. Treasury Department, 1978 compendium
of tax research. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

________________________________________

1982. Dynamic general equilibrium

impacts of replacing the U.S. income tax with a progressive consumption tax.

Journal of Public Economics. Forthcoming.

Fullerton, D., King, A.T., Shoven, J.B., and Whalley, J.

1981. Tax integration

in the U.S.: A general equilibrium approach. American Economic Review 71:
677—691.

Goldfield, S.M., and Quandt, R.E. 1972. Nonlinear methods in econometrics.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Goulder, L.H., Shoven, J.B., and Whalley, J.

1982. Domestic tax policy and the

foreign sector: The importance of alternative foreign policy formulations

-R5-

References (continued)

to results from a general equilibrium tax analysis model. In Feldstein,

M.S., ed., Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press. Forthcoming.

Hall, R.E., and Jorgenson, D.W. 1967. Tax policy and investment behavior.
American Economic Review 57: 391—414.

Harberger, A.C. 1962. The incidence of the corporation tax. Journal of
Political Economy 70: 215—240.

______________•

1966.

Efficiency effects of taxes on income from capital. In

Krzyzaniak, M., ed., Effects of corporation income tax. Detroit: Wayne
State University Press.

______________•

1976.

The incidence and efficiency of taxes on income from

capital: A reply. Journal of Political Economy 84: 1285—1292.

Harrison, C. and Kimbell, L. 1982. General equilibrium analysis of regional
fiscal incidence. This volume.

Hausman, J. 1981. Labor supply. In Aaron, H. and Pechnian, J., eds., How taxes
affect economic behavior. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Jorgenson, D.W., and

Sullivan,

corporate capital
inflation, and the taxation

.M.A. 1981. Inflation and

recovery. In Hulten, C.R., ed., Depreciation,

of income from capital. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.

Kehoe, T. 1980. Uniqueness of equilibrium in production economies. Department
of Economics Working Paper #271, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

-R 6-

References (continued)

Keller, W.J. 1980. Tax incidence: A general equilibrium approach. Amsterdam:
North Holland.

Laan, G. vander and Talman, A.J.J. 1979. A restart algorithm for computing
fixed point without an extra dimension. Mathematical Programming.

Mansur, A. and Whalley, J.

1982. Numerical specification of applied general

equilibrium models: Estimation, calibration, and data. This volume.

McLure, C.E., Jr. 1970. Tax incidence, absolute prices, and macroeconomic
policy. Quarterly Journal of Economics 84: 254—267.

________________

1975.

General equilibrium analysis: The Harberger model

after ten years. Journal of Public Economics 4: 125—161.

de Melo, J.

1978. Estimating the costs of protection: A general equilibrium

approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 42: 209-226.

Mieszkowski, P. 1969. On the theory of tax incidence. Journal of Political
Economy 75: 250—262.

______________

1969.

Tax incidence theory: The effects of taxes on the

distribution of income. Journal of Economic Literature 7: 1103—1124.

Piggott, J.R. and Whalley, J. 1976. General equilibrium investigations of U.K.
tax

subsidy

policy: A progress report. In Artis, M.J. and Nobay, A.R.,

eds., Studies in modern economic analysis. Oxford, England: Basil Blaclcwell.

-R7-

References (continued)

___________________________

1982. Economic effects of U.K. tax—subsidy

policies: A general equilibrium appraisal. New York: Macmillan Publishing

Co. Forthcoming.

Richter, D. 1975. Existence of general equilibrium in multi—regional economies
with public goods. International Economic Review 16: 201—221.

Rosenberg, L.G. 1969. Taxation of income from capital, by industry group. In
Harberger, A.C. and Bailey, N.J., eds., The taxation of income from capital.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Scarf, H.E., with

the

collaboration of Terje Hansen. 1973. The computation of

economic equilibria. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Serra—Puche, J.J. 1979. A computational general equilibrium model for the

Mexican economy: An analysis of fiscal policies. Ph.D. dissertation, Yale
University.

________________

1982.

A general equilibrium model for the Mexican economy.

This volume.

Shoven, J.B. 1973. General equilibrium with taxes: Existence, computation,
and a capital income taxation application. Ph.D. dissertation, Yale
University.

___________

1976.

The incidence and efficiency effects of taxes on income

from capital. Journal of Political Economy 84: 1261-1283.

-R8-

References (continued)

Shoven, J.B. and

Whalley, J. 1972. A general equilibrium calculation of the

effects of differential taxation of income from capital in the U.S. Journal
of Public Economics 1: 281—321.

___________________________

1973. General equilibrium with taxes: A computa-

tional procedure and an existence proof. Review of Economic Studies 40:
475—489.

Slemrod, J.B. 1980. A general equilibrium model of capital income taxation.
Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University.

____________

1982.

A general equilibrium model of taxation with endogenous

financial behavior. In Feldstein, M.S., ed., Simulation methods in tax

policy analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Forthcoming.

Whalley, J.

1980. Discriminating features of domestic factor tax systems in a

goods mobile —

factors

immobile trade model: An empirical general equili-

brium approach. Journal of Political Economy 88: 1177-1202.

