                    NBER WORKINO PAPER SERFS




           INTEREST RATE VOLATILITY AND MONETARY POLICY




                          Carl    E. Walsh




                      Working    Paper No. 915




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                            June 1982




The research reported here is part of the NEER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. The views expressed
herein are solely those of the author and do not necessarily repre-
sent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #915
                                                      June 1982




                 INTEREST RATE VOLATILITY AND MONETARY POLICY




                                    ABSTRACT

        In October 1979 the Federal Reserve shifted from an interest rate

oriented operating procedure to a reserves oriented procedure. It is

argued in this paper that part of the very large increase in interest

rate volatility which resulted from the policy switch may have been due

to shifts in the parainters of the money demand equation, shifts due to

the adoption of a reserve aggregates operating procedure. This result

is derived by comparing rational expectations equilibria in a simple

theoretical model under alternative policy rules. This allows the variance

of interest rates to be explicitly expressed as a function of the policy

rule.




                                                   Carl E. Walsh
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   Princeton University
                                                   Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                   (609) 452—4026
                                                                  April 1982




                  INTEREST RATE VOLATILITY AND MONETARY POLICY

                                 Carl E. Walsh*
I. Introduction
         In October 1979, the Federal Reserve shifted from an interest rate

oriented operating procedure to a reserves oriented procedure. One expected

result   of such a policy shift would be an increase in the short—run vola-
tility   of market interest rates, and this   has occurred. However, the
increase   in interest rate fluctuations has been very large, much larger than

was probably anticipated. According to a review of monetary control proce-

dures carried out by the Federal Reserve staff (Tinsley and others [19811),

the standard deviation of monthly changes in the Federal funds rate increased

from 0.27 in the year prior to the policy shift to 2.4 in the year following

the shift. A simple theoretical model is used in this paper to argue that

part of this increase may be due to shifts in the parameters of the money

demand equation, with the parameter changes being due to the adoption of a

reserves oriented operating procedure. This result is derived by comparing

rational expectations equilibria under alternative monetary policy rules.

This allows the variance of interest rates to be explicitly expressed as

a function of the policy rule followed by the monetary authority.

      The argument advanced in this paper is motivated by the following

line of reasoning. Models of portfolio choice by risk averse asset holders

imply that the demand for risky assets will depend upon the joint probability

distribution of asset returns. In a mean—variance framework, this implies

that the demand for money (and other assets) will be a function of both

expected rates of return (on money and other assets) and the covariances
                                   —2—



among asset returns (Tobin [1958]). If the monetary authority changes the

way in which it adjusts the money supply in response to shocks to the

economy, the covariances between the rate of inflation and the returns on

other assets will be affected. This will result in a shift in asset demand

equations. Hence, the money demand function will change if the monetary

authority shifts from an interest rate oriented policy to a money supply

oriented policy.

      The policy induced change in the demand for money function is not

simply a change in the intercept; interest and income elasticities change.

This means that the old money demand function cannot be used to draw

inferences about the variance of interest rates after a change in the

operating procedure. This, of course, is just another example of the

Lucas [1976] policy evaluation critique.

      Because variances and covariances become important when the money

demand function is derived from an underlying portfolio choice model, the

assumption of rational expectations imposes nonlinear restrictions on the

parameters of the equilibrium expression for the interest rate, Market

clearing implies a distribution function for the equilibrium rate of interest;

in a rational expectations equilibrium this distribution must be identical

with the one upon which asset demands are based.   (See Lucas [1978].)

      By utilizing a model which allows the rational expectations equilibrium

solution for the endogenous variables to be explicitly calculated, it is

possible to discover how, for example, the variance of the interest rate

depends upon the policy rule followed by the monetary authority. The

standard approach to evaluating alternative policies, which assumes that
                                       —3—




the   parameters of the money demand function are policy invariant, is shown

to produce misleading conclusions.-' In particular, a switch from a policy

of stabilizing interest rates to one focusing on monetary aggregates will

lead to greater interest rate volatility than is implied by the standard

approach.

        In order to demonstrate these points, this paper proceeds by first

specifying a simple macroeconomic model in which   the   parameters of the

money demand function are assumed to be policy invariant. Since expecta-

tions of prices and interest rates appear in the model, the assumption

of rational expectations is used to obtain an equilibrium solution. This

solution corresponds to the standard approach described above, and the

implications derived from it provide a benchmark against which to compare

subsequent results.

        The next step is to show how the money demand function used in the

basic model can be derived from a portfolio choice model. This exercise

demonstrates how the parameters of the money demand function are themselves

functions of the stochastic properties of the interest rate and the rate

of inflation. The variance of the nominal price of bonds is, in the model

used in this paper, the crucial variable in solving for the rational

expectations equilibrium. In such an equilibrium, the variance of bond

prices upon which individuals base their portfolio choices must agree with

the   bond price variance that is implied by the assumption of market clearing.
        This additional equilibrium requirement results in nonlinear restric-
tions   on the solution parameters and raises the possibility of multiple

solutions. Nonuniqueness in nonlinear rational expectations models has
                                   —4—



been discussed recently by McCafferty and Driskill [l98O],--" Similar

problems arise in Walsh [1982]. In the present model, the variance of

the price of .bonds must satisfy a quadratic equation so that, in general,

there are two solutions.

      After deriving the solution for the model subject to the nonlinear

restrictions implied by the rational expectations assumption applied to

variances as well as means (hereafter referred to as the nonlinear model),

the remainder of the paper discusses properties of the solution and com-

pares them to the results derived under the standard approach in which the

parameters of the money demand function are assumed to be policy invariant

(hereafter referred to as the linear model). As has already been mentioned,

a shift in policy from a rule which attempts to minimize the variance of

bond prices to one which focuses on a monetary aggregate will lead to a

larger increase in bond price (and hence interest rate) variation according

to the nonlinear model than would be predicted by the linear model. It is

also shown that the policy predicted by the linear model to minimize the

variance of bond prices is, in fact, not the minimum variance po1icy,'

      In the next section the basic model is specified; at this stage,

the portfolio balance function is not derived from an underlying portfolio

choice model. Instead, it is simply assumed to be plausible, and its

parameters are taken to be policy invariant.-' The rational expectations

solution for this, the linear model, is derived in section III, while the

properties of the solution are discussed in section IV. Section V attempts

to show how the portfolio balance equation in the basic model could be

derived from a mean—variance model of portfolio choice. One implication
                                   —5--




of this exercise is that the parameters in the portfolio balance equation

are functions of the stochastic properties of the price of bonds and the

price of money. The nonlinear restrictions this implies for the rational

expectations solution are discussed in section VI. Section VII compares

the results obtained in the nonlinear model with the predictions of the

linear model. Finaily, section VIII provides a summary of the paper's

results.
                                      —6—




II. The Basic (Linear) Model

         There are four equations in the model to be studied: an aggregate

supply function, an aggregate demand equation, a portfolio balance condi-

tion, and a policy rule describing the actions of the monetary authority.

         Aggregate supply is assumed to be determined according to a Lucas—

type supply function in which the deviation of output from its "natural't

level (in logs), y—y, is related to deviations of the log of the price

level,        from the value of   that was expected at the end of previous

period,1P. The most reasonable theoretical rationale for this type of

supply function would seem to be that given by Fischer [1977]; labor contracts

are set at the end of period t—l on the basis of expectations concerning Pt

so that the labor market clears if p =
                                            t—lt   As argued by Barro [1977j,

contracts of this nature are not Pareto optimal. In addition, there seems

to be no empirical support for the Lucas supply function. Nevertheless,

it has enjoyed wide usage in recent theoretical macroeconomics and does

help to simplify the solution of many rational expectations models. Its

ad hoc nature can only be defended by the lack of any superior alternatives.

The aggregate supply relationship is assumed then to be


                  = +               + c; ct>O,                                (1)

where       is a white noise supply shock (EO, Eca2, EeO ts).
         Aggregate demand is assumed to depend upon the expected real return

on bonds. If s denotes the log of the nominal bond price at time t, this

expected real return is given by (s÷i_st) —                   The inclusion of

this variable defers slightly from standard practice. Normally, bonds in
                                     — 7-.




macroeconomic models are assumed to be fixed price, variable rate bonds.

Here, though, bonds are assumed for simplicity to yield only a capital gain.

The expected real rate of interest requires, therefore, expectations both

of the future price level          and the future price of bonds

In the portfolio problem considered in section V, it will be important that

uncertainty about the real return to bonds involves uncertainty about both

     and         and not     alone. Demand is also subject to a mean zero,

serially independent stochastic shock, u, with variance a2. Hence,


                 =   k+                      +
                                                 u;   <O.                  (2)


      The final equation modeling private sector behavior is a portfolio

balance or money demand equation. If upper case letters denote levels of

variables, W real aggregate wealth and M real money balances, the money

demand equation is assumed to be Mt =                       ))W
                                        (r0+Y1y+i2(s1_s               2<°
Defining m as M/W, this equation can be rewritten as


           fl1       'o + it +                                            (3)



      Three aspects distinguish equation (3) from a standard money demand

equation. First, since the nominal return to bonds depends upon        an

expected nominal return variable appears in the demand for money function.

Standard practice includes only an observed actual nominal interest rate

thereby ignoring any expected capital gains or losses on bonds. Second,

on the left—hand side of (3) appears the fraction of total wealth in the

form of money rather than real money balances. This distinction will be

important since it will be assumed that m is the policy variable controlled
                                       —8—




by   the monetary authority. In other words, monetary policy consists of

open market operations which alter the composition of the private sector's

portfolio of bonds and money. Third, no stochastic disturbance term

appears on the right—hand side of (3). Monetary disturbances will arise

on the supply side only (in equation (4) below) through random fluctuations

in m1.

         All three of these departures from a standard money demand equation

are taken with a specific purpose in mind. In section V, I wish to demon-

strate that (3) can be derived as the solution to a portfolio choice problem

in which risk averse individuals maximize expected utility. Equation (3)

is chosen to be so derivable and yet still look as much as possible like a

standard money demand function.

         The choice of m as the policy variable (rather than the nominal

supply of money) has one very important implication: equations (1) —           (3)
cannot determine the absolute levels of either p or s since no one's behavior

depends on the absolute level of either price. Only expected changes or

expectational errors of p and s appear in these equations and both these

types of terms are independent of arbitrary constants added to the solutions

for p and s. The levels of p and s will be determinate if they appear in

the policy rule determining m so that the policy authority's behavior

depends upon the absolute level of p or s. For example, if m is based

in part upon tl and             this particular nonuniqueness problem disappears.

I    choose,   however, not to include either tl   or   s1   in   the policy rule

for    two reasons. First, this paper chiefly deals with the behavior of
variables such as 5t+l5t which are unaffected by arbitrary constants added
                                          —9—



to s. Second, conditional variances, which also play an important role in

this paper and are of the form E(s+i_Es+i)2, are independent of any

feedback from              or s1 to m1. It therefore seems simpler to just ignore

such feedback.

      The general class of policy rules which are considered in this paper

take the form


                  =        + P1mi + 2Ct +        + V
            tnt       P0


where it's are policy parameters, l<p1<l, and v is a mean zero, random

disturbance term.'

      The information structure of the model requires some comment in light

of the assumption in (4) that m can respond to contemporaneous values of the

aggregate supply and demand disturbances,          and u. The sequence in which

information is revealed and decisions are made is as follows. At the end of

period t—l, wage contracts applicable to period t are written. Wages are

based upon expectations of all variables dated t—l or earlier. Next,          and

u, the shocks to aggregate supply and demand are revealed. On the basis of

the realized values of           and u the monetary authority adjusts its policy

variable (i.e., p0+p1m 1+2+113u is determined). Then, v is observed,

but the monetary authority is not allowed to react to it. This shock repre-

sents, from the policymaker's point of view, uncontrollable random noise

in the policy rule. The private sector, however, observes c, u, and v

before taking any action during, period t. On the basis of the observed

contemporaneous shocks, expectations about variables at t+l are formed.

Individuals then allocate their portfolios between bonds and money and
                                     —10—




determine aggregate demand.

     This particular information structure is not crucial for the role of

monetary policy which will be discussed in this paper. Alternative monetary

policy rules will lead to shifts in the portfolio balance equation and thus

in the behavior of bond prices as long as 1) asset demands depend upon the

distribution of      and      and 2) m+i depends upon some variable which

i unobserved at the time the portfolio choice is made. The disturbances


cj          and v41 are all such variables under the information structure

assumed in the paper. If c1, u, and v are not observed when the portfolio

allocation is made, then letting m+i depend upon       u, and v will produce
results similar to those of this paper. Because individuals pay s when they

purchase bonds, and hence observe at least one piece of current information,

it seemed unreasonable to assume they incorporate no current information into

their forecasts of s1 and            One could assume that information on

    and v is obtained only through observing s and therefore the realized

values of these disturbances must be estimated on the basis of the observed

value of s. This, however, leads to severe nonlinearities in solving for

the equilibrium solution (see Barro [1980]). The information structure that

is used in this paper is thus a compromise; it allows perhaps for too much

current information to be available in predicting future prices, but it

leads to a relatively simple solution.

      Because aggregate supply depends upon            and monetary policy

can react to      and u, systematic monetary policy will have real effects;

the distribution of y will depend upon 2 and 143 in (4). Such effects,

however, last for only one period.
                                         —11—



      In later sections of this paper, equilibrium solutions for alternative

policy rules will be compared where alternative policy rules are taken to

mean alternative values for the parameters U,• p1.13.          In particular, two

alternatives will generally be considered. In the first,
                                                                       ]' M2, and
113 are nonzero and chosen to minimize bond price fluctuations. Such a policy

will often be referred to as an interest rate policy. A money supply policy,

on the other hand, will be one in which             and   are nonzero and 1.121.130.

The resulting policy rule, mO+1.tlml+v, can be interpreted as representing

a policy in which the monetary authority has a desired target value, m*, for

in and adjusts toward m* with speed given by


                        =
                            (l_j.Li)(m*.Inti) + v                                 (5)


where nt* =
              o/(1_l)   is a constant. Similarly, the interest rate policy can

be written in the same form as (5) with the target m* equal to (to+1.12t+1.13u)/

(l—M1). In this case, in is adjusted in response to the observed supply and

demand shocks.

      These definitions of what will be called an interest rate and a money

supply policy differ somewhat from standard usage, particularly the interest

rate policy. Usually these alternative policies would be defined in terms

of fixing either (in this model) s or m. A fixed s versus a fixed m does

not, however, seem to be a very interesting choice to consider in examin-

ing the effects of the Federal Reserve's October 1979 policy shift. It would

seem more germane to study policies in which the monetary authority varies

in the extent to which it attempts to reduce fluctuations in either s or m.

In what is here labeled as an interest rate policy, the monetary authority
                                    —12—



"worriest' about bond price volatility, with the money supply rule it "worries"

about volatility in the portfolio composition variable.

      There is, in this model, an additional reason for not treating a fixed

s as one alternative policy. In section V the portfolio balance equation (3)

is derived from an underlying model of portfolio choice. It is shown that

the parameters y, y, and 12 are functions of the variance of s.     If this

variance is zero, these parameters will be undefined. If bonds and money are

only subject to identical price level uncertainty and their yields are not

equal, only one asset will be held. A non—degenerate solution to the port-

folio choice problem of section V requires that s be stochastic with a nonzero

variance.

      There is, of course, no presumption that either of these alternative

policies are in any sense optimal. Given the structure of the model, the

parameters of the policy rule affect the variance of output. Since the mini-

mization. of this variance is a conventional objective in analyzing policy,

the values of 11c'•• 113 could be chosen to achieve this goal. Since the

focus here is only on how the variance of bond prices might be affected by

a change in policy, the issue of optimal policy will not be addressed.

      To complete the actual specification of the model, the joint distribu-

tion of the disturbance terms must be defined. It will be assumed that

u, and Vt are each independent normal variates with means equal to zero
and variances c, c, and a, respectively. Covariances among the three

disturbances are all zero and each is serially independent.

      We now turn to the solution of the basic linear model.
                                                 —13—



 III. The Solution for the Linear Model

        The model consisting of equations (1) —               (4) will be solved by the
method of undetermined coefficients. A trial solution is first hypothesized

for s and            This is then used to eliminate the expectational variables

appearing in (1) —       (3) under the assumption of rational expectations. Solving
then for s and Pt yields functions identical in form to the initial trial

solution; equating coefficients in the two                expressions   for the endogenous

prices produces values for the coefficients in the trial solution in terms

of the basic parameters of the model.

        Trial solutions are given in equations (6) and (7):


              Pt =    a+         a1m1 + a2c +
                                                    a3u + a4v;                             (6)


              St = b     ÷
                             b1m1          + b2c + b3u + b4v,                              (7)


where         are functions of time only and
                                                          a1,.. .,a4, b1,... ,b4 are, as yet,
undetermined coefficients. Recalling the discussion of the previous section,

arbitrary constants a0,b0 can be added to (6) and                (7)   without affecting

the equilibrium. For the reasons discussed in the previous section, this

problem of the indeterminancy of the absolute levels of s and p will be

ignored in the remainder of the paper.

        Eliminating       and          from (1) —   (4)   results in the following two

equations for p and s:


                                     k—y   +              —
                                                                          + u_c            (8)



                + ji1m       1
                                 +          + 13t + V =    0 + 11y +
                                                     —14—



                                                      +         +


Terms   involving     expectations can be substituted out of (8) and (9) by

using (6) and (7) to conclude that


                  Pt —          = a2c + a3u + a4v

                  s —           = b2c + b3u + b4v

                          =
                              ai   + a1m

                          =
                              b+i +       bim.

Using (4) to eliminate m in these last two expressions and then substituting

them all into (8) and (9) yields, when solved for                   and s, expressions for

these two variables which are of the same form as (6) and (7). Equating the

coefficients in these derived expressions for p and s with the coefficients

in the trial solutions yields the following values for the parameters in (6),

the solution for p:


                  a1 =                                                               (lOa)



                  a2 =
                          I8(      -y1)-y2]/y2h                                      (lOb)



                  a3 =                                                               (lOc)
                                 -f-i2]/y2h
                          l—p1
                                                                                     (lOd)
                  a4 ()/y2h
where h =   c'.   —   +               >   0.     In addition,



                  a÷i- a =         (k-)/         -                                   (lOe)
                                                   —15—




Using these results, the equilibrium price level is given by




             Pt
                  =
                      a—    (l—)y2
                                               +
                                                    (l)h (m_im)

                                               —
                                                    (l+yi/y2)(l/h)c   + (l/h)u   (11)




where m_1m =
                       112c+1.x3u+v is the unanticipated (as of t—1) component
of m. Properties of this solution will be discussed in the next section;

equation (11) is simply stated here for later reference.

 •
      The parameters for the equilibrium solution for the price of bonds

are given by


             b1 =     _1h/'(1_l)12                                               (12a)



                  =
                                       1
                                 —                                               (12b)
             b2
                      L1             y11(l/y2h)

                       (—c)j.i
             b3 =                +                                               (12c)
                                           (h/y2h)
                      [   1—

                  =
                      :l,Y2h                                                     (12d)



                                 —
     b+l b =                                                                     (12e)



These results imply that the equilibrium nominal price of bonds can be

written as



             s =      b - (l_i)y2 mi +             (l—1)y2h   (m_1m)             (13)
                                   —16—



     Equations (11) and (13) completely characterize the rational expec-

tations equilibrium for this model. The results of this section can now

be used to examine the properties of the equilibrium.
                                      —17—



IV.   Properties   of the Linear Model

      While the main focus of this paper is on the behavior of bond prices

as a function of the policy rule followed by the monetary authority, it

will be useful to begin a discussion of the model's properties by examining

the equilibrium solutions for the two real variables of the model, the real

rate of return on bonds and the level of output.

      The ex—post real return on bonds is defined as (s+i—P+i) —
                                                                       (s—p)
         Using the solution equations (6) and (7) and the fact that a1 =
                                                                               b1,

                              —
           r+1 —    (bt÷1b)       (a+i_a)    + (b2_a2)(c+i_t)

                              +                                                (14)
                                  (b3_a3)(u+1_u) + (b4_a4)(v+i_v).

The equality of a1 and b1 in the equilibrium solution implies that the real

rate of return is independent of current or past realizations of m. The

reason for this is easy to see. Suppose all disturbances are set equal to

zero. Then, from the aggregate supply relationship, y = y.       With output

determined, the aggregate demand relationship determines the real rate of

return; the current value of       only affects the division of r÷i between

the capital gain on bonds Cs—s and the inflation return

      From (14), the unconditional expectation of the real interest rate,

       is equal to (b+i_b) —                  which, using (lOe) and (12e)
                                  (a+1_a),
implies that Er+1 (y—k)/. This is independent of the policy rule.

      The solution for real output can be found by- using (lOb) —    (lOd) to
evaluate the price level forecast error and substituting the result into

the aggregate supply equation (1):
                                   —18—




                 - (/y2h)(y2+(y1 —
                                     l-1t
                 + (a/y2h)(y2 +


                 + (c/y2h)(/(1_).1i))vt +

             =   + (c8/(l_pi)y2h)(m_timt) —    (1/h)(c_cu)                (15)



Because of the specification of the aggregate supply function, y—y is

serially uncorrelated, unlike r. Each of the coefficients on the distur-

bance terms in (15) are functions of the policy rule parameters so that

the monetary authority can affect the variance of y around y by its choice

of         and I3 The results of section VI below suggest, however,

that choosing the policy parameters to minimize E(y_y)2. as derived from

(15) will not, in fact, minimize the variance of output.

      The equilibrium solution for the price of bonds has already been given

in equation (13). As would be expected, an unanticipated increase in       due

to the random policy rule shock, v, produces a rise in nominal bond prices

                      For a given money surprise, m_im, positive values

of the composite disturbance (e_cLu) will increase bond prices. Since

c>O,<O, positive supply or positive demand shocks both reduce current bond

prices. The net effects of both     and u depend upon the induced effect

each has on m_imt via the policy rule. Even though positive realizations

of both types of shocks tend, for a fixed m_1m to reduce nominal bond

prices, an examination of equation (14) shows that positive supply shocks

reduce, and demand shocks increase, the expected real return on bonds
                                          —19—



        There are two alternative ways in which one could define bond price

volatility, corresponding to the variance of s conditional on information

available at time t—l or the unconditional variance of s .           This   latter
                                                        t
measure is obtained by replacing m1 in the solution for s by o/(l_i)

+ z      (2ct.+13u.+v.). Making            this   substitution yields



                   =
                       b + b1M0/(l—1) + (b2+bllLi)ct
                         + (b3±ii3b1E1.i'L1)u + (b4+blZl4_lLi)vt                     (16)


where L is the lag operator (i.e., L'vt=vt). This expression can then be
used to calculate the unconditional variance E(s—Est)2 which would yield a

measure of the gross volatility of bond prices.-' Generally, however, the

conditional variance of s will be used in this paper as a measure of vola—
         8/
tility.— This is given by


              a2 =
                       Et i(s_Et is)2 = ba2      + b,a2 + ba2                        (17)

which, using the results in (12), is equal to


              a2       (1/yh2)[(312(—a)/(l—3.11) —   11)2a +
                              + ilct)( + ((—c)/(l—ji1))2a2].                         (18)



        Suppose the monetary authority adopts an       interest   rate oriented policy

in which it reacts to supply and demand shocks in an        attempt   to stabilize

bond prices. From (18), it appears that by an appropriate choice of                  and

      nominal bond prices can be completely insulated from variations due to e
                                                —20—



or u. The required values for the policy parameters are 1.t21(l-.1.11)

               >    0 and 3/(lii1) =
                                            —y1cL/(—a)
                                                         >   0.   Interpreting the policy

rule as adjusting m to m* as in (5), m* responds positively to both supply

shocks and demand shocks in order to minimize fluctuations in s. Since

positive realizations of either                or u lead to higher income and a greater

demand for money, both will tend to depress bond prices. To offset this

effect and stabilize s requires an expansionary monetary policy; m* is

increased. The resulting variance of bond prices, for a given adjustment

speed l1.ti    is

               2
              aS/ =        (.)2        a2                                                    (19)
                        (l—i.i1)2yh2

where the new subscript on a indicates that this is the •variance of s

under a policy which picks 1.12 and 1.13         to minimize a. It will be shown in
section VI, however, that this policy does not, in fact, minimize                      for
              9/
a given 11l

      Instead       of attempting to stabilize bond prices, suppose that m* is

not adjusted in light of the realized values of                    and u(1.12=3.13=O). In

this case, m is adjusted toward a constant target at the rate 1—pr.

Equation (18) then implies that




              a51      y2h2 (2a
                                   +   a2a2) + (1_h2 .                                       20



A comparison of (19) and (20) reveals that for equal values of the adjust-

ment parameter
                                            —21—



                    —          =                                   0.
                          Is       (y1/y2h)2(2a2 ÷ 2c2)     c0 >                   (21)


Within the framework of this model, a shift to a monetary aggregates policy

increases the variance of s, a trivial result since the alternative had

been chosen to minimize a. However, equation (21) defining c0 will be

used later in determining the extent to which             in (20) may actually

understate the variance of s when            =     = 0.
      The model specified in (1) —         (3) is ad hoc, chosen for its plausi-
bility and the ease with which it can be manipulated rather than as the

implication of a model based upon individual maximizing behavior. In

particular, the portfolio balance equation (3) corresponds to what Bryant

and Wallace [1980J have labeled the "starting from curves approach." In

the next section, it will be shown how (3) can be derived from an under-

lying model of portfolio choice. This derivation suggests that the

parameters of the portfolio balance equation, 0'1'2' will not be
policy invariant.       Subsequent    sections discuss the implications of this
result.
                                     —22—



V. The Portfolio Choice Model

      The results of the previous section imply that both the rate of

inflation and the rate of interest (capital gains on bonds) are stochastic

variables. The real return from holding either money or bonds is thus

subject to risk. Models of portfolio choice (e.g., Tobin [1958]) suggest

that this risk is important in determining the demand for assets. One

would expect, then, that the condition for portfolio balance, equation (3)

in the model of sections II —   IV, should   depend upon the risk characteristics

of bonds and money. It is this dependency that will be examined in this

section.

      Throughout, it will be assumed that all individuals are identical.

This fiction allows the portfolio choice problem to be formulated in terms

of a representative individual. It is also assumed that the representative

individual exhibits constant relative risk aversion. This implies that

the optimal portfolio composition is independent of the level of wealth.

Such an assumption will be necessary if an equation such as (3) is to be

derived since (3) focuses on the equilibrium fraction of wealth held in

the form of money.

      The solution equations derived in section 3 showed that both bond

prices and the price level were linear functions of normally distributed

random variables. Therefore s and p were themselves normally distributed.

In this case the returns to holding bonds and money are completely

characterized by their means, variances, and covariances. Assume then

that the risk averse representative individual's expected utility can

be written as a linear function of the mean and variance of his or her
                                       —23—



portfolio's real rate of return, r:


                       —
             u =                                                             (22)



The return on the portfolio is defined as r+i r+1m + rb+l(l_m)

where r and rb are the real rates of return on money and bonds,

respectively, and m is the fraction of wealth held in the form of money.

In previous sections, rb+l has been approximated by (s1—p1) —           (s_p).
The real return to money will be assumed to consist of two components: a

return to the transaction services yielded by money and a capital gains

return resulting from price level changes:


             r+i =      —                                      .
                                                                             (23)

where, for simplicity, the transactions return is taken to be proportional

to real output. One could think of T     as   a function of the variance of indi-

vidual expenditures within each period. (See Santomero and Seater [1981].)

       By rearranging the first order condition for the maximization of (22)

with   respect to       and defining           E (s+.i_Ets÷i) +i_Ep+i) the
following relationship can be derived:


                    (l-2)   +—1-y -             (s1-s).                      (24)




Equation (24) is of exactly the same form as the original portfolio balance

relationship given by equation (3).. However, equation (24) allows a

structural interpretation to be given to the parameters of equation (3).
                                        —24—



                                                =                 = t/pa2, and
Comparing the two equations reveals that
                                                    l_r,IO   ''

      —l/pc2.

        If a requirement for a rational expectations equilibrium is that
the distribution of asset returns implied by the model be identical to

the distribution upon which asset demands are based, then the value of ci2

which   appears in (24) must equal the value of       predicted by the model.

This condition imposes nonlinear restrictions on the model since equation

(24) implies that 2 is a function of a while equation (18) implies that

cr2 is a function of y.

        The implications of this additional restriction are developed in the

next two sections, but one conclusion is immediate. In the previous section

two   alternative   policies were considered. Each policy led to a different

variance of bond prices (Y1      in equation   (19) and 'm in equation (20)).

In comparing these two    variances,   however, l and    were treated as fixed

parameters which remained unchanged as         changed. The results of this

section show that this was not a valid assumption. It is necessary to redo

the comparison, taking into account the changes in - and 2 induced by the

policy shift.
                                                  —25—



VI.   Equilibrium in the Non—Linear Model
      Sections III        and IV showed how the actual distribution of bond prices

is a function of the parameters of the portfolio balance equation.

Section V showed how the parameters of the portfolio balance equation

are functions of investors' (homogeneous) beliefs about the distribution

of bond prices. In a rational expectations equilibrium, the subjective

distribution upon which
                                      y,     and 2 are based must equal the actual

distribution determined by

clearing.
                                           l'   and          via theassumption of market



•

      In deriving the solution in section III, only the means of the actual

and the subjective distribution of s were required to be equal. The

requirement that the variances also be equal implies that 12 and o are

linked by two relationships. With                     = t/pcy2   and 1'2 =   —T, equation

(18) becomes,




                s
                    =
                        (2a2+22)
                        h   c  u
                                         +     2(-) (23a)r 1     h
                                               ('—pi)                     L12


                                +
                                    (i_lli)2
                                                ÷) ri   h2


                        c0 +c    -l+c          fl]2                                         (25)
                                1L12J      2['2J

where h =   c——rt.          From (24),


                    =   —l/p2   .                                                           (26)
                                               —26—



Using the results of section V, the equilibrium functions (11) and (13)

for the log of the price level and the log of the bond price can be re-

written as



                   = a   +   pcr2.i1
                                       m1 —
                                                 pa
             Pt
                             (l—i)              (l—1)h (m_im)

                         —
                             (l_r)(l/h)c       + (l/h)u                                   (1l)


                   =
                       b + (1—pi) mr_i     —
                                                 (1-i1)h (m_im)

                         + (t/h)(et_cLu)                                                  (13)



Equilibrium in the non—linear model is a quadruple (P,s,y2a2) which

satisfies (ll), (l3), (25), and             (26).     Because of the structure of the

model, equations (25) and         (26)   can be first solved for        and
                                                                              cr.   The

resulting solution value of cr2 can then be substituted into (1l) and (l3)

to find the equilibrium values of Pt and s.

      Using (26) to eliminate             from (25) yields the following quadratic

equation in cr2:



             c2p2cr' —                           0.                                       (27)
                          (l+c1p)a2 + c0

Equation (27) admits of three possibilities, corresponding to whether there

is no positive solution for cr2, a unique solution, or two solutions. Which

alternative is relevant depends upon the values of c0, c1, and c2, of which

c1 and c2 depend upon the policy parameters ,                   and           Certain choices
                                                                      1t3•
                                             —27—



of the policy rule parameters can lead to a situation in which no rational

expectations equilibrium exists in this model (see Walsh [1982] for a

similar conclusion in an overlapping generations model).

        Figure 1 graphs the two relationships between            and 2 that must

simultaneously be satisfied in a rational expectations equilibrium. The

curve PP represents equation (26):             = —1/pa2.   Curves AA, BB, and CC

represent equation (25) for alternative values of c1 and c2. For convenience

in making the comparison, c0 is taken to be the same for each of the curves.

        AA has no intersection with PP: there are no (12a) combinations

which are simultaneously consistent with the portfolio choice model and

market clearing. BB leads to a unique equilibrium with                and a given by

point EB. Finally, CC has two intersections with PP, both of which are

rational expectations equilibria. At E, a2 is small, leading via Pp to

a large 2' A large 2 implies that random shocks to in require only small

bond price movements to maintain money market equilibrium. Hence, bond

prices are relatively stable, thus validating the large 2 The opposite

story can be told about E. For the case in which there are two solutions,

only E, where CC cuts PP from above, is a stable equilibrium; E is

unstable. This is illustrated in Figure 2. Suppose initially that indi-

viduals believe that a <           so that from PP Ii >               Market clearing
                                                             i'r21.
implies that     will lead to a variance of bond prices greater than that upon

which     was based. This leads to an adjustment in 2 that moves it toward

    Similar reasoning shows that E            is unstable. Since along PP a2 - 0 as

  + —, and, along cc    a2-   +        and     —, as   long as c0 > 0 if there are
                                  c0
two equilibria, the one with the smaller a2 will be the stable equilibria.
                                        —28—



       Suppose we now reexamine the policy that equation (18) (which ignored

the dependency of 12 on a) implied would minimize bond price fluctuations.

This policy involved choosing 12 and           such that b2 =        = 0 in the
                                                                b3
solution equation for s. This in turn leads to equation (25) taking the

form


               a2 ——    (_c)2
                           z2a2                                                   28)
                $      (l—p1) h v L12


which is just equation (19). This relationship between a2 and 2 is graphed

in Figure 3 (labeled II) together with the curve PP derived from (26). At

point E, o = (l—p1)2h2/(—a)2p2a2 and the slope of II (2/py) is greater
than the slope of PP (1Ipy) so that II cuts PP from below as drawn in

Figure 3. Hence, the equilibrium at E is unstable. The other intersection

between II and PP is at o = 0,      2 = — at     which point the equilibrium is

not consistent with 0 < m < 1.

       When the dependency of 2 on a is ignored, the policy which attempts

to minimize bond price variation is either explosive (if the economy starts

out to the right of E, that is, if initially individuals expect bond prices

to be fairly volatile) or converges to an equilibrium in which the demand

for money is either zero or equal to total wealth. If points at which the

equilibrium is not defined for 0 < m < 1 are excluded (i.e., if we exclude

a2 =   0),   it is clear that point E, the nonzero bond price variance associated

with the linear model's minimum variance policy does not, in fact, minimize

the variance of s. Alternative policies, such as the one associated with

the dashed curve in Figure 3 lead to stable equilibria with a variance of

s less than
                                      —29—




VII. Predicting a When Policy Changes

      Suppose that the monetary authority has been following a policy

designed to lead to relatively stable bond prices. Let the resulting

relationship between     and a implied by market clearing under this

policy be a locus such as AA in Figure 4.

      Now suppose that the monetary authority decides to adopt a policy

under which the target m* is not adjusted in response to the realized

values of either e or u (p2=iI3=O).i1 Using the linear model solution of

section IV, this policy switch is predicted to lead to greater interest

rate volatility. If the dependency of 12 on cr2 is ignored, will the

predicted increase in the variance of s exceed or fall short of the actual

increase in the variance? In other words, suppose the model in (1) —      (4)
is estimated using data from the policy regime under which      was the

variance of s.    If the resulting empirically estimated parameters are

used to evaluate the new policy, suppose sL       is predicted as the new

variance of s. How does L compare with           the actual new equilibrium

variance under the aggregates policy in which 1.12         0.
                                                     113


      That       and aN will differ is simply one example of Lucas's [1976]

policy evaluation critique. The parameters of empirically estimated

macroeconomic models are not policy invariant. By explicitly deriving

in section V the relationship between the parameters of the portfolio

balance equation and the underlying stochastic structure of the model,

one can say more about the relationship between aL and a2N than simply

that they will differ.
                                                   —30—



      Let ''                be the estimated parameter values obtained during the

previous policy regime. Estimation error will be ignored so that                           = 1 —


 sps
  /2,    1
             =   r/p2,
                    s
                            and
                                  2
                                      =    1/p2s   where
                                                             sp
                                                                    is the covariance between S

and p during     the previous policy regime. From equation (18), the predicted
variance of   s under the new policy is




              SL 2h2 (2a2+a2a2) +


                   =        +                                                                 (29)
                       Co
                                (i_1i1)2h2


      Equations (25) and (26), however, imply that the actual variance

under the new policy is given by the solution to


                     2           (8—a)2ap2a
              aN = I_.(2a22a2) +
                                                      (l—i.i1)2h2




                   =        + (s—a) 2° aSN                                                   (30)
                       Co
                                  (l—ii1)2h2



      The first term in both (29) and                  (30) equals c0 Since 12 =
      = —t, and h ispo1icy invariant. Subtracting (29) from (30) yields



      (a2NL) =                            (p2
                       (—c)2a2p2
                             V
                                          (a'sN—au)
                                                 s
                                                      > 0                                    (31)
                        (1—.i1)2h2
                                         —31—



since asN >   c and (—c)2a2p2/(l--ii1)2h2 > 0.     Equation (31) shows that

a shift in policy from one which stabilizes (partially) bond prices to

a monetary aggregates policy (as defined in this paper) will result in

a larger increase in the variance of bond prices than would be predicted

from a model estimated under the previous policy regime.

      Figure 4 illustrates this result, E1 represents the initial equilibrium.

The shift to     =        = 0 results in a new locus of (y2,a2) points consistent
                     p3
with market equilibrium; let this locus be BB. The new rational expecta-

tions equilibrium is at E2.

      The standard approach to policy analysis treats         as a policy

invariant parameter, equal to          Given the shift from AA to BB, the

variance of s is predicted to rise to           given by E3. This will be less

than the actual rise in the variance since the induced fall in the interest

elasticity of the demand for money is ignored.
                                     —32--




 VIII. Summary and Conclusions

       Previous models in the rational expectations macroeconomic literature

 have assumed that the parameters of the
                                             equation describing portfolio
 balance are policy invariant. Models of portfolio choice, however, imply

 that these parameters are functions of the stochastic properties of the

 interest rate (bond prices in this model). This leads to two relationships

 connecting the bond price elasticity of the demand for money and the

 variance of bond prices. First, the assumption of market clearing makes

 the variance a function of this elasticity, and, second, the elasticity

 is, from the portfolio choice model, a function of the variance of bond

prices. Finding values which simultaneously satisfy both restrictions

leads to the possibility of multiple solutions.

      If monetary policy can react in the future to shocks which are not

observed when individuals choose their portfolios, changes in the policy

rule followed by the monetary authority will affect the stochastic proper-

ties of bond prices. Such a policy change will, therefore, also result

in changes in the parameters of the portfolio balance equation. This is

an example of the Lucas policy evaluation critique: we cannot assume the

parameters of the portfolio balance equation remain constant under alterna-

tive policy regimes.

      By linking portfolio balance to a specific model of portfolio choice,

it was possible to determine how parameters such as the bond price elasticity

of the demand for money depended upon the policy rule. It was shown how

ignoring this dependency would lead to an underestimation of the increase

in the variance of bond prices that would result from a shift to a monetary
                                   —33—



aggregates policy.

      In focusing on the role of the policy rule in affecting the variance

of bond prices, other properties of the model were not discussed. For

example, the results of the papers cited in footnote 1 are called into

question; attempts to design policies to minimize output fluctuations

which neglect the induced shifts in asset demand equations will fail to

lead to the optimal policy.
             Figure 1




                             A       CP    2
                                          as



                                     tc


         A                       /
         B
                        E'
                                          Co

     P



72
          CNu
                lb


     C)




a)




                              I?-




                               c-sJ
                     C)

                          0
           Figure 3



                           2
                      I   as




           E               2
                          as'
                            Is
      E'

P



'12
            'Y2S
      z C1cn C',l
      b b lb
     CNu,




                     z
j.                   C4
     C1
     w
r4
          C)        I?-
          w


               I
               I

                     CJ
                                     Footnotes

*Assjsant Professor, Princeton University, and      Visiting   Scholar, Federal

Reserve Bank of Kansas City.      I would like to thank members of the research

department of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City for helpful comments.

Any opinions expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect

the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City or the Federal Reserve

Sys tern.


1/ The original analysis of interest rate versus money supply policies was

due to Poole [1970]. Other authors utilizing this approach include Friedman

[1977], Sargent and    Wallace   [1975], Flood [1979], Woglom [1979], and Weber

[1981].     The results of all these papers are called into question by the
arguments made in this paper.
2/ Problems of uniqueness in linear rational expectations       models are discussed

in Taylor [1977] and     Flood and Garber [1980].
3/   The minimum variance policy implied by the linear model has two     solutions.
One   involves   a positive variance for bond prices which is not a minimum (and

is unstable). The other implies a zero variance (which is obviously a mini-

mum), but, given a money demand function derived from a mean—variance

framework, a nonstochastic return on bonds implies nondiversified portfolios.

Since nominal interest rates appear to be stochastic, the statement in the

text ignores the zero variance solution.

4/ It thus corresponds to what Bryant and Wallace [1980] describe as the

"Starting from Curves" approach common in macroeconomic modeling.

5/ By definition 0      m   1.   It is assumed that this is never a binding con—

straint.
 6/ Since the model can determine rates of inflation and capital gains but

not levels of p and s, only a+1 —
                                    a,   and similarly b+1 —
                                                               b,   can be

determined.

 7/ This measure of volatility ignores, however, the change in s due to

the evolution of the deterministic part of s (i.e.,
                                                      b_b_i).
 8/ In Tinsley et al. [1981], Ei(s_Etis)2 is described as "a more

relevant measure of undesirable interest rate volatility than the fluctuations

of total changes" in bond prices.

 9/ The policy which from (18) appears to minimize     is shown in section VI

to be consistent with two equilibria: in one, a2 > 0 and is not a minimum;

the other has a = 0 which is certainly a minimum but implies that the demand

for either money or bonds is equal to zero or the optimal portfolio allocation

is indeterininant. Among "well defined" equilibria, then, the policy does not

minimize a2. This is discussed further in section VI.
          S

10/ Since money and bonds in this model are both liabilities of the govern-

ment, m is constrained to lie between 0 and 1. It is assumed that this is

not a binding constraint.

       is taken to remain unchanged as a result of the policy shift.

12/ The subscript L denotes that this corresponds to the variance predicted

by the linear model of sections III and IV.
                                    References

Aoki, Masanao and Matthew Canzoneri [1979], "Reduced Forms of Rational

      Expectations Models," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93, No. 1

      (February), 59—71.

Barro, Robert J. [1976], "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary

      Policy,"Journal      of Monetary Economics, 2, No. .1 (January), 1—32.

Barro, Robert.J. [1977], "Long—Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary

      Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 3, No. .3 (July), 305—316.

Barro, Robert J. [1980], "A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business

      Cycle Model," Econometrica, 48, No. 6 (September), 1393—1417.

Bryant, John and   Neil   Wallace [1980], "A Suggestion for Further Simplifying

      the Theory of Money," Staff Report 62, Federal Reserve Bank of

      Minneapolis (August).

Fair, Ray [1981], "Estimated Effects of the October 1979 Change in Monetary

      Policy on the 1980 Economy," American Economic Review, 71 (May),

      160—165.

Feige, Edgar L. and Robert McGee [1979], "Has the Federal Reserve Shifted

      From a Policy of Interest Rate Targets to a Policy of Monetary Aggre-

      gate Targets?" Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 11, No. 4

      (November), 381—40 4.

Fischer, Stanley jl977], "Long—Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and

      the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 85,

      No. 1 (February), 191—205.

Flood, Robert P. [1979], "Capital Mobility and the Choice of Exchange Rate

      System," International Economic Review, 20, No. 2 (June), 405—416.
Flood, Robert P. and Peter M. Garber [1980], "Market Fundamentals vs. Price

      Level Bubbles: The First Test," Journal of Political Economy, 88,

      No. 4 (August), 745—770.

Friedman, Benjamin [1977], "The Inefficiency of Short—Run Monetary Targets

      for Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 293—335.

Klein, Benjamin M. [1977], "The Demand for Quality—Adjusted Cash Balances:

      Price Uncertainty in the U.S. Demand for Money Function," Journal of

      Political Economy, 85, No. 4 (August), 691—715.

Lucas, Robert E. [1976], "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,"

      in The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, edited by K. Brunner and

      A. H. Meltzer, the Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series, Vol. 1,

      19—46.

Lucas, Robert E. [1978], "Asset Prices inan Exchange Economy," Econometrica,

      46 (November), 1429—1445.

NeCafferty, S. and R. Driskill [1980], "Problems of Existence and Unique-

      ness in Non—Linear Models of Rational Expectations," Econometrica,

      48 (July), 1313—1317.

McCallum, Bennett T. [1980], "Rational Expectations and Macroeconomic

      Stabilization Policy: - An Overview," Journal of Money, Credit, and

      Banking, 12 (November, pt. 2), 716—746.

McCallum, Bennett T. [1981], "Price Level Determinancy With an Interest

      Rate Policy Rule and Rational Expectations," Journal of Monetary

      Economics,   8 (November), 319—329.
McCallum, Bennett T. and   James G. Hoehn [1981],   "Money Stock Control With
      Reserve and Interest   Rate Instruments Under Rational Expectations,"
      miineo (October).

McCallum, B. T. and J. K. Whitaker [1979], "The Effectiveness of Fiscal

      Feedback Rules and Automatic Stabilizers Under Rational Expectations,"

      Journal of Monetary EconOmics, 5 (April), 171—186.

Poole, William [1970], "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a

      Simple Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (May), 197—216.

Santemero, A. M. and J. J. Seater [1981], "Partial Adjustment in the Demand

      for Money: Theory and Empirics," American Economic Review, 71

      (September), 566—578.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace [1975], "Rational' Expectations, the

      Optimal   Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"
      Journal of Political Economy, 83 (April), 241—254.
Taylor,    John B. [l975], "Monetary Policy During a Transition to Rational

      Expectations," Journal of   Political Econy, 83 (October), 1009—1021.
Taylor, John B.    [1979], "Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model

      With Rational Expectations," Econometrica, 47   (September), 1267—1286.

Tiasley,   Peter A., Peter von zen Muehien, Warren Trepeta, and Gerhard Fries

      [1981], "Money Market Impacts of Alternative Operating Procedures,"

      Federal Reserve Staff Study, New Monetary Control Procedures, Vol. II

      (February).

Tobin, James [1958], "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk,"

      Review of Economic StudIes, 25 (February), 65—86.

Walsh, Carl E. [1982], "The Demand for Money Under Uncertainty and the Role

      of Monetary Policy," mimeo (March).

Weber, Warren E. [1981], "Output Variability Under Monetary Policy and
     Exchange Rate Rules," Journal of Political Econy, 89 (August),
      733—751.

Woglom, Geoffrey [1979], "Rational Expectations and Monetary Policy in
      a Simple Macroeconomic Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93

      (February), 91—105.
