                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE ECONOMICS OF MORTGAGE TERMINATIONS:
                IMPLICATIONS FOR MORTGAGE LENDERS
                        AND MORTGAGE TERMS


                      Patric H. Hendershott

                             Sheng Hu

                         Kevin E. Villani


                      Working Paper No. 918




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                            June 1982




Research support from the Office of Policy and Research
Development, Department of Housing and Urban Development, is grate-
fully acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #918
                                                    June 1982


              Th! Economics of Mortgage Terminations:
        Implications for Mortgage Lenders and Mortgage Terms


                             Abstract

       The paper begins with the development of models explaining

the mortgage refinancing and assumption decisions of households.
Having identified the economic variables influencing these

decisions, we then simulate the models for different values to
determine under what conditions households will refinance or

assume. Finally, we draw some implications of these results
for:    (1) the impact of a decline in mortgage rates on the asset

portfolio yields of mortgage lending institutions and (2) the
effect of the observed rise in interest rate volatility, including

the optimal terminations response of mortgage borrowers, on the
terms of the mortgage contract and the returns to mortgage lenders

on recently issued mortgage loans.




Patric H. Hendershott    Sheng Hu                   Kevin B. Villani
Ohio State University    Krannert School of Mgt.    Office of Econ. Affairs
1775 College Road        Purdue University           Dept. of HJJD
Columbus, OH 43210       West Lafayette, IN 47906   451 7th St. , SW
(614) 422-0552           (317) 494-4461              Washington, D.C. 20410
                                                     (202) 755-5426
                      The Economics of 1'brtgage Terminations:
               Implications for Mortgave Lenders and Mortgage Terms

       For   the past 50   years, mortgage   debt   has been repaid in a relatively

predictable    mariner.    Amortization occurred according to a prespecified

 schedule,   and Prepayments took the form of either a lump       sum upon   the sale
of   the house collateralizing the mortgage or occasional double monthly payments

as households saved via accumulation of housing equity. Households moved more

frequently in some parts of the country than others but, in general, the

determinants of household mobility were quite stable and predictable.             Prepayment
for wealth accumulation was attractive because alternative investments--savings

accounts--paid low interest rates. On average, 30-year mortgages terminated

in the twelfth year,

      History is unlikely to be a reasonable guide to future mortgage terminations

because mortgage rates have both risen sharply and become generally more

volatile since 1979. We might anticipate numerous complete prepayments (re-

financings) without the sale of the underlying house if mortgage rates decline

sufficiently from their recent heights, On the other hand,           in   the l970s and

especially recently, we have observed a sharp increase in assumptions of existing

mortgages when the underlying houses were sold and a related rapid growth in owner-

financing, Moreover, gradual prepayment of mortgages (double payments) is

improbable because yields on alternative household investments have become far

more attractive.

      The present paper is divided into three sections, We begin with the develop-

ment of models explaining the economics of the refinancing and assumption decisions.

Having identified the variables influencing these decisions, we then simulate the

models for different parameter values to determine under what specific conditions

households will refinance or assume. Finally, we draw some implications of these

results for;     (1) the impact of a decline in mortgage rates on the

asset portfolio elds of mortgage lending institutions
                                      —2—




 and (2) the simulated effect of the observed rise in interest rate
 volatility, including the optimal terminations response of mortgage
 borrowers, on the terms of the mortgage contract and the returns to
 mortgage lenders on recently issued mortgage loans.
                I. Models of the Mortgage Termination Decision
      The ex post tennination of a mortgage reflects the exercise of the
 borrower's   option which is often related to the observed course of

 interest rates in a way that reduces the ex post yield to investorsj

 If rates on newly—issued mortgages decline below the coupon rates on

existing mortgages sufficiently to outweigh the costs of refinancing

 (including   closing costs, repayment penalties and additional points
charged the borrower), then most homeowners will terminate mortgages and
refinance at the new lower rates. This eliminates the capital gain that
otherwise   would accrue to mortgage lenders. On the other hand, if
mortgage rates   on new issues rose above the coupon rates on existing
mortgages, then homeowners who would normally tenninate their mortgages
upon the sale of their houses will instead be encouraged by the new
buyers to allow assumption of the old mortgages, lengthening the mort-
gage life and increasing the capital loss accruing to lenders. This
section develops explicit models of the refinancing and assumption
decisions. The analysis assumes level—payment, fixed—rate financing.
     A.   Ref inancings

     Just like corporations, households may be expected to repay (call)

existing debt and refinance if it is financially advantageous to do so.

The following model predicts that a mortgage will be called when the present



1For evidence on this point, see Curley and Guttentag (1974).
 value of expected benefits exceed the costs. The model considers only
 financially motivated refinancings.
      The payment   on a level payment mortgage of amount X and maturity N

 carrying a fixed rate i, where a denotes the period the mortgage was

 originated, is


                                  (l+i
                            °xJ
            PAY(i ,X,N) =
                 o                       H
                              LCi+i —1

The factor in brackets captures the amortization of the mortgage. The

principal outstanding on this mortgage in period k is



           PRIN(i0,X,N,k) =
                                             N —
                                  (1+1)          1


Finally,   the payment on the mortgage if it is refinanced at rate               for

the remaining maturity N—k is2




           PAYCik. PRIN(i ,X,N,k), N—k] =            ikPRIN(i.x,M,k)            H-k
                                                                       (l+ik)
                                                                                      —1




     If the borrower expects to maintain the mortgage for L additional periods

(1 C N—k) and 1k represents the appropriate discount rate for all future periods,

then the present value of the expected benefits of refinancing in period k are:




    the initial loan had a maturity of 30 years and is refinanced after
 5 years, then the new loan is assumed to equal the outstanding loan and to

 original payment if    =   i.
 have a maturity of 25 years. Note that the new payment is identical to the
                                                 14




brk   =
            L
                                 ——--—-
                  F'A?(i,X,M) — PAY[i
                                    t-k
                                           °
                                      PR1N(i ,X,N,k), M—k]
                                            ,
                                                                             ____pi-k
                                                                            }'RIN(i ,...)   — PRIN(i   ,,..)

          t=k+l


The last term, which is zero if L = M, reflects the difference in amortization

rates of the two mortgages. The benefits are obviously greater the larger

is the decline in i, the greater was the amount of original mortgage (X),

the larger is the remaining principal (the lower is k) , and the longer the

borrower expects to maintain the mortgage (the larger is L)

       The cost in period k of refinancing the remaining balance of the mortgage

is

                crk =



where the term in parentheses reflects normal closing costs and repayment

penalties (u) plus any additional points that may be charged the borrower

 (v) to provide a "below market" coupon rate. The v term includes points

paid by the buyer and points paid by the seller but built into the price

of the house, and both u and v are expressed as a percentage of

principal. Refinancing will be profitable in period k if brk_crk >

          The benefits and costs of refinancing are plotted in Figure 1 as a

 function of k. The height of crk depends solely on the initial principal

 and the cost parameters, u+v. The crk schedule declines monotonically, although

 quite slowly at first, as the mortgage amortizes.                   The height of the brk


schedule depends on the expected holding period L and the decline in i (iO_ik)

as well as the initial principal. The brk schedule also declines morotonically




31f a call appears only marginally beneficial to a borrower at time k,
but there is a significant probability that a call will be substantially
more beneficial at some future period, even after discounting the interim
cost, refinancing will be postponed.
               —4 a—




                                M

                                C)




                                      Fs.




                                      m
                                      m
                                      Mi
                                      rt
                                      [0


                                     ct
                                     n
                                     C
                                     (0
                       c-f           (n
                           U)
                                     0
                                     H)
                       f-I-
                       0
                                     m
                                     H)
                       '-I
                                     C)
                                     -J.
                                     eQ
                                     (0




         C)
         C
         (0
         c-f
         0)
U)
C

Zr
Q  -L.
ii Hi
c-tm
                                      -.5—




 with the amortization of the existing mortgage. Because the shapes of the

 schedules are so similar, the refinancing decision is quite insensitive

 to k. Either the decline in the mortgage rate is sufficient to
                                                                   trigger

 refinancing, given L and u-h', or the decline is not. The schedules are

drawn such that the household will refinance.



     B.     Assumptions

     Just as large declines in interest rates tend to shorten the average

life of outstanding mortgages, increases in interest rates can lengthen

the life of these mortgages dramatically. All FRA/VA mortgages contain

assumability   clauses. Ibile most conventional loans written since 1970
contain 'due—on—sale" clauses, an explicit prohibition of the assumability
provision, these clauses have proven somewhat difficult to enforce.
Moreover, due—on—sale and asstmability clauses only apply on the
transfer of title; homeowners can choose not to rre precisely to avoid
tenninati.ng the rrnrtge contract. This may be thought of as an "implicit
assumption"   by the existing owner. It is   identical from the investor's
perspective   to an assumption by a new buyer.

     The benefits to the assumDtion, explicit or implicit, of an

existing   loan are exactly analogous to the benefits of refinancing;
the present value of the expected benefits of an assurnotion is the
discounted savings from naking payments on the outstanding principal
at the lower old rate rather than at the higher current rate. In fact,
we can siuply write

    bak = _brk

4See Sanders (iq8l) for a   state by state analvsis of the enforcahilitv of due on sale.
 Its lelity is currently being considered by the Supreme Court.
                                               —6—




         The cost of an explicit assumption is the discounted
                                                              extra outlays
 made on the financing of the remainder of the house purchase that would
 otherwise be financed at the current mortgage rate,      If the house (and
 thus the T1rol" loan) has risen in value at rate ir (inflation net of
 depreciation) and the financing rate for the 'loan" in excess of the
 assumption is i, then the payments are

                                                                        S   N-k
         PAY(i,n,X,M,k)    =
                               isl(l4)kx   -
                                                PRIN(i,X,M,k)]




The expression for the payment on this loan if it were financed at

PAY(ik)7r)X,M,k), has an identical form but with 1k replacing i. The

costs of assumption, then are


          L     PAY(i5,7r,X,N,k) —                         PRIN(i, ...) — PRIN(ik
cak =
                     k               PAY(ikrXM,k)      +
                                     t-k
        t=k+l
                                                                  -
                                                                      (l+ik)L
        Of course, if i =        —if the   household is sufficiently wealthy

that    it can borrow the increrrental funds (effectively use its ovn
resources) at the rate on first ritrtges, then there are no costs
to assumotions, and all assumable mortgages will be assumed if mortgage
rates rise      at all. On the other hand, i could exceed        the secondary
itrtge rate to the extent that the combined monthly mortgage payment on
the assumed and second mortgages exceeds that on a first mortgage and
that the household faces a siiificant cash—flow constraint. The combined
payment could be higher, even though the average interest rate on the
assumed and second mortgages is less than that on the first mortgage,
                                        —7-




 owing   to the shorter remaining tenn of the assumed mortgage and the
 typical short tenn of second mortgages. Thus
                                                       i< likely varies
                                                          —



 over t lire, depending on the cash flow position of the marginal borrower
 that must be induced to purchase a house with an assumable mortgage.
        The cost of an implicit assumption is the loss of real income and/or
the misallocation of consunction between housing and other goods owing
to not moving. That is, one might forego a more lucrative job, if it
requires relocation, or one might not "dovmsize" or "trade up" in
response    to changes in real income and/or the real price of housing

services. These costs are discussed and modeled in Hendershott and

Ru (1982) and (Hendershott (1982). In the present paper, we consider

the costs of explicit assumptions only.

       The costs and benefits of assumption at a given point in time are

plotted in Figure 2 as functions of k. The cak schedule rises (from

zero) initially as the amount of the second mortgage rises owing to

ii   > 0 and amortization of the first mortgage. However, at some point

(rouily k =     ft'2)   the costs decline, owing to the shorter period

(remaining expected loan life) over which the costs will be paid.

The height of the cak schedule is largely detenoined by i .              The

bak schedule declines monotonically as the period over which the benefits

are   cumrrrulated becorres pro-essively shorter. Its height depends
primarily   on how far interest rates have risen since the original

mortgage   was obtained (ik — i0). The schedules are drawn so that the
mortgage will be assumed if the underlying house is sold prior to
period k. Prior to this period, bak >         cak;   later, ba c
       The difference between baK and caK is the net value of the old
                   Figure   2:   Benefits and Costs of Assumptions
ba, ca
         gross benefit
                         (ik_i)
                                                                     costs
                                                                             ik)
         seller
                                                                                        Life of
                                    k                                              30   Mortgage
                                        —8—




mortgage that is received by the seller. This value obviously depends

upon i —         a spread that is determinea in the relevant local market

for assumed mortgages. This detenydnation is illustrated by the supply

and demand schedules     for a standard unit   of siguificantly (say 2%)
"below—market"   assumable mortgages drnwn in Figure 3.      standard unit
                                                              The

is defined as a combination of principal, maturity and below—market
coupon rate such that the present value of the stream of interest
savings is a thousand dollars. Thus, bak equals $1000 for the unit.
The supply curve in Figure 3 is the number of these units made available
to the market by sellers in a given period. The higher the price paid
for each unit, the greater the number offered. The demand depends on
the liquidity or cash—flow constraints of households that desire to
purchase houses. For households with no constraint (they can easily
supply own equity for the entire difference between the sales price and
the amount of ah assumable mortgage), the deithnd is horizontal at bak.
At a sufficient supply, households facing constraints mast be drawn
into the market by lower prices; thus the demand curve eventually falls
off.     The higher the level of interest rates, the more binding are
cash—flow constraints, and the greater is the fall off in demand.
     The solid schedules in Figure 3 might refer to the situation at
the end of 1977. The supply is limited because virtually no mortgages
were issued in   the   1969--l977 period at a rate siguificantly below the
late 1977 rate of 9     percent.   As a result,    —
                                                       i< was low for the marginal
investor,   as was cak. Thus, the net benefit of assumDtions was close

to the gross benefit.

       The sharp jump in mortgage rates in the last four years has had

an   enonnous Thipact on the net benefit. First, the supply of units of
               Figure 3: Determination of the Net Benefit of
                          Assumption ofa Standard Be1ow.-Ivrket Nortgage
                                            1977
                                                                    /1981
         bak
(ba—ca1)1979                                                    /
                                                   N   /
                                                           /
                                                   I
                                          //               01981
                                                                            Mortgages Assumed
                                                                            Per Period
                                     —9—




below—market, assumable mortgages grew enormously . Second, many
potential homebuying households have become severely cash—flow
constrained. This twists the demand schedule clockwise. The net result
is a sharp drop in the net benefit (bak —    cak)
                                                    relative to the gross
benefit   (bak).

     C. The addition of Taxes

     Taxes   alter the above expressions in a   fairly straight-forwaz

manner. Let interest payments of the relevant household be deductible

at rate 0. Equations (1) and (3)   are   then changed in two ways. First,

the discount rate becomes an after tax rate, i = (1 —
                                                            °'k    Second,

the difference in the streams of tax savings on interest payments must

be subtracted. For brk, this difference is:


     —       ofiQPRmiO)t_l_ikPikt_1]
         t=k+l
                       (l+i)
For caK i replaces i0.
    We also must change the expression for the cost of refinancing.

If points charged the borrower toprovidea below—market rate are the

only deductible costs, then the correct expression is:


     crk =
                                       -'0-




                        11. Some Simulation Results


       In the following pages we compute the net gains (benefits less

  costs) from refinancings and assumptions for various values of the

 key parameters. These values are selected to enable us to deduce (in

 Section III A below) how far interest rates will have to fall from recent

 levels in order (1) to trigger massive refinancings and (2) to deter

 the continued assumption of old mortgages (those carrying 8 and 9

 percent coupons) upon the sale of the underlying houses.



                            A. Refinancings



      The parameters key to the refinancing decision are the difference

 between the original and current mortgage rates, 10     - ik,   and the

 upfront fees and points, u +   v.    The higher are the points1 the more the

 mortgage rate must decline in order to make refinancing

 profitable. In fact the relationship is virtually a linear one. With

 a holding period of 12 years, a mortgage life of 30 years and an initial

 mortgage rate of 15 percent, the issuer will gain from refinancing if



         —
             1k   * fu +   (1   - S   )v]




within the first twenty years of the mortgage life. For exaniple, if u

were 0.02 and v iero, then the mortgage rate need only decline to 14½

percent. In contrast, if v = 0.08. a decline to 12½ percent is required.

This approximation is roughly correct for tax rates of zero and 0.3.
                                      —ii —



    While the calculation is most heavily influenced by the decline         in

the mortgage rate and the upfront charges, the calculation is also

sensitive to the effective remaining holding period of thefl owner if it

is short. The impact of variations in M and L are illustrated by the

data in Table 1.       In the first three rows, the remaining effective

holding period is assumed to be the remaining life of the mortgage

(L = M   -
             k).   As is shown, a 1½ percent decline in the mortgage rate

(from 15 percent and assuming upfront fees equal to 6 percent of the

mortgage) will produce profitable refinancing if the decline occurs

before the remaining maturity falls below 10 years, regardless of the

original maturity of the mortgage. This result holds for household

tax rates of 0.0 and 0.3.

    Rows 4-6 illustrate that the refinancing decision is sensitive to

the expected holding period and that the household tax rate matters if

the expected holding period is not long and the Srtgage rate declines

by a particular amount. In these calculations, the original maturity of the

mortgage is 30 years, and the effective holding period is 8 years. With

this short a holding period, the 1½ percentage point decline in the

mortgage rate (from 15 percent) will trigger refinancing for households

who take the standard deduction ( =       0.0)   only if the decline occurs before

the fourth year after origination. For households in the 30 percent tax

bracket, even an instantaneous decline of This magnitude will not induce

refinancing. Rows 5 and 6 suggest that 2 or 2½ percentage point declines

will induce refinancing even-as late as the 24th year of the mortgage. The

sharper decline is needed for households in higher tax brackets.
                                        Table 1
               The Refinancing Decision; Initi4l Mortgage Rate   (1 )   of   0.15 and
                               Up Front Fees (u-f-il) of 0.06
New Mortgage   Original Maturity     Effective Holding
  Rate         of the Mortgage                             Refinancing Will Occur Prior
                                     Period Remaining      to This Year of
                                                                           Mortgage Life
                                                           6=0.0                        6=0.3
    .135              20                 20—k                10                          10
    .135              25                 25 —   k            15                          15
   .135              30                  30—k                20                          20
   .135              30                    8                     4                        0
   .130              30                    8                 24                          11
   .125              30
                                           8                 24                          24
                                          -13-




                                  B. Assumptions


         Recall that the trade off driving the assumption decision is the

  lower costs on the existing mortgage vis a vis the extraordinary costs

  (second mortgage rate greater than first mortgage rate) of the second

 mortgage. The greater has been the increase in mortgage rates since

  the mortgage was issued,       —   i,   the more profitable is assumption.

 On the other hand, the greater is the excess of the second over the first

 mortgage rate i —          and the larger is the portion of the total

 financing taking the form of the second (the greater is the net inflation

 rate, rr, and the time since the original mortgage was issued, k),

 the less profitable is assumption.

        In the calculations presented below, the rate on second mortgages

 has been set two percentage points above the rate on first mortgages.

 This constant difference reflects two offsetting factors. On one

 hand, we would expect the difference to rise as the maturity of the

 second rises because lenders tend to charge higher rates on longer term

 second mortgages. On the other hand, the longer is the maturity of the

 second, the less likely is the cash flow on the assumed and second mort-

gages to pose a problem for the borrower. The original mortgage is assumed

to carry a 9 percent coupon and have a iife of 30 years.

        The   data in Table 2 indicate how   increases in new-issue mortgage

rates   raise   the desirability of assumption. In the upper half of the

table, the gross benefit of assumption is reported for households in zero

and 30 percent tax brackets assuming a 7 percent net inflation rate,

roughly the rate in the U.S. between 1972 and 1981. The percentage

capital gains 4, 8, and 16 years after origination on a 9 percent coupon,
                        -
                                         -14-


 30 year mortgage are listed for different vajues of the new issue

 mortgage rate. As can be seen, with new issue yields in the 15 to 17½

 percent range, the capital gains are enormous. For mortgage issued

 in 1978 (four years ago)   ,   the   gain is 30 to 40 percent of the original

value; for mortgages issued in 1974 (eight years ago), the gains are

only 4 percent less-. Eight years from now the gains would still be in

the 20 to 25 percent range. In general, the gains are 3 percent less

for those in the 30 percent tax bracket than for those not paying taxes.

    The data in the lower half of Table 2 refer to the net benefit of

assumption.5 The last year in which the mortgage will be assumed is

reported, as are the percentage net gains on the old mortgage that will

exist after the fourth and eighth years. The results are reported for

two net (of depreciation) inflation rates. Of course, the higher is

the inflation rate, the smaller are the net gains from assumption

upon sale of the underlying house because a larger portion of the sale

price is financed at the higher second mortgage rate.

    Consider first the results for a 7 percent net inflation rate. A one

percentage paint increase in the mortgage rate to 10 percent will induce

an assumption only if the house sale occurs within 4 years after the

mortgage was first originated. An increase from 9 to 15 percent, in

contrast, will lead to an assumption if the sale occurs within the first

15 years of a 30-year mortgage (12 years of a 20-year mortgage). If the

sale occurs at the end of the fourth year (1982 for a mortgage originated

in 1978), the gain to the seller is 29 percent of the face value of the

mortgage. At the end of the eighth year, the gain is still 21 percent.



5The reported results are households       taking the standard deduction and
are little different for households        in the 30 percent tax bracket. The
last year in which the mortgage will       be assumed is, at mOst, one year
less and the percentage capital gain       is never reduced by as much as
one-tenth.
                                          -15-




                                      TABLE 2

      The Assumption Decision: Initial Mortgage Rate (i0)              of   0.09 and

                     Original     Maturity (M) of 30 Years

A. Gross Benefit: inflation rate (it)            =   0.07
                             tax, rate (e) = 0.0                           tax rate (8) =       0.3
New Issue         % Gain           % Gain            % Gain     % Gain            % Gain              % Gain
Mortgage          After            After             After    After              After                After
Rate (ik)         4 Years          8 Years           16 Years 4 Years             8 Years             16 Years
.10                  8                7                     4      6                   6                     3
.125                23               20                 13        20                17                   11
.15                 34               30                 20        31               27                    17
.175                42               38                 26        39               34                    22




B. Net Benefit: tax rate (8) =         0.0
                    NET INFL&TIQN RATE (it) =         0.07        NET INFLATION RATE (iT) = 0.12
New Mortgage      Last Year           % Gain         % Gain     Last Year       % Gain     % Gain
Rate (ik)         Mortgage Will       After          After      Mortgage Will          After          After
                  Be Assumed          4 Years        8 Years    Re Assumed             4 Years        8 Years
.10                      5                 2            0              3                    0            0

.125                  12                  18            9              7                   14            0

.15                   15                  29           21           10                     26           11

.175                  18                  38           30           12                     35           21
                            -
                                        -16-

        With a net inflation rate of 12 percent, assumption is less
                                                                    attractive;

    assumption will occur only about two-thirds as far into the life of the

    mortgage as was the case for a 7 percent net inflation rate. To

    illustrate, with a current market mortgage rate of 15 percent, assumption

    would occur through the tenth year; with a 17½ percent rate, the net

    gain after 8 years is 11 percent.

     The above calculations explain both the passions generated by the "due-on—

sale" controversy and the growth in owner financing. There are enormous gains

at stake. Sellers with low rate mortgages surely would like to avoid giving up

the gains (to the lenders from whom the gains were received). If owner financing

is required, so be it. Moreover, there are other interested parties such as

realtors. In a depressed housing market owing largely to high real and nominal

interest rates, house sales are down and so are real house prices. The incorpor-

ation of special financing terms (based on the favorable terms on the existing

mortgage) into a sales contract both increases the volume Of sales and maintains

the list house price upon which fees are earned. If due-on-sale clauses were

rigidly enforced, then many households who would otherwise move would maintain

their existing homes.6


                     III. Implications of the Calculations


       The above analysis has at least two interesting implications. The

   first is the likely impact of a decline in mortgage interest rates

   from their current high level on the return mortgage lenders are earning

   on their existing portfolios of mortgage loans. That is, at what interest

   rate level will old mortgages earning 9 percent and less cease being

   assumed   (will the rate of repayments at thrifts return to normal) and


        6See Hendershott and Flu (1982)..
                                      17


at    what level will recent issues of mortgages earning 15½ to 18 percent

be refinanced? The second implication is for the value of the terminations

call option in recent mortgage contracts. Our calculations suggest that

movements in mortgage rates within the range observed in the past four

years can have an enormous impact on the life of a mortgage because most

issuers terminate their mortgages to their economic advantage and to the

disadvantage of lenders (call the mortgage if rates fall and put it if

rates rise). As a result, the expected return to mortgage lenders could

be significantly less than the promised return. To compensate, Jenders

will charge an up front "origination fee" or a higher mortgage coupon rate

than they otherwise would. Hypothetical values of this compensation are

computed.



A. Declining Interest Rates and The Return on Thrift Asset Portfolios



        Declining interest rates might be expected to restore thrift profit-

ability through two channels. First, and most obvious, the cost of funds

would fall. This is not of concern to us in this paper. Second, some of

the    low-coupon mortgages made in the l970s might be terminated sooner than
otherwise with the funds reinvested at higher rates. That is, the profit-
ability of assumptions would decline, and the incentive to "stay put" with
an   existing   loan would be diminished. This would, of course, augment earn-

ings only gradually over time as the underlying houses were sold.

       The above analysis suggests that the decline in new mortgage rates

would have to be substantial for the profitability of assumptions to be

reduced sufficiently to eliminate the assumption phenomenon in the near term,

except possibly in very high inflation areas like California. Mortgage
                                     18




rates in 1981 fluctuated between 15½ and 18 percent. The data in Table 2

 implied that with r =   0.07 a decline to 12½ percent will not deter
                                                                        assump-
tions on the 9 percent mortgages issued as early as 1973 until at least

1987.

        Mortgages issued prior to 1973 are less likely to be assumed because

of their shorter remaining lives but more likely to he assumed because they
carry lower coupon rates (between 7¼ and 8½ percent for the mid 1969-mid
1973 period and down to 6 percent for the early 1960s) .   Our   analysis sug-
gests that   the new mortgage rate must decline below 13 percent for there to

be any significant reduction in the near term in assumptions of 30 year mort-

gages issued after 1965. In higher inflation areas, a reduction in the new

mortgage rate to 13 percent would virtually end the assumption phenomenon.

     Rather than ending the assumption phenomenon, declines in mortgage

rates in the near term are likely to trigger substantial refinancings, and

these would occur instantly (they do not depend on the sale of the under-

lying house). If new mortgage rates should fall to 13 percent, then prob-

hably half of all the mortgages issued since the beginning of i980 cou]d

profitably be refinanced. This would, of course, offset some of the bene-

fits of the decline in the cost of funds of thrifts.


                   B. Mortgage Values and Coupon Rates


     The value of a mortgage is the discounted present value of the total

cash flow it generates. If we are certain that the mortgage payments wili



      7The assumption of mortgages originated in the first half of the 1960s
will be stifled, and the principal of these 30-year mortgages still exceeds
half of its original value. However, the size of these mortgages was
quite low owing to the low price of houses (and relatively low loan—to-
value   ratios) at that time.
                                                   19




  be made and that the mortgage principal will be prepaid at the end of the

  kth year, then



                k PAY(i0,X,M)             PRIN(i0,X,M,k)
        vC=                           +
                f1t                           k
                                              II
                   fl     (l+y5)                   (l÷yr)
                  j=l                     j=l



 where y is the yield on a pure discount bond of maturity t.

        There is, of course, a large array of termination patterns that might

 occur with significant probability, at least one for every future interest-

rate scenario. Moreover, each scenario implies a different set of discount

rates (y's). For simplicity, assume that there are three possible interest

rate patterns: rates can rise, fall, or remain the same. We denote these

patterns by y(TJ), y(D) and y(C), where U denotes up, Ddown, and C constant.

 If the probability of rates rising is p and of rates falling is also p. then

the probability of rates being constant is l-2p. The value of the mortgage

is then



        Vu = pVU     +    (l-2p)VC   + pVD,


where                                                   -




                X   PAY÷Gi PRINt_1                          PRIN(X)
        vx= E                                 +                        forXY,   C, P.
              t=l
                          [l+(l-e)y(x).J            II [1÷(l-O)y(X)J
                    k=l                            k=1



The arguments in the PAY and PRIN functions are dropped, except for the pre-

payment date, because they are the same as above. Note that interest payments

are deductible at the lender's tax rate S and that after-tax discount rates

are employed.
                                         20




       Consider the case where the prepayment (termination) of a 30-year

mortgage is assumed (by the lender) to be independent of future interest

rates and is expected to occur at the end of the twelfth year. Assume

further that the mortgage and discount rates are 15 percent and that

interest rates are expected with probability p to average 15½, 16½ and

17½ percent in the next three periods and to average 18 percent thereafter.

Assume further that rates are expected, again with probability p, to average

14½, 13½, and 13 in the next three periods and y percent thereafter. If

p =   0.2   and y =   12.64, then a mortgage loan of X will be valued at X by tax-
exempt investors. The data in the exogenous row of Table 3 indicate how

the changes in interest rates affect the value of the given mortgage pay-

ment stream. The value when interest rates are constant at 15 percent is

set at unity. When rates rise, the payment stream based on a 15 percent

coupon falls in value to 0.89 or by 11 percent. The decline in interest

rates is specified such that the increase in the value of the payment stream

is also 11 percent.

      Now let the prepayment decision be endogenous. More specifically,

assume that the mortgage will be prepaid (refinanced) at the end of the

third year when interest rates decline but at the end of the twenty-first

year (assumed until then) when interest rates rise. These responses are

consistent with the refinancing and assumption calculations made above. The

data in the second row of Table 3 demonstrate the impact of endogenous term-

inations on mortgage value. When the mortgage life shortens to 3 years with

the decline in interest rates (refinancing occurs), the increase in mortgage

value is only 3 percent. That is, the terminations response wipes out 70

percent of the capital gain that occurred when the mortgage life was fixed at
                                              -
                                                        -21-




                                       Table 3:    Interest Rate Changes and
                                                   Mortgage Value for Mortgages
                                                   with a 15 Percent Coupon


                                    Prepayment Year and Value of Payment Stream      Total Value
                                       Rate = 12.64% Rate = 15%    Rate = 18%         (p =   0.2)
                Terminations          Year Value        Year Value   Year Value
                Exogenous               12 1.11          12 1.0       12 0.89              1.0

                Endogenous               3 1.03          12 1.0       21 0.87              0.980




                                     Table 4: Interest Rate Uncertainty and
                                               the Premium in Mortgage Coupon Rates


                      Tax Rate = 0.0                                              Tax Rate =     0.3
      y   (%)     Total Value        Mortgage Premium                y (%)      Total Value         Mortgage Coupon
                   (Par =    1.0)            (basis poipts)                     (Par = 1.0)         (basis points)

0.1   12.94           0.990                        19                12.80         0.990                 24

0.2   12.79           0.980                        41                12.65         0.980                 50

0.3   12.74           0.969                        66                12.60         0.969                 80
                                  -22—



 12 years. Moreover, the capital loss in response to an increase in interest

rates is exaggerated by the lengthening of mortgage life to 21 years (assump-

tions occur). Here, however the impact is not large; the loss is increased

by about 15 percent.

    The last column in Table 3 indicates that the value of the mortgage falls

by 2.0 percent. This is the cost to the lender of giving the borrower the

option of terminating the mortgage at his discretion. An upfront fee of 2

points (or percent of par mortgage value) would offset the decline in mortgage

value--would equate the expected yield on the mortgage to that on a "mortgage"

which terminates with certainty at the end of the twelfth period.

    The total-value columns of Table 4 show how changes in the probability of

significant increases or decreases in interest rates (in p) affect mortgage

value for lenders in 0.0 and 0.3 tax brackets. As can be seen, the relationship

between p and value is negative and approximately linear. Mortgage lenders

can charge borrowers for the terminations option over time via a higher

mortgage coupon rate and thus greater monthly payments rather than by a single

upfront payment. The results of converting the single payments into higher

coupon equivalents are listed in the mortgage-premium columns of Table 4.

In these calculations, we determine how high the mortgage coupon rate would

have to be to maintain mortgage value at par even when adverse terminations were

expected. The results indicate, for example, that a 41 basis point premium in

the mortgage rate (a rate of 0.1541) would be appropriate when p =   0.2 for
tax-exempt investors. As can be seen, the premium is approximately a linear

functiGn of p, and the premium is about 20 percent greater for investors in

the 30 percent tax   bracket.
                                     -23—


     In the period after October 6, 1979, when the Federal Reserve appeared

to deemphasize substantially the importance it attached to interest rate

stability, interest rates have been far more volatile than in
                                                                preceding years.
To illustrate, the standard deviation of expost one-month returns on 20-year

Treasury bonds over a one year period has roughly
                                                    quadrupled from 1¼ percent to
5 percent. In terms of our analysis, this should have lead mortgage lenders

to raise their estimate of p substantially. As a result, calculations of

effective mortgage yields that incorporate the cost of the terminations option

should have risen relative to yields on, say, 1O-year Treasury securities.

If the increase in p were from 0.1 to 0.3, then about a half percentage point

relative increase in mortgage coupon rates should have occurred or lenders

should have charged an additional two points upfront. A similar experiment

was performed with larger possible changes in interest rates, namely increases

to 16, 18, 20 and 21 percent thereafter and declines to 14, 13, 12 and z percent,

thereafter, where z is such that mortgage value is unity for the relevant p

when the year of termination is maintained at 12. In this case, an increase

in p from 0.1 to 0.3 would raise the coupon rate by 100 basis points.8




8Between 1978 and late 1981, the yield on pools of near-par GNMAs rose by
 over 100 basis points vis a vis the yield on a comparable maturity portfolio
 of Treasury securities. Hendershott and Villani (1982) have attributed this
 increase to an increase in the termination or call option in mortgage
 coupon rates.
                                   References




A.J. Curley and J.M. Guttentag, "The. Yields on Insured Residential Mortgages,"

    Explorations in Economic Research 1 (Summer 1974).



 P.H. Hendershott, "Mortgage Capital Gains and Housing Demand," Quarterly

      Review, Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati (2:1982.).




 P.H. Hendershott and S.C. Hu, "Accelerating Inflation and Nonassumable

      Fixed-Rate Mortgages: Effects on Consumer Choice and Welfare," Public

      Finance Quarterly 10 (April 1982).



 P.H. Hendershott and K.E. Villani, "The Call Premium in Mortgage Rates:

      An Interpretation of the Changing Spread Between Mortgage and Bond

      Rates," inimeo 1arch 198I.



 B. Sanders, "Due-on-Sale: The National Picture," Mortgage Banking (October 1981).
