                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DOMESTIC TAX POLICY AND THE FOREIGN SECTOR:
          THE IMPORTANCE OF ALTERNATIVE FOREIGN SECTOR
             FORMULATIONS TO RESULTS FROM A GENERAL
                 EQUILIBRIUM TAX ANALYSIS MODEL


                      Lawrence H. Goulder
                         John B. Shoven
                          John Whalley

                     Working Paper No. 919




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge Mk 02138


                            June 1982




Paper presented at the NBER Tax Simulation Conference, Palm Beach,
Florida, January 26—27, 1981. The research reported in this paper
was supported by the Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Treasury
Department. We are very grateful to Charles Ballard of Stanford
University for outstanding research assistance. The research
reported here is part of the NBEP   research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #919
                                                      June   1982
                                   Abstract


                 DOMESTIC TAX POLICY AND THE FOREIGN SECTOR:
          THE IMPORTANCE OF ALTERNATIVE FOREIGN SECTOR FORMULATIONS
           TO RESULTS FROM A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM TAX ANALYSIS MODEL


       There   is a growing recognition among public finance economists of

the inappropriateness of closed economy models for analyzing alternative

US, tax policies. In response to this, this paper reports on four

different external sector specifications for the Fullerton—Shoven—Whalley

general equilibrium tax model of the U.S. The alternative formulations

permit an assessment of their impact on model findings and provide the

enhanced capability for analysis of tax policies which connect closely

with foreign trade issues (such as a VAT).

       Results indicate that the different external sector formulations

can substantially affect the model's findings. When the model permits

international capital flows, the effect of a tax policy can be quite different

from what a closed economy model would predict. Capital mobility substantially

increases the efficiency gain implied by corporate tax integration, while it

more than eliminates the efficiency advantage of moving from an income tax to

a consumption tax (unless adjustments are made in the foreign tax credit).

The sensitivity of the efficiency evaluation of domestic tax policies to the

functioning of international capital markets suggests the need for further

research to determine precisely how those markets operate.


     Lawrence H. Goulder       Professor John B. Shoven Professor John Whalley
     Department of Economics   Department of Economics   Department of Economics
     Stanford University        Stanford University      University of Western
     Stanford, CA. 94305        Stanford, CA. 94305        Ontario
                                (415) 497—3273           London, Ontario, Canada
                                                         N6A 5C2
                                                         (519) 679—3973
I. Introduction

•     There is a growing recognition among public finance economists of

the inappropriateness of closed economy models for analyzing alternative

U.S. tax policies. Foreign trade has increased fairly sharply as a fraction

of GNP in the last twenty years, and capital markets have become more inter-

national in scope. United States investors participate in foreign capital

markets both directly and indirectly through multinational corporations,

and foreign direct investment in the U.S. has grown enormously in the past

ten years. In this paper, we report on some alternative treatments of the

external sector within an empirical general equilibrium model of the United

States economy and tax system. This general equilibrium model has been

described elsewhere [Fullerton, Shoven, and Whalley (1978); Fullerton, King,

Shoven, and Whalley (1978)]. The new specifications of the external sector

are motivated by the twin concerns of developing a general equilibrium analysis

of tax policy where foreign trade issues enter, and of assessing the sensitivity

of earlier results concerning alternative domestic tax policies to the specif 1—

cation of the external sector.

      In previous analyses employing this general equilibrium model, we have

given little emphasis to foreign trade. The external or foreign sector was

modelled quite simply, and relatively little attention was given to how the

foreign sector might influence the U.S. economy. One simplifying assumption

employed in previous versions of the model was that for each commodity, the

value of net trades between the U.S. and the rest of the world remained

unchanged as prices changed. This assumption provided us with a convenient

                                    1
                                    2


way of closing the model, but was difficult to reconcile with utility

maximization. Our alternative specifications are somewhat more complex,

but more plausible.

      The first alternative which we explore is the use of constant

elasticity excess demand functions (a constant elasticity offer curve in

the two good case) to describe foreigners' merchandise trade behavior.

We also consider a variant of this formulation in which certain imports

are treated as imperfect rather than perfect substitutes for comparable

domestic products. For both of these formulations, we consider several

different elasticity parameters to evaluate model sensitivity. We then

present two formulations which model capital mobility between the U.S. and

the rest of the world. The first of these formulations introduces flows

of capital services between the U.S. and abroad which depend on the differ-

ence between U.S. and foreign rental rates. An elasticity parameter controls

the sensitivity of capital service flows to differences in rental rates.

The second of these formulations is similar, but involves capital goods

rather than capital services. These last two formulations permit us to

model the U.S. as a taker of the rental prices of foreign capital. We were

motivated to introduce these formulations partly by the belief that treating

the U.S. in this way might significantly affect the model's evaluation of

alternative tax policies.

      In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the model to these different

specifications, we analyze the integration of corporate and personal income

taxes [Fullerton, King, Shoven, and Whalley (1979)1 and the elimination of

savings distortions in the U.S. income tax [Fullerton, Shoven, and Whalley

 (1980)] under eaéh of these alternative formulations. •We also consider the
                                    3



effects of adopting alternative forms of value—added tax (VAT) in the U.S.

We consider VAT's of both the income and consumption type, and on both

destination and origin bases.

     The plan of the paper is as follows. Wefirst outline the structure

of the basic tax model before any of the modifications we describe are

incorporated. Then we present our alternative foreign sector formulations

and discuss the linkage between foreign trade issues and tax policy design.

A final section of the paper presents results and major findings.


II. Main Characteristics of the Fullerton—
     Shoven—Whalley General Equilibrium Tax Model

      The Fullerton—Shoven—Whalley general equilibrium tax model of the U.S.

can be regarded as a higher dimensional extension of traditional Edgeworth

box analysis, with particular functions and parameter values used to represent

preferences and production possibilities. Taxes enter as ad valorem distor-

tions of factor use, production decisions, and consumer purchases. The model

generates sequences of equilibria through time. The equilibria are connected

through savings decisions which imply different augmentations to the capital

service endowment passed between periods. The model is calibrated to 1973

benchmark data assumed to lie on a balanced growth path for the economy.

      The production side of the model includes 19 profit—maximizing industries

which use labor and capital according to constant elasticity of substitution

(CES) or Cobb—Douglas production functions. Substitution elasticities are

chosen for each industry as the central figures in Caddy's (1976) survey of

the literature and range from 0.6 to one. We use data from the Survey of Current

Business and unpublished data from the Commerce Department's National Income

            model description draws heavily from Section 2 in Fullerton (1980).
                                    4



Division to obtain each industry's payments for labor and capital.1 Base

year quantities are derived according to the convention that a unit of

each primary factor is that amount which earns one dollar net of taxes in

the 1973 benchmark year. A fixed coefficient input—output matrix is derived

from Bureau of Economic Analysis tables.

      The ad valorem tax on each industry's use of capital comprises the

corporation income tax, state corporate franchise taxes, and local property

taxes. The Social Security tax and contributions to workmen's compensation

are modelled as an ad valorem tax on industry use of labor. Various federal

excise taxes and indirect business taxes are modelled as output taxes; a

different tax rate applies to each of the 19 industries. State and local

sales taxes apply to each of the 15 consumer goods in the model.

      The 19 producer goods can be used directly by government, for export,

or f-or investment. These producer goods can also be translated into the 15

consumer goods which enter consumer demand functions. This translation is

made possible by a fixed—coefficient "G" matrix.2 The G matrix is necessary

because the Commerce Department production side data include industries such

as mining, electrical manufacturing, and trade, while the Labor Department's

Survey of Consumer Expenditures provides data on purchases of goods like

furniture, appliances, and recreation.



      'Labor compensation includes all wages, salaries, commissions, and
tips, while capital earnings include net interest paid, net rent paid, and
corporate profits with capital consumption adjustments and inventory valuation
adjustments. Non—corporate profits were divided between labor and capital on
the basis of full—time—equivalent hours and average wage for each industry.
Some industries were averaged over several years to avoid recording transitory
effects.
      2The C matrix derives from data in the February 1974 Survey of Current
Business.
                                        5



          Industry and government payments to buy labor and capital services

 are exactly matched by total household receipts from the supply of each

 factor. The Treasury Department's Merged Tax File provides information on

 labor and capital income for each of our 12 consumer classes, as well as tax

payments and an estimate of the average marginal income tax rate, r., for

each group. These range from a one percent average marginal rate for the

first income class to a 40 percent rate for the highest income class. A

progressive income tax system is then modelled as a series of linear

schedules, one for each group. Pensions, IRA plans, and Keogh plans are

modelled as a 30 percent saving subsidy to capture the proportion of saving

that now has such tax—sheltered treatment.

      We also model a !tpersonal factor tax," a construct designed to capture

discrimination among industries by the personal income tax. Each industry

is assigned a fraction, f1, representing the proportion of capital income

from industry i which is fully taxable at the personal level. This fraction

is determined from proportions of capital income paid as non—corporate income,

dividends, capital gains, interest, and rent) Taxable capital income is

subject to t,     the overall capital—weighted average marginal personal income

tax rate. At the consumer level, rebates are given to groups with a        less

than t,   while   additional tax is collected from others. The personal factor

tax acts as a withholding tax at the industry level, and corrections at the

consumer level sum to zero. The model thus captures the favorable tax treatment

      1A11 dividends are 96 percent taxable, because of the four percent that
fell under the $100 exclusion in 1973. All retained earnings are 73 percent
taxable. This results from the value tax deferral and rate advantages for
capital gains, as well as the taxation of purely nominal gains. Interest and
rents are fully taxable except for the imputed net rent of owner—occupied homes,
while the non—corporate investment tax credit also appears as a personal tax
reduction varying by industry.
                                     6



given to industries with noncorporate investment tax credit, and to the

housing industry.

      The expanded income of each consumer group is given by transfer

income plus capital and labor endowments.' The latter is defined as 7/4

of labor income. The figure 7/4 results from our estimate that in the

benchmark, 40 hours are worked out of a possible 70 hours. Consumer demands

are based on budget—constrained maximization of thenested CES utility function:



(1)



In the first stage, consumers save some income for future consumption, Cf.

and allocate the rest to a subutility function, H, over present consumption

goods, X1, and leisure, 2..   The elasticity of substitution between Cf and H

is based on Boskin's (1978) estimate of 0.4 for the elasticity of saving

with respect to the net—of—tax rate of return. Saving in the model derives

from consumer demands for future consumption under the expectation that all

present prices, including the price of capital, will prevail in all future

periods. Then income for H is divided between the purchase of leisure, 2.,

and the purchase of a bundle of 15 consumer goods. The composition of the

consumer good bundle derives from the maximization of a Cobb—Douglas function.

The elasticity of substitution between leisure and consumer goods is based on

an estimate of 0.15 for the elasticity of labor supply with respect to the

net—of—tax wage.

      Consumer decisions regarding factor supplies are thus made jointly with

consumption decisions. Demands for leisure and for saving will depend on all


      1Portfolio effects are ignored because dividends, capital gains, interest,
rent, and other capital income types are summed to obtain capital endowments.
                                    7



relative prices, whether for factor endowments or for commodity purchases.

Saving is converted immediately into investment demand for producer goods,

with proportions based on national accounting data for fixed private invest-

ment and inventories.

      In previous versions of the model, the foreign trade sector has been

modelled such that the net value of exports less imports is constant for

each producer good. This simple treatment closed the model, maintained zero

trade balance, and allowed easy calculation of trade quantities, given prices.

As we shall see in the next section, however, this specification was hard to

reconcile with traditional trade theory; hence the alternative external sector

formulations.

      The specification of the government sector completes the model. Revenues

from the various taxes described above are used for transfers, labor, capital,

and producer goods. Lump—sum transfers to each consumer group are based on

Treasury Department data for social security, welfare, government retirement,

food stamps, and similar programs. Government demands for factors and commodities

are represented by a Linear Expenditure System derived from a Stone—Geary utility

function. In equilibrium the government budget is balanced.

      Because the benchmark data required for this model are so comprehensive,

the sources are necessarily divergent. The two sides of a single account are

often collected by different agencies with different procedures, and thus do

not match. In order to use all of these data together, there must be adjustments

to ensure that each part is consistent with the rest. To do this we accept some

data as superior and other data are adjusted to match. All industry and government

uses of factors are taken to be fixed, so consumers' factor incomes and expendi-

tures must be scaled. Tax receipts, transfers, and government endowments are
                                    8



fixed, so government expenditures must be scaled to balance their budget.

Similar adjustments ensure that supply equals demand for all goods and
          1
factors

      The fully consistent data set then represents a benchmark equilibrium,

where values are separated into prices and quantities by assuming that a

physical unit of each good and factor is the amount that sells for one dollar.

Certain elasticity parameters are imposed exogenously, and the model's equil-

ibrium conditions are used to generate remaining behavioral equation parameters

which are consistent with the data set. Factor employments by industry are

used to derive production function weights, and household expenditures are

used to derive utility function and demand function weights. We can use the

resulting tax rates, function parameters and endowments to solve the model,

perfectly replicating the benchmark equilibrium. This calibration allows for

a test of the solution procedure and ensures that the various agents' behaviors

are mutually consistent in our benchmark data set.

      We use the Merrill (1971) variant of Scarf's (1973) algorithm to solve

in each period for a competitive equilibrium in which profits are zero and

supply equals demand for each good or factor. Simplex dimensions are required

only for labor, capital, and government revenue, since a knowledge of these

three "prices is sufficient to evaluate all agent behavior. Producer good

prices are calculated based on factor prices and the zero—profits condition,

while consumer good prices derive from producer good prices through the G trans—

ition matrix. A complete set of prices, quantities, incomes, and allocations

      11n particular, the input—output matrix does not conform to the require-
ment that gross output of each good can be measured by the column sum plus
value added, or the row sum plus final demand. tn iterative row and column scaling
method is employed to generate a consistent matrix, and similar scaling satisfies
similar conditions for the expenditure matrix.
                                    9



is calculated for every equilibrium. Since it is not based on differential

calculus, the computational model can accommodate discrete changes in any

tax or distortion, without linearity assumptions and without ignoring income

effects. There can be any number of sectors and agents, and any specifications

of demand, so long as Walras' Law holds.

      The dynamic sequencing of single period equilibria in the model first

assumes that the 1973 consistent data set or benchmark equilibrium lies on

a steady—state growth path. Observed saving behavior and the capital endow-

ment are translated into an annual growth rate for capital (approximately

2.75 percent), and this growth is also attributed to effective labor units.

This exogenous growth rate for labor is split evenly between population growth

and Harrod—neutral technical progress. The benchmark sequence of equilibria

is then calculated by maintaining all tax rates and preferences, increasing

labor exogenously, and allowing saving to augment capital endowments over time.1

By construction, this sequence will have constant factor ratios and constant

prices all equal to one.

      Policy change simulations are performed by altering tax rates while

retaining preference parameters and the exogenous labor growth rate. Savings

and other behavior then conform to the specified elasticities, growth of capital

diverges from the steady state rate, and the economy begins to approach a new

steady—state path with a new capital/labor ratio. Sequences are compared by

discounting the "H" composites of instantaneous consumption through time with

appropriate terminal conditions. Only leisure and present consumption are

      1We convert a dollar of saving into capital service rental units through
multiplication by y, the real after—tax rate of return. The model assumes that
25 dollars of saving can purchase a capital asset that will earn one dollar per
period net of depreciation and taxes. That is, a value of .04 is used for y.
                                  10


included in this welfare measure because saving is reflected in later

consumption of the sequence. The sequence is discounted at a four percent

rate and includes only the initial population. Otherwise, the importance

of future periods would be sensitive to population growth.

     The welfare gain or loss of a tax change is the aggregate compensating

variation, defined as the number of dollars at new prices that would be

required for each consumer to attain the old sequence of consumption values.

The model thus incorporates both interindustry and intertemporal tax distor-

tions and efficiency changes.


III. Different External Sector Formulations

      In this section we outline alternative ways of modelling external sector

behavior in the general equilibrium tax model of the U.S. In the next section

we explore the sensitivity of results from various policy simulations to the

external sector specifications.


A. The Existing Foreign Sector Specification

      The external sector modelling currently used in the U.S. general equil-

ibrium tax model focuses solely on commodity trade and ignores all capital

transactions. Exports and imports are classified into three categories of

producer goods: those for which there are net imports (7 commodities); those

for which there are net exports (7 commodities); and those which are not traded

(5 commodities). The benchmark data set for 1973 is adjusted to guarantee that

the value of total exports equals the value of total imports. The model then

assumes that the value of net exports remains constant for each export commodity

and the value of net imports remains constant for those commodities which are

imported. For each of the import commodities, we have
                                    11


(111.1)         P N. =
                  ii      N°,
                           i
and for the export commodities, we have


(111.2)
                  Ji
                P.E. =
                           3


where N? and E? are the benchmark net import and export quantities,

respectively. Recall that the benchmark prices are unity, by the units

assumptions. P1, N., P,, E. are the current prices and quantities for

imports and exports. Since initially,


(111.3)          Z E? =   I    N?
                jJ
we always have the condition that


(111.4)          ZP.E. = EP M.,
                   33      ii

or   the value of exports equals the value of imports. This trade balance

condition is necessary in a general equilibrium model which does not allow

for international capital flows.



        This modelling has several drawbacks. First, commodities cannot switch

between being imported and being exported. Far more serious is the feature

that import supply by foreigners reacts perversely to changes in commodity

prices: this specification has import supplies negatively related to prices

with an elasticity of —1.

        A related problem with this treatment is that in the two good analog

it implies an offer curve which is different from those usually found in

traditional trade theory. This difficulty is transparent if we plot, for the
                                              12



two good case, the foreign offer curve which the U.S. economy is assumed

to face. Suppose E and N each now refer to scalars rather than vectors;

the constant value net trade formulation implies


(111.5)          E = E


(111.6)          N = N


where E and N are base year exports and imports, and E' M are export

and import prices, respectively.

      In this simple formulation we can choose E to be the nutneraire and

set       = 1.   The implied foreign offer curve is then:


                 N                            Foreign Offer Curve




                 N0




                      0                   E                         E
                                           0

                      Figure   111.1. Diagram of Foreign Offer Curve



When superimposed on a diagram incorporating the usual form of home country

 offer curve this is seen to violate traditional trade theory on two counts:

 (a) the foreign offer curve does not go through the origin; and (b) the

 foreign offer curve is concave rather than convex to the N axis.
                                     13

          N                          Foreign Offer Curve




                                      Home Offer Curve

          N
           0




               0                E                        E
                                 0


           Diagram 111.2. Diagram of Foreign Offer Curve with
                Superimposition of Traditional Home Offer Curve



      Clearly this simple formulation contains some major departures from

traditional trade theory; consequently, we consider a number of alternative

external sector formulations.

                                            1
B. General Constant Elasticity Specification

      The first alternative specification differs from the simple specification

above in two main ways. First, import supply functions are modelled so as to

have a positive price elasticity. Second, the restrictive Cobb—Douglas type

assumption of the previous specification——the assumption that the value of net

exports remains constant for each commodity——is no longer employed.

      In this formulation, the relative prices of traded goods are endogenously

determined in the model. Trade balance is assured since foreigners' excess

demand functions (export demand and import supply) satisfy budget balance.

      1This section relies on material presented in Whalley and Yeung (1980),
which analyzes the external sector equation system discussed in Boadway and
Treddenick (1978).
                                     14


        This specification operates as follows. For each of the n producer

goods (in the case of our model, n =      19),   we specify an import supply

function and an export demand function, with parameters p and n as price

elasticities of import supply and export demand, respectively:

                       M.
              N.
               1
                 =N?—
                  1e               o<<
(111.7)


               EI =E—-
                   ie             —<n<

where       is the domestic price of imports and          is the domestic price of


U.S. exports (cost—covering price received by U.S. producers). The variable

e can be interpreted as an ehange rate between domestic and foreign prices

although we will show below how e can be removed by a simple substitution

into the trade balance equation. As in all classical general equilibrium

models which focus solely on relative goods prices, this exchange rate is a

purely financial magnitude with no significance for real behavior in long—

run equilibrium, although it is helpful for our exposition if we use this
                 N.                                                     E.
terminology) —i is the price the foreign exporter receives and —--             is
the price that foreign purchasers must pay for U.S. exports. The sign restric-

tions on p and     are discussed below.

        In order to close the system and solve the general equilibrium model,

we add the trade balance constraint that


      'No well—defined financial sectors are specified in our model; there
is no domestic or foreign demand—for—money function which determines the
relative prices of domestic and foreign monies (the exchange rate) in a
purely monetary sense.
                                                             15



(111.8)                                                     E..
                         M. M =                 'E.

If we substitute for M. and Ei from equation (111.7), we have


                                                        n                     "E.
(111.9)                  P                      =             P
               i=1
                         N.
                          1
                            1 e                     i=1
                                                    .             E
                                                                      I
                                                                          1    e



      If we now define



                     =
                         i=1
(111.10)


                              1


equation (111.9) can be solved for the exchange rate parameter
                                  p


(111.11)       e =
                         U1



Finally,   substituting this result in (111.7) gives
                                           p

                                      U
              M = N'P —-
(111.12)        i  iM.a           ii
                                           1)

                                      U
(111.13)      E. = E'P                —-
               1


Note that U1 and             are themselves functions of import and export prices,

respectively. Equations (111.12) and (111.13) can be thought of as reduced

form Import supply and export demand equations. Another interpretation is
                                                         16


that they are the external sector behavior equations compensated for zero

trade balance. They reflect the fact that one cannot simply specify an

import supply elasticity and an export demand elasticity, and simultaneously

assume zero trade balance. The trade balance condition provides a cross

equation restriction implicit in our solution procedure for equations

(111.12) and (111.13).

      Another thing to note about the reduced form import supply and export

demand equations is that they depend only on domestic prices: the exchange

rate has been eliminated by substitution. Thus, equations (111.12) and

(111.13) depend only upon the real terms of trade given by             the — term.
                                                                 1
      In the case where only two commodities are involved, the equation system

(111.7) specifies an offer curve of constant elasticity which describes the

excess demand functions for the foreign sector.               The elasticity of the offer

curve is

               oc =
(111.14)                  1-Hi    ii




                                                         of both foreign
and this parameter oc is related to the price elasticity
export demand and foreign import supply through the equation [see Johnson

 (1961), Ch. II, Appendix]:

                                               PS
                   oc =
                            FD
                            E
                                           E
                                           N        +1
               c                       =
 (111.15)                  FD                       FS
                          LE
                                 —l             c


 where CE and PS define the foreign price elasticities of export demand

 and import supply.

       This implies that in terms of the reduced form equations characterizing

 the system,
                                    17


              FD =   ri(l+p)
(III 16)      C       (u—ri)


which for n   < —1, p > o implies        <   0.   Also,



              FS =
(111.17)
              M          (p-n)


andfor p>0, n<—l,           c>O.
      These elasticities imply that the true price elasticities of the system

of foreign excess demand functions are not in fact given by n and p as the

equations (111.7) might seem to suggest, but by the more complicated forms

described above. Furthermore, p and r are not independent parameters but

jointly imply an elasticity for the offer surfaces we use.- To have the

appropriate sign for the value of c, rj must be less than —1, rather than

simply negative as stated above.

      Because of the form properties of this system, we describe this specif i—

cation of the external sector as one where the U.S. is a taker of a foreign

offer surface (satisfying a foreign economy version of Walras' Law) of constant

elasticity form. The form of utility functions necessary to generate such

surfaces is discussed more fully in Johnson (1954, 1961) and Gorman (1957).

In the section where we present our results, we discuss further our choice

of p and r.

      When we analyze trade in homogeneous products, it is natural to assume

that a country will not import and export the same good. This assumption can

be expressed as


(111.18)      E? •       =0
               1     1
                                   18


However, the assumption is violated by much empirical data: there are a number

of commodities which are both exported and imported by the U.S. This phenomenon

of "cross hauling?t is evident from trade statistics, even with finely aggregated

data, and underlies much of the recent literature on intra—industry trade [see

Grubel and Lloyd (1975) and the subsequent literature].

      There are many reasons for this phenomenon. In some cases, cross

hauling is dictated by explicitly non—competitive behavior, such as that

mandated by the U.S.—Canada automobile manufacturing agreement. However, it

is also possible to reconcile cross hauling with competitive behavior. One

explanation asserts that foreign commodities are qualitatively different from

domestic goods. This assumption of qualitative difference by country (e.g.,

U.S. and foreign cars being treated as close but not perfect substitutes) is

referred to as the "Armington assumption," following Arinington (1969, 1970).

Cross hauling can also be explained by reference to geography and transportation

costs. For example, it may be perfectly sensible for the U.S. to export Alaskan

oil to Japan and at the same time import the identical product through ports

on the east coast and the Gulf of Mexico, given the cost of delivering Alaskan

oil to the east.

      Previous versions of the model dealt only with net trade flows, as if

trade occurred only in one direction for each commodity and there were no

cross hauling. In each of the new formulations, it is possible to deal only

with net trades, as before, or alternatively to allow for cross hauling. When

cross hauling is specified, it is necessary to substitute gross trade flows for

net trade flows in the export demand and import supply equations.   (For example,

E and M'? would represent gross magnitudes in the base year in the previous

equations in this section.) Although our formulations can incorporate cross

hauling, the reasons for the cross hauling are not explicitly provided by the model.
                                        19


 C.   Trade Modelling with Imperfectly
      Substitutable Imports

       Our second external sector specification separates imports into two

 broad categories, depending on whether they are perfect or imperfect

 substitutes in production for domestically produced intermediate goods.

We treat all of the imports discussed in previous subsections as perfect

substitutes in production for U.S. producer goods. We then represent these

imports as a negative component of final demand; as a consequence, every

additional unit of import of producer good i reduces the gross output

requirement of industry i in the model. Industries demanding intermediate

goods from industry i are assumed to be indifferent as to whether those goods

are produced at home or imported.

       We now consider a model specification which allows some imports to

be imperfect substitutes for domestic goods in production. Under this

specification, we introduce a single new aggregated import commodity which
                                                                      1
enters the production structure as an imperfectly substitutable input.

This specification invokes the Armington assumption, since it assumes that

there is a qualitative difference between the imported input and any domestic

inputs used in production [Armington (1969)].

       The foreign excess demand equations are now



(111.19)      M. = M?
               1
                     —
                    1e
                        P. p
                                    o < p    <




                        1E.
              E. El—                —   < n < —l
(111.20)       1 iie

       1The quantities of this imperfectly substitutable import into each industry
were based on rows 80A and 80B of the 1971 U.S. input—output matrix published by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce.
                                       20
and

(111.21)     R = R°   —
                      P
                                     0 < p   <




where (111.21) is the supply function for the import commodity ("resources't)

which enters the production structure. This commodity Is different from all

domestically available goods. The demand for imported resources is a derived

demand based on production requirements (as with the other factors of produc-

tion, labor and capital). M and E may represent either gross or net

magnitudes as desired.

      The trade balance condition is now


(111.22)     PRR +
                      1=1
                            M. N =      E.       E.

      Let


(111.23)     l = R0(PR) +

and


(111.24)     2 =            (PE)'E.
                     1=1

Then, substituting (111.19), (111.20), and (111.21) into (111.22), and using

the above notation, we get
                            1


(111.25)     e =     —


and                             n


 (111.26)     N. =
               1
                     N1 P
                                p


 (111.27)     E. =
               1
                     E1 P
                        E1y1
                                            21

                                 Ii



                            -r
(111.28)     R = R0 P1' —
                        R




As in. the previous section, these are the reduced form or (trade balance)

compensated import supply and export demand equations. They provide a

constant elasticity set of excess demand functions to describe foreign

behavior.

      With this formulation, the production structure has also been modified

to incorporate the imported resource. In the previous version of the model,

the production function for each sector could be written as



(111.29)     Q.
                  = min VA(K., L.),                   .



where the a... (i =   1,... ,n)       are the fixed per unit intermediate input

requirements, x1. are the available intermediate inputs, VA(,) is a CES

value added function with capital (K.) and labor (L.) as inputs, and a. is

the requirement of value added per unit of output.

      Under this new specification, the production function is



(111.30)     Q.   = min{—-_ J[VA(K., L.), R],             ,...




where J is a CES or Cobb—Douglas function for each sector, and a. now represents

the requirements of the resource/value added composite per unit of output. A

critical parameter in this formulation is the value chosen for the elasticity

of substitution between R and VA(K., L.) for each sector, We denote these

elasticities by c1A. We will return to the choice of values for
                                   22



      The solution procedure takes advantage of the separability of the

production structure, as in the original Fuilerton—Shoven—Whalley model.

Each producer first calculates the optimal factor proportions to use in

his value added function, given the minimum factor costs of production.

From this information, the optimal combination of domestic factor value

added and imported resources can be determined by minimizing the per unit

cost of the J function. From this solution, we can compute all domestic

producer prices using the Samuelson non—substitution theorem. These prices

can be used to determine the government's demand for producer products, the

foreign demand for producer goods (exports), and the supply of both producer

good imports and resource imports. The producer good prices determine

consumer goods prices, while the factor prices and the government revenue

determine consumer incomes. Consumer demands are evaluated, :and the derived

demands for producer goods necessary to meet consumer demand for consumption

and investment goods are computed. With these components, we can obtain the
                                                        which the derived demand
demand for domestically supplied producer goods, from
                                                             Further, from all
for labor, capital, and imported resources is determined.

the transactions in the model, government tax receipts can be calculated. The
                                               and government revenue is then
excess demand for labor, capital, resources,

 computed, and the model proceeds as in earlier versions, until an equilibrium

 set of prices and tax revenue is found where all markets clear.

       This specification presents two additional data requirements.   We use a

 modified version of the 1970 U.S. I/O Table underlying our 1973 benchmark data,

 to spearately identify a row of factor imports by industry in our I/O data.
                                                     between U.S. value added and
 We also need to specify a substitution elasticity

 R. For these, we use estimates of the aggregate import price elasticity of
                                      23


import demand for the U.S. In the central case we take the value [from Stern

et al (1977)) of 1.7 to represent the pure substitution effect between domestic

value added and imported resources, and take 0.5, 1.0, and 3.0 as sensitivity

cases.


D. A Simple Modelling of International
    Capital Flows

         To this point, our model formulations have not accounted for international

capital flows. From a modelling perspective, however, it is very important

whether a single international capital market or separate national capital

market is considered, since this choice may significantly affect the perceived

impact of a tax change. In this subsection, we present a simple formulation of

international capital flows, which allows foreign rental rates on capital to

affect rental rates in the U.S.

         Here we add one consumer to the model——a "foreigner" who is endowed with

large quantities of those commodities which the U.S. imports or exports, and with a

large amount of capital services. In the benchmark year, the foreigner's endowment

of each import or export commodity is usually set at 5 times the benchmark level of

imports of that commodity by the U.S., while the foreigner's capital services

endowment is five times the U.S. capital services endowment in the benchmark.

As part of a sensitivity analysis we have varied the magnitudes of the foreigner's

endowments of goods and capital services. The foreigner consumes" most

of his endowments; that is, most of these import goods and capital services are

used by the foreign economy rather than sold or rented to the U.S. In the

benchmark, in particular, the foreigner sells just the observed amount of import

commodities (a fifth of his endowment) to the U.S. economy, and purchases the observed

quantity of export commodities (also a fifth of his endowment) from the U.S. The

foreigner rents no capital services to the U.S. in the benchmark; he thus consumes
                                    24
his entire endowment of capital services. A loose interpretation would be that

these capital services are foreign resources which provide directly consumable

output to the foreigner.
        As U.S. prices change with a tax change, however, the foreigner alters

his behavior. If the U.S. rental price of capital increases above the foreign

rental price (exogenously fixed in real terms), the foreigner will "rent" some

of his endowment to be used in U.S. production (i.e., there will be a capital

inf low from the perspective of the U.S.). On the other hand, should the U.S.

rental price of capital fall below the foreign rental price, the foreigner

may "rent" U.S. capital for his foreign consumption (i.e., a capital outflow

from the U.S. perspective).

        This behavior is specified as

                                        E
                                        K
(111.31)       WK       WK K'KF
where      is the capital service endowment of the foreigner, X are capital

services rented to the U.S. by the foreigner (or rented from the U.S. if

is negative), and EK is an elasticity parameter controlling capital flow

responses in the model.       and       are the rental rates of capital in the

U.S. and abroad, respectively. Since        =     =1   in the benchmark, the

benchmark value of      is zero.

        The critical parameters in this formulation are the ratio of WK to the

U.S. capital service endowment (5 in our central case analysis) and EK. EK

should be negative to give the capital service flow responses we require. In

our central case EK is —1.0. For sensitivity analysis, we use values for

   ranging from zero to -10.0.

        Equation (111.31) thus determines capital service flows in the model,

once factor prices are known. A two stage procedure is thus involved in
                                   25


determining foreign behavior. We first determine X, and from this we

calculate income remaining to be spent on all other goods. For simplicity,

the expenditure on other goods follows a Cobb—Douglas specification, with

weights determined from benchmark data. A point worth noting is that

equation (111.31) is not explicitly derived from utility maximizing

behavior of the foreigner. We focus on welfare evaluations for the U.S.

only, and treat our model of the foreign sector as a model closure system

which satisfies external sector balance and has the qualitative properties

we desire.                                                         -


      Our motivation for this formulation incorporating capital service flows

relates to the recent debate between Feldstein (1980) and Harberger (1980),

about the degree to which the U.S. operates in a relatively competitive

world capital market. Feldstein, observing a high correlation between the

savings of countries and their investment, argues that there are severe

restrictions on the operation of a world capital market. Harberger asserts

that this correlation is not so large and that this statistic is not sufficient

evidence for concluding the malfunctioning of the world capital market.

      This issue is important because of its implications for policy evaluation

from general equilibrium tax models. In a world with a perfect, frictionless

international capital market, the domestic choice between an income and consump-

tion tax would not affect the aggregate employment of capital in the U.S.

Despite the fact that an income tax discourages saving by U.S. consumers, and

thus tends to discourage capital formation, the rest of the world would provide

U.S. industry with capital until its rate of return was equal to the world level.

However, an origin—based tax such as the U.S. corporation income tax would still

be distortionary, affecting both the amount of capital in the economy and its
                                    26


allocation across industrial sectors. In their most recent exchange, Feldstein

and Harberger seemed to be converging to the view that, while there is some

pressure towards equalizing the rates of return to capital across world markets,

this equilibrium is incomplete, and even the partial movements observed take

substantial amounts of time. We can capture the key aspects of this debate

by altering EK, the elasticity parameter for the demand for capital services

by foreigners.


E. An Extension of the Capital Flows Modelling

      The previous subsection has the rest of the world endowed with a large

amount of capital services which it "rents" to the U.S. if the U.S. offers a

higher rental price. If the rental price in the U.S. falls, the foreigner

rents capital from the U.S. While this is a step toward including world

capital markets in our model, it fails to capture important aspects of

foreign investment. Under this specification, a capital inf low involves a

financial outflow (the U.S. must make the rental payments). In fact, the

principal response to high U.S. rates of return is more likely to be direct

foreign investment in the U.S., rather than the rental to the U.S. of foreign—

owned capital. The rest of the world would purchase U.S. capital goods,

providing an iimnediate financial inflow. Foreigners would then accumulatea

claim on the future earnings of their acquired capital rather than receive

immediate financial compensation.

      This behavior can be incorporated in our model using a somewhat different

representation of the "foreigner." The initial U.S. capital endowment of the

foreigner is taken as zero. The foreigner, however, can acquire U.S. capital by

purchasing the savings good (the 16th consumer good, which is a fixed proportion
                                     27



portfolio of real investment goods). He will do this if the expected rate of

return on U.S. investments rises above the expected rate of return on foreign

investments. This will generate a capital and monetary flow. He is interested

in the rate of return net of the corporation income tax, the corporation

franchise tax, and property taxes. Should the U.S. rate of return fall relative

to the foreign rate, he may sell foreign capital to domestic savers. Once again,

we do not model the production structure of the rest of the world; rather, the

foreigner simply "consumes' foreign capital as in the previous subsection.

      This formulation is reasonably complex in terms of modelling. There now

are two kinds of capital goods, foreign and domestic, offering separate (although

conceivably identical) rates of return. Initially, domestic consumers own only

domestic capital and the foreigner owns only foreign capital. The demand functions

are structured such that the foreigners will save in the U.S,. only if the U.S.

rate of return rises above the foreign rate, whereas the U.S. consumers will

purchase foreign capital service endowments only if the U.S. rate of return

falls below the foreign rate. While the U.S. rate of return is endogenous in

the model, the foreign rate is usually set at the benchmark rate, although it

can be influenced by certain tax policies of the U.S.1

      Savings behavior in the U.S. stems from the same demand functions as in

the Fullerton—Shoven—Whalley model, except that it involves not just a domestic

savings good but a composite savings good aggregated over domestic and foreign

savings goods. For each household,


      1For example, in this model the foreign rate of return would be affected
by a U.S. policy which changes the percentage of U.S. consumers' savings which
can be deducted from taxable income. Such a policy alters the after—tax price of
savings to U.S. consumers, whether the savings is at home or abroad. Consequently,
the policy affects the foreign rate of return to U.S. consumers of saving abroad.
                                             28


(111.32)

                 sF = Ci   —




where S is total savings, and sD and sF' are domestic and foreign savings

goods acquired. 8 is a distribution parameter which depends on the relation

between domestic and foreign rates of return (rF, rUS).



(111.33)                                   if r   >   r
                               F    Us)
                      —Z1(r —r
                  8e                       ifr <rF

Here r' and rUS are expected rates of return to U.S. consumers. Because of

differences in marginal tax rates, rF and rUS each will differ across the

12 household classes distinguished by the model. We account for these

differences in the model, although for convenience we speak of a single
 F         US
r and r         in this discussion.
                                F
      In the benchmark r =          r US     1 and 8 = 1 (U.S. households buy no foreign

capital goods). In the solution of the model, 8 for each household is used to

form a composite price for savings goods which enters household budget

constraints. Household utility functions only have an interpretation over

composite goods, since we do not investigate real characteristics of assets

(such as risk) which would account for a diversified portfolio by savers. We

set Z1, the elasticity parameter in equation (111.33), at 250 in our central

case. We consider this figure to be roughly comparable to the                value of —1.0

in the previous specification.
                                                          F
      The foreigner's savings in the U.S.,                    are given by
                                       29


                F                                US        F
(111.34) S =          0                     .
                                            if
                                                 rF       rF

                                   z
                F
               SUS = Z2
                           US F3
                          rF —
                                            .    US
                                                      >    F
                              rF            if rF         rF


Here r and 4 are      U.S. and foreign rates of return expected by the foreigner.

Because U.S. consumers and foreigners are not treated identically in the tax
         US               .          US      F       F
system, r     generally differs from rF ,and r from rF.

      A two stage procedure similar to that in subsection D applies here. First,

we determine the foreigner's investment behavior abroad, with remaining expendi-

tures allocated in a Cobb—Douglas fashion. In our central case analysis, we

take Z2 to equal 50,000 and        to equal 0.5. In this specification, our dynamic

sequencing of equilibria takes account of previous investments abroad in

determining capital service endowments in each country in each period. Invest-

ments abroad in a given period imply international capital service flows in

subsequent periods.

      In the following section, we investigate how the model's findings are

affected by the four formulations we have just described.


IV. Policy Analyses under Alternative
     External Sector Formulations

      In this section we examine results from a number of policy analyses,

using the various formulations of external sector behavior presented in the

preceding section. We consider the introduction of an 80 percent savings

deduction in the U.S. income tax [as considered by Fullerton—Shoven—Whalley

(1980)). We also consider corporate tax integration in the U.S. [as considered

by Fullerton—King—Shoven—Whalley (1980)1, and the introduction of alternative

forms of value—added tax in the U.S.
                                   30


     We use the same dynamic sequence of equilibria approach used in the

earlier papers by Fullerton et al, and compute sequences of equilibria

linked through household savings decisions, as described earlier. In the

base case, the economy is assumed to lie on a balance growth path. Under

different policies, the economy is initially displaced from balanced growth,

and asymptotically returns to a new balanced growth path with a different

ratio of capital service to labor endowment in each period. Our welfare

analysis of gain or loss to the economy involves a calculation of the Hicksian

compensating variation in each period for each household group. We first

discount into present value terms, using the real net of return to capital

as the discount rate, and then we sum over households.

      Our analyses involve the same numerical specification used by Fullerton

et al. We analyze six periods, each of ten—year duration, using the same

values for all parameters which do not deal with the external sector. The

various external sector formulations are incorporated as separate model

extensions.

      We refer to the four formulations as follows:


1. CONS ELAS NO ARM                Foreigners' behavior involves constant elas-
                                   ticity demand functions (constant elasticity
                                   offer curve in two—good case); no Armington
                                   product heterogeneity enters; no capital ser-
                                   vice or capital good flows are considered

2. CONS ELAS WITH ARM              As in (1) except that we also consider Armington
                                   product heterogeneity for certain imported
                                   inputs

3. CAP SERV FLOW                   Flows of capital services take place between the
                                   U.S. and the rest of the world

4. CAP   GOOD   PLOW               Flows of capital goods take place between the
                                   U.S. and the rest of the world
                                    31



       These formulations were described above in subsections III.B, III.C,

III.D and III.E, respectively.

       These formulations are listed in Table 1 along with the values we have

specified for the more critical parameters. In the case of the first formula-

tion, the parameters p and r imply an export price elasticity which the U.S.

faces. We use an export price elasticity for the foreigner's demands of —1.4.

This is approximately the central case value reported in the recent compendium

of Stern et al (1976). We use values for p of 0.465 and r of —10. These

jointly imply the —1.4 export price elasticity; the implied elasticity of the

foreigner's import supply function is approximately 0.4.

       For sensitivity analyses in this case, we consider p and r set first at

10 and —10 and then at 1 and —1. For the 10, —10 case the export price elas-

ticity is approximately —5. In the two—good case, as r and ji   both become
large (in absolute value), the elasticity of the offer curve approaches unity

and this specification for the foreigner's behavior would imply that the U.S.

is a small, open, price—taking economy. For the case of 1, —l the export price

elasticity is -.1, and in the two—good case the elasticity of the offer curve

is .   We also consider cases where net trade flows rather than the gross flows

enter the benchmark calculation.

       For the second formulation, the critical parameters are p, r, and cvA.

We take the same p and ri values as for the central case in our first formulation.

vA is set a 1.7. In our sensitivity runs,       is set at 0.5, 1.0 and 3.0.

       For the capital service flow formulation, a critical parameter is EK,

which expresses the sensitivity of the foreigner's behavior to differences

between the rental rates on capital employed in the U.S. and abroad. In our

central case under this formulation, we set EK at —1.0; in sensitivity runs we

consider values of 0, —0.1, and —10.0 for EK.
                                                                         TABLE   1


                          CHARACTERISTICS OF ALTERNATIVE EXTERNAL SECTOR SPECIFICATIONS


          .               CONS ELAS                       CONS ELAS                              CAP SERV                 CAP GOOD
Specification                NO ARM                       WITH ARM                                   FLOW                   FLOW

    Section                                                                                         III.D                   III.E
                          III.B                            III.C
Where Described

Brief Description     Constant                           Constant                          Capital Service Flows,       Capital Good
                      Elasticity                         Elasticity                        No Product Heterogeneity,    Flows, No
                .                                                                                                       Product Heter—
                      Excess Demands,                    Excess Demands,                   Cobb—Douglas Commodity
                      No Product                         Product Heterogeneity             Demands, Gross Trade         ogeneity, Cobb—
                      Heterogeneity,                     for Intermediate Imports,         Flows                        Douglas Commodity
                      No Capital Flows,                  No Capital Flows,                                              Demands, Gross
                      Gross Trade Flows                  Gross Trade Flows                                              Trade Flows

Critical Parameters              p,   r                    p,    r,                                     RATIO*                            RATIO*
                                                                         °VA                                            Z1, Z2, Z3,

Values in
                                                                     = .465                         —l                          = 250
Central Case             p =      .465                          ii                             EK                          Z1
                             = —10                                                             RATIO = 5                        =   50,000
                         n                                      n = —10                                                    Z2
                                                                     =   1.7                                                    =   0.5
                      (jointly imply U.S.
                      faces export price                                                                                   RATIO = 5
                      elasticity of —1.4)

                             =                 =                     =                              =                           =                  10
Sensitivity              p        10,     ii       —10                   0.5, 1.0,   3.0            0, —0.1, —10.0                  1000, 100,
                                                           cYVA                                EK                          z1
   Cases                                                                                       RATIO = 2, 10                    =   100,000
                         p1, ri—1                                                                                          Z2
                         Net rather than                                                       Gross of tax rather            = .25, 1.0
                                                                                                                           z3
                                                                                               than net of tax return
                         gross trade flows                                                                                 RATIO = 2, 10
                         used                                                                  to capital used

     *"RATIO"                                                                                                     and
              represents the ratio of the foreigner's benchmark endowments of capital services, input commodities
export commodities to the U.S. benchmark endowments of capital services, level of importsandlevel of exports,
respectively.
                                   33


      Another key parameter in this formulation is RATIO, the ratio of

the foreigner's benchmark endowments of capital services, import commodities

and export commodities to the U.S. endowment of capital services, level of

imports and level of exports in the benchmark. RATIO is a rough indicator

of the "size" of the rest of the world relative to the U.S. In our central

case, we set RATIO equal to 5; in sensitivity runs we consider values of 2

and 10 for RATIO.

      A final and important sensitivity analysis in this case involves the

return to capital. In the central case, when foreigners rentto the U.S.,

they receive K' the real net of tax rental price of or return to capital.

P is paid to the U.S. when Americans rent to foreigners. Because of the tax

system in the U.S., a differential exists between the marginal product of

capital (the gross of tax price) and the net of tax return to capital. Thus,

the U.S. gains if it rents capital services from abroad, since the U.S.

collects the marginal product of capital but pays the net of tax return to

capital. Conversely, if the U.S. rents capital to the foreigner, the U.S.

suffers a loss for the same reason. To correct for this, we calculate a tax

rate which applies to international capital service transactions and use this

new rate in one of our sensitivity cases.

      For the capital good formulation, the critical parameters are Z1, Z2

and Z3. These parameters determine the sensitivity of domestic households

and of the foreigner to differences between domestic and foreign rates of

return. We use values of 250 for Z1, 50,000 for Z2 and 0.5 for Z3 in our

central case. In sensitivity cases we consider values of 1,000, 100 and 10

for Z1, 100,000 for Z2, and 0.25 and 1.0 for Z3.
                                   34



A. Savings Deduction

     In Table 2 we show model results for a single tax policy——an 80 percent

savings deduction——under the different external sector formulations. This

policy, described in detail in Fullerton—Shoven—WhalleY (1980), represents

a move from the current income tax system toward an expenditure or consump-

tion tax system. The deduction is only 80 percent since roughly 20 percent

of savings is used for new housing construction which does not incur the

"double" taxation of the income tax system. Thus an 80 percent deduction

would closely approximate a full consumption tax system. We 'additively"

adjust marginal income tax rates (increasing or decreasing all rates by a

certain number of percentage points) so that the total revenue raised by the

government is not altered in any period by the policy change.   We consider

six equilibria spaced 10 years apart.

      The original analysis suggests a present value gain to the U.S. of

$538 billion (1973 prices) from the tax change. It is useful to comDare

this number with the discounted present value of consumption

plus leisure in the base sequence of $49 trillion (1973 prices). The gain

thus amounts to 1.10 of this discounted present value of the economy.

Put another way, after allowing for the change in the timing of consumption,

and spreading the gain involved over a number of years, an 80 percent savings

deduction increases total consumer welfare by 1.10 percent per year.

      The first two external sector formulations do not change this broad

                       In the constant elasticity case with no Armington good,
picture very much.

 the gain falls to $511 billion. With the Armington good, the gain falls further

 to $479 billion. This result indicates that the terms of trade effects of the

tax change are weak, a finding which contrasts with the papers by Boadway and

Treddenick (1978) and Whalley (1980); these studies find significant terms of
                                     35



 trade effects associated with changes in factor taxes. These two papers

 both incorporate a complete Armington specification which leads to

 stronger terms of trade effects. In addition, in the present formula-

 tion there are not substantial differences in factor intensities of

 export and import competing industries, as a consequence, the offer

 surfaces for the U.S. have only limited bowness.

         The major changes in results occur wit-h the capital service and

 capital good flow formulations. In the service flow case, the $538 billion gain




                                    TABLE 2

             FURTHER ANALYSIS OF 80 PERCENT SAVINGS DEDUCTION
                            IN U.S. INCOME TAXd
               (Dynamic welfare effects in present value of
                    compensating variations over time)


                                                    Welfare Effectb

1. Original Fullerton—Shoven—Whalley                 538 (1.10)
      type formulation

2. CONS ELAS NO ARM (central case)                   511 (1.04)


3. CONS ELAS WITH ARM (central case)                 479 (0.98)


4. CAP   SERV FLOW (central case)                   —476 (—.97)


5. CAP   GOOD FLOW (central case)                   —33 (—.07)

     aAll results are from runs including six equilibria spaced ten years apart.
An "additivet' method of tax replacement (see page 34) was employed in every case.
     bWlf     effects are measured in billions of 1973 dollars. The numbers in
parentheses represent the welfare gain or loss as a percentage of the present
discounted value of consumption plus leisure in the base sequence ($49 trillion).
                                       36

changes to a $476 billion loss. The main reason for this has already been

indicated above: the U.S. incurs substantial capital service outflows as

a result of the policy change so that the U.S. foregoes the gross of tax

return to capital (capital's marginal product), but only receives the net

of tax return. In effect, the foreign tax authority gains at the expense

of the U.S. Treasury, as a U.S. tax credit Is given for foreign taxes paid.

The cumulative capital service outflow in this case over 50 years is approx—

itnately $1.7 trillion. In the sensitivity analysis, we note that the effi-

ciency loss is reduced and even reversed as the ER parameter is reduced towards

zero. An interesting policy prescription which some have suggested is that the

 U.S. either have additional taxes on capital income received from abroad

or revoke the foreign tax credit. The additional tax rates, if used, would

equal U.S. capital factor tax rates. This prescription ignores possible

retaliatory consequences of such action. The capital good flow case reveals

a similar result, although the effect is quantitatively weaker.



B. Sensitivity nalys
        In Table 3 we report our sensitivity analyses for our two constant

elasticity formulations. Given that the central case results of these two

forms do not differ significantly from each other or from those of the original

specificiation, it may not be surprising that a similar conclusion applies

for sensitivity cases. The choice of the p and n       combination,   or whether

gross or net trade flows are specified, makes very little difference in the

No Arinington cases. In the Armington cases, the results are relatively robust
                               R                             .   .                .
with   respect to   changes   7A can fall from $487         ba.llion to $446 billion

as       is lowered from 3.0 to 0.5.
                                          37




                                        TABLE 3

     SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF 80 PERCENT SAVINGS DEDUCTION IN U.S.
            INCOME TAX FOR CONSTANT ELASTICITY FORMULATIONS
             (Dynamic welfare effects in present value of
                  compensating variations over time)


                                                              Welfare Effect

1. Original Formulation (Table 2, Case 1)                           538

2. CONS ELAS NO ARM
     Central Case (p =   .465;   ri =   —10)                        511

     plO; —lO                                                       502

     p =   1; r =   —1                                              538

     Net rather than gross trade flows                              529

3. CONS ELAS WITH
                                               R   =
     Central Case (p =   .465; i = —10;                1.7)         479

     aR =0.5                                                        446

     a =1.0                                                          67

     aR =3.0                                                        487
                                 38


       In Table 4 we report our sensitivity analysis of the 80 percent savings

deduction cases from Table 2 for our capital service and capital good flow

formulations. For the capital service flow formulation, a most dramatic

result appears when the gross of tax rental price is employed instead of the

net of tax price in international capital service transactions. In this case

the large loss of $476 billion in the central case changes to a gain of $562

billion. This gain is even larger than in the cases without capital flows.

The reason is that with a closed capital market the additional savings caused

by the adoption of a consumption tax depresses the marginal product of capital

more than with an international capital market. This demonstrates clearly the

significance in the model of the U.S. instituting a compensatory tax on capital

income received from abroad.

       Sensitivity analysis for the capital service flow formulation also

included changing ER from —1.0 to 0.0, —0.1 and —10.0 and varying RATIO, the

goods and service endowment ratio, between 2 and 10. As expected, the welfare

loss is larger for higher absolute values of EK. With EK = 0, we get results

essentially equivalent to the formulations without capital flows.

       For our capital good formulation we only report sensitivity on     and

the endowment ratio in Table 4, because with an 80 percent savings case the

U.S. saves abroad with no foreign savings in the U.S.1 Z2 and Z3 are immaterial

in this case but have an effect in the integration cases reported below, where

the capital good flow is in the opposite direction. We thus report Z2 and

sensitivity later. Table 4 reveals significant sensitivity to Z1 values; there

is relatively little sensitivity to the values for RATIO.


       'For domestic consumers and more importantly for foreigners, this policy
change lowers the U.S. rate of return relative to the foreign rate. Under
these circumstances foreigners do not save in the U.S. (see sub—section III.E).
                                           39




                                      TABLE 4

         SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF 80 PERCENT SAVINGS DEDUCTION IN U.S.
                  INCOME TAX FOR CAPITAL SERVICE AND CAPITAL
                            GOOD FLOW FORMULATIONS
                 (Dynamic welfare effects in present value of
                      compensating variations over time)


                                                                 Welfare Effect

A. Capital Service Flow Formulation

    1. Central Case (Table 2, Case 4)                                   —476

    2. Gross of tax rental price used in        place
          of net of tax price                                            562

    3. E = 0.0         (changed from —1)                                 525

    4. EK         —0.1 (changed from —1)                                 192

    5.    E1, =   —10,0 (changed from —1)                               —730

    6. RATIO =       2 (changed from 5)                                 —221

    7.     RATIO = 10 (changed from 5)                                  —601


B. Capital Good Flow Formulation

   1. Central Case (Table 2, Case 5)                                      33

    2. Z1 = 1000 (changed from 250)                                      337

    3.       = 100 (changed from 250)                                   122

   4. Z1 = 10 (changed from 250)                                        441

    5. RATIO = 2 (changed from 5)                                       —38

    6. RATIO = 10 (changed from 5)                                      —26
                                   40

  C. Tax Integration

         In Table 5 we present further analyses of corporate and personal tax

 integration in the U.S. using the alternative external sector formulations

 presented earlier. Here we evaluate a policy of "full integration" as

 described in Fullerton, King, Shoven and Whalley (1980). Such a policy

 involves the elimination of the corporate income tax accompanied by increases

 in personal taxes on capital income. The corporate income tax is eliminated

 for both domestic— and foreign—owned firms situated in the U.S. Individuals

 are taxed on the basis of their total capital income, whether that income

 is realized (as dividends, rents, etc.) or accrues (e.g., as retained earnings).

        As with Table 2, the two constant elasticity formulations do not make

very much difference to results although gains increase rather than fall in

comparison to the original. The capital service and capital good flow formu-

lations, however, yield gains which are significantly higher than those under

the original formulation. In these cases the gains are $1,031 and $497 billion,

respectively. Tax integration induces a reallocation of capital from non--

corporate to corporate sectors, since the latter experience a larger tax

reduction from a policy of tax integration. This leads to an increase in the

           rental price of capital in the U.S.; the rental price and rate of

return to capital rise in the U.S. relative to the rest of the world. Under

the capital service flow formulation, this induces foreigners to rent their

capital to the U.S., while in the capital good flow formulation, this leads

to foreign saving in the U.S. In both cases, the U.S. experiences a substan-

tial efficiency gain since it pays the net—of—tax return as its marginal

product. We report sensitivity analyses on Z2 and Z3 for the capital good

flow case; they have an impact in this situation as the foreigner saves in

the U.S. (unlike the 80 percent savings deduction case).
                                            41




                                        TABLE 5

    FURTHER ANALYSIS OF U.S. CORPORATE AND PERSONAL TAX INTEGRATIONa
              (Dynamic welfare effects in present value of
                   compensating variations over time)


                                                             Welfare Effectb

1. Original Formulation                                         265 (.54)

2. CONS ELAS NO ARM      (Central   Case)                       287 (.59)

3. CONS ELAS WITH ARM (Central Case)                            321 (.66)

4. CAP   SERV FLOW (Central Case)                             1,031 (2.10)

5. CAP   GOOD FLOW (Central Case)                               497 (1.01)

6. CAP   GOOD FLOW (Sensitivity Cases)

      Z2 = 100,000 (changed from 50,000)                        666 (1.36)

      Z = .25      (changed from 0.5)                           927 (1.89)

      Z3 =   1.0   (changed from 0.5)                           326 (.67)


     aAll results are from runs involving six equilibria spaced ten years apart.
An "additive" method of tax replacement (see page 34) was employed in every case.
     bwlf     effects are measured in billions of 1973 dollars. The numbers in
parentheses represent the welfare gain or loss as a percentage of the present
discounted value of consumption plus leisure in the base sequence ($49 trillion).




D. Value-Added Tax

      In Table 6 we present results from our simulations of introducing four

alternative forms of value—added tax in the U.S. Much of the recent discussion

of value—added taxation in the U.S. has been prompted by the VAT systems intro-

duced in Europe over the last 15—20 years. The destination based VAT in Europe
                                   42




                                  TABLE 6

     WELFARE IMPACTS OF INTRODUCING 10 PERCENT VAT OF DIFFERING TYPESa
               (Dynamic welfare effects in present value of
                    compensating variations over time)


                                       Income—Tjpe VAT       Consumption—Type VAT
                 -
                                     Origin Destination      Origin   Destination
                                     Basis       Basis       Basis        Basis

1. Original Formulation                 —42      —47          265         261


2.   CONS ELAS NO ARM                   —39      —39          256         256


3. CONS ELAS WITH ARM                   —47      —47          213         213


4. CAP SERV FLOW                        261       236          91         106


5. CAP   GOOD   FLOW                 —529       —467          128         127


     aAll results are central case results for runs involving six equilibria
spaced ten years apart. An "additive" method of tax replacement (see page 34)
                                     effects are measured in billions of 1973
was employed in every case. Welfare
dollars.
                                       43


    is seen in some quarters in the U.S. as a trade—restricting measure since

    exports leave Europe tax free but imports are taxed as they enter. While

    this view is criticized by many academic economists who stress the neutrality

    of either tax base for a broadly based tax, it has nonetheless been influential

    in policy debate.

          We model an origin based VAT as an equal rate factor tax on both primary
•
    factors and a destination based tax as an equal rate final sales tax on

    expenditures in the U.S. Under the income—type VAT all goods are taxed; under

    the consumption—type only curreiit consumption goods. We model the latter

    feature through a savings deduction for the origin based VAT of the consumption

    type. We impose equal yield through an additive replacement in the income tax;

    income tax collections fall through a linear income tax reduction applied to all

    household income tax rates. These tax changes are thus regressive.

          The VAT is constructed to be a non—distorting tax save for impacts on

    labor supply and savings. The introduction of this tax alternative therefore

    implies a scaling down of existing distorting taxes, which produces welfare

    gains. Consumption—type VAT gains are primarily due to the reduction in the

    intertemporal distortion of the income tax. In the consumption—type runs the

    VAT compounds multiplicatively with other taxes and neutrality between origin

    and destination bases holds exactly for the Armington and capital service

    flow cases and nearly so for the other cases.

          The welfare gains in the income—type VAT runs are generally smaller

    than in the corresponding consumption-type VAT runs. The gains are smaller

    because the income—type VAT inefficiently distorts individuals' consumption—

    savings decisions more than the consumption—type VAT, since the former tax

    applies to investment goods (as well as consumption goods) and in effect taxes
                                   44


savings. There is one exception to this general result:     in the capital

service flow case, the gains under an income—type VAT are larger than under

the consumption—type. The domestic rental price of capital eventually rises

(relative to the foreign rental price) under the income—type VAT but falls

(relative to the foreign price) under the consumption—type VAT.    As a result,

capital is rented to the U.S. under the former tax and from the U.S. under

the latter, in the capital service flow formulation. Since, as discussed

earlier, those offering capital overseas receive only the net—of—tax price of

capital as compensation, the direction of the capital service flow is favorable

to the U.S. under the income—type VAT, and unfavorable to the U.S. under the

consumption—type VAT. The favorable effect under the income—type tax more than

compensates for any adverse impact related to the tax's distortion of consumption—

saving decisions.

      The policy prescriptions from these runs are that foreign trade concerns

regarding destination vs. origin based taxes do not provide a legitimate reason

for the U.S. to introduce a VAT, but a broadly based VAT which replaces existing

distorting taxes may be an efficiency gaining tax change.


V. Conclusion

      In this paper we have described four alternative external sector formula-

tions which can be used to represent external sector behavior in the Fullerton—

Shoven—Whalley tax model for the U.S. Our motivations are twofold: to assess

 the impact of alternative formulations on model findings, and to provide an

 enhanced capability for analysis of tax policies (such as a VAT) which connect

 closely with foreign trade issues. We consider two formulations of merchandise

 trade behavior using constant elasticity excess
                                                   demand functions for fjgfler5
                                   45

behavior. We also consider internationally mobile capital services and

capital goods.

      Under these different formulations, we reinvestigate two policy

alternatives considered earlier by Fullerton et al (1979, 1980): an 80

percent savings deduction in the income tax, and personal and corporate

tax integration. We also examine the effects of introducing a ten percent

value—added tax of the income type or consumption type, on either an origin

or a destination basis.

      Results indicate that the different external sector formulations can

substantially affect the model's findings. The allowance for capital service

flows can either greatly increase the efficiency gain of a tax policy (as in

the case of corporate tax integration) or turn a significant gain into a large

loss (as in moving to a consumption tax). Each of the policies which we investi-

gated appears to have the potential to generate substantial capital service

flows between the U.S. and abroad. When the net flow is from the U.S. to

foreigners, the U.S. is adversely affected since those offering capital receive

only the net—of—tax rental price. The specification of merchandise and service

trade appears to affect our results far less than the capital flows modelling..

      This paper indicates that the evaluation of domestic tax policy is very

sensitive to the functioning of international capital markets. Therefore,

further research which reveals more precisely the operation of these markets

would be most useful for future analyses.
                                   46


                               REFERENCES


Armington,   P. S. (1969). "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by
       Place   of Production," I.M.F. Staff Papers, pp. 159-176.

Boadway, R. and 3. H. Treddenick (1978). "A General Equilibrium Computation of the

       Effects of the Canadian Tariff Structure," Canadian Journal of Economics,

       August, pp. 424-446.

Caddy, V.    (1976), "Empirical Estimation of the Elasticity of Substitution;

       A Review," Preliminary Working Paper OP—09, IMPACT Project,

       Industrial Assistance Coinmision, Melbourne, Australia, November.

Deardorff, A. and   R. M. Stern (1979). "An Economic   Analysis of the Effects of the

       Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations on the United States and the

       Other Major Inudstrialized Countries," M1N Studies No. 5, prepared for

       Subcommittee on International Trade, Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate,

       96th Congress, Washington, D.C.

Feldstein, H. and C. Horioka (1980). "Domestic Savings    and   International. Capital

       Fls," Economic Journal (forthcoming).

Fullerton, D. (1980). "Transition Losses of Partially Mobile Industry Specific

       Capital," N.B.E.R. Working Paper, No. 520.

Fullerton, Don, A. Thomas King, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley (1980). "Tax Inte-

       gration in the U.S.: A General Equilibrium Approach," Cambridge, Mass.:

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 337R.

Fullerton, Don, John B. Shaven, and John Whalley (1978). "General Equilibrium

       Analysis of U.S. Taxation Policy," 1978 Compendium of Tax Research,

       Washington, D.C.: Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Treasury Department.
                                        47


   Fullerton,   D., J. B. Shoven, and J. Whalley (1980). "Dynamic      General   Equilibrium
          Impacts of Replacing the U.S. Income    Tax with   a Progressive Consumption Ta: ,"

          paper pesented at N.B.ER. Tax Conference on Taxation of Capital,
          November   16-17,   1979.

 Gorman, W. M. (1957). "Tariffs, Retaliation, and the Elasticity of Demand

        for Imports," Review of Economic Studies, Vol.. XXV,    pp.   133-62.

 Johnson, H. G. (1953). "Optinum Tariffs and Retaliation," Review of Economic Studies.

       Vol. XXI, pp. 142-153. Reprinted with amendments in H. G. Johnson

       International   Trade and Economic Grcth [George Allen and Unw'in         1961).

Harberger,   A. C. (1980).    "Vignettes on the World Capital Market," American Economic

       Review, May.

Merrill, 0. H. (1971). "Applications and Extensions of an Algorithm that Computes

       Fixed Points of Certain Upper Semi-Continuous Mappings," unpublished          Ph.D.
       Thesis, University of Michigan.
Scarf, Herbert E., with the collaboration of Terje    Hansen (1973). The Conutation

       of Economic Equilibria [New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press].

Stern, R. M., J. Francis, and B. Schumacher (1977). Price Elasticities in

       national Trade: An Annotated Bibliogrpy [Macmillan Publishers for the
       Trade Policy Research Center].
Whalley, J. (1980). "Discriminatory Features of Domestic Factor Tax        Systems in a

       Goods Mobile, Factors Irmnobile Trade Model: An Empirical General Equilibrium

      Approach," Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).

Whalley, J. and B. Yeung (1980). "External     Sector 'Closing' Rules in Applied
      General Equilibrium Models," University of Western Ontario, mimeo, April.
