                   FIBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         TRADE STRUCTURE AND TRANSMISSION OF INFLATION:
                 THEORY AND JAPANESE EXPERIENCE




                        Jongmoo Jay Choi
                        M. Ishaq Nadiri



                     Working Paper No. 923




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                           June 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #923
                                                       June 1982




               Trade Structure and Transmission of Inflation:
                       Theory and Japanese Experience



                                  ABSTRACT




        The international price linkage in a single commodity model
can be explained trivially by the law of one price or the cpantity
theory of money. In this paper, we formulate a simple sectoral,
general equilibrium model with money. The transmission of price
pressures from the world market to nontradable sectors of a domestic
economy depends on industry structure, and the size of the direct

price  substitution effect and the indirect money and income
effect through the balance of payments. The structural model
is then empirically implanented for Japan, 1956—77. Various
dynamic simulations conducted show both the overall magnitude of
imported inflation and the relative importance of three major
channels of transmission (price, money and income) in Japanese
inflation during the period covered. These results imply that
closing of one channel of transmission such as the monetary
channel by a completely sterilizing monetary policy does not
insulate the domestic economy fran foreign price disturbances.


  Jongmoo Jay Choi                           M. Ishaq Nadiri
  do National Bureau of                      National Bureau of Economic Research
    Economic Research                        269 Nercer Street, 8th Floor
  269 Mercer Street, 8th Floor               New York, NY 10003
  New York, NY 10003
                                             (212) 598—7042
TRADE STRUCTURE AND TRANSMISSION OF INFLATION: THEORY AND JAPANESE PERIENCE



     "Imported" inflation has been the subject of increasing concern but not
enough attention has been given to how the structure of the econon,r
affects the nature and process of the transmission of inflation. Many
models of inflation in an open econort,r (Brunner and Meltzer (1917), Parkin

(1977), Laidler (1976), Branson (1975), Thrnovsky and Kaspura (19Th) and

others]    either combine   "domestic" and "foreign" factors in an ad boc manner

or   rely on aggregate real—sector modelling. The aggregate, one—comxrodity
approach,    however, conceals the forces that lie behind sectoral

transmission of price pressures. The international price linkage in a

single commodity model can be explained trivially by the law of one price

or by the quantity theory of money. The transmission of inflation from the

world    market to a domestic econorrrT, however, is inherently a two—stage
process: first, the direct linkage between the world market and the tra—
dables    sector of the domestic econonbr, and second, the subsequent spillover

to the nontradables sector.

     The sectoral, multi—commodity approach is, of course, basic in inter-

national trade literature, but its implication for the price linkage is yet

to be explored fully. As pointed out by Jones and Corden (1976), in a

relative—price model of tradables and nontradables, devaluation cannot

improve   home balance of trade without creating an excess demand in non—
tradables sector. The inflationary pressure created in the nontradables——
unless offset by government anti—inflation efforts specifically addressed
to this market——underscores a necessity for a more general analysis which
includes the income and money as well as the relative price effect.
     The Scandinavian theory of inflation !Aukrust (1970), Edgren, Faxen and
Odhner (1969)] recognizes the importance of the structural problem, but the
transmission in that model is entirely supply—determined, contingent on the
                                       —2—

assumption of constant factor shares and constant mark—up.' A recent paper

by Katseli—Papaefstratiou (1980) emphasizes consumption substitution in the

tansmission of inflation, but in a framework where the monetary channel

connecting the balance of payments and the money supply is not recognized.

     The purpose of this paper is two—fold:     first, to construct a simple

model of international price linkage for an open econorrry which incorporates

both the direct price channel due to substitution in production and con-

sumption, and the indirect channel through the impacts of the balance of

payments on the money supply and income. The transmission of inflation

from the world market to a domestic econon,r is viewed as a two—stage

process: first, the direct linkage between the world market and tradables

sector of the economy, and, second, the subsequent spillover to the nontra—

dables sector. The theoretical analysis suggests a possible conflict bet-

ween the direct and the indirect effects, and emphasizes the importance of

the structure of the economy in international transmission of inflation.

     Second, the structural model suggested in the theoretical analysis will

be   implemented empirically for Japan and simulated dynamically for the
effect of various foreign shocks. Estimation is on annual data from 1956
to 1977. Japan is an interesting and fitting case, because its trade
structure is easily identifiable and because its capital account is basi-
cally dictated by the trade balance——thus effectively exogenous as in our

model——rather    than the other way around. The debate on the relative price
behavior   of   primary versus manufactured commodities in the world market,
coupled   with dependence on raw material imports and exports of finished

products within the export—led growth strater, provides an added reason

for interest in the Japanese experience. "Partial" simulations will also
                                      —3—


be attempted to highlight the relative importance of the three nnjor chan-
nels of transmission——price, money and income——in Japanese inflation. The
results    suggest that closing of one channel of transmission such as the

monetary channel by complete sterilization by the ntnetary authority, does

not insulate the domestic econony completely from foreign price disturban-

ces.

1. The Model
 -
       Our model is a monetary general equilibrium framework with tradables,

nontradables and money. To allow for an exogenous change in external terms

of trade, tradables are further divided into importables and exportables,

but overall categorization of tradables versus nontradables is maintained,

that is, substitution is between tradables——or one kind of tradables——and

nontradables, not within the tradable goods. Such specification permits

focusing    attention on the "exposed" versus "sheltered" sector distinction
often    stated in the literature, which is important for our present

purpose.2

       The model focuses on the linkage between the world prices of tradables

and the domestic prices of nontradables through commodity trade for a small

country case under the fixed exchange rate regime. A price increase in the

world rrket is first imported to domestic tradables sector of the econony

through commodity arbitrage. The resulting increase in price of tradables

relative to nontradables then triggers substitution of consumption from the

former to the latter. Productive resources, on the other hand, will shift

from nontradables to tradables. On both counts, the prices will increase

in the nontradables sector. Further there is a indirect channel through

the balance of payments. The relative—price change affects the balance of

trade, which, given exogenous private capital flows, will affect the money
                                        —'4—


supply and income. The price of nontradables will be affected accordingly.
    We assume that capital flows,     world prices of tradables, and the
exchange    rates are exogenous; exogeneity of capital flows is a minor

problem in Japan, since, over the period of empirical work, the Japanese

government had de facto controls over capital flows. The "small country"

assumption,especially with respect to export prices, may prove a bit
troublesome. However, for the interest of volume growth, the Japanese
generally are known to be reluctant in using their potential monopoly power
to raise export prices in the world market. The assumption of fixed
exchange rates potentially is    a   serious problem for the latter half of the
period under consideration. This assumption was dictated by our choice of
annual data in view   of   our interest in structural issues in this paper.
Experiments under the fixed—rate assumption, however, are still of     rele-

vance, since the yen experiences in the l97Os were marked as naich by the
"exogenous" government interventions——which can be accommodated in the pre-
sent model——as the free market forces. The fact that Japanese balances of
payments were nowhere near zero during this period testifies that the real—
world "managed floating" after 1972 in Japan includes a high——even
dominant——element of "fixed" exchange rate regime. A dumxrrj variable
is included in the empirical model to capture irçflications of different
exchange regimes.
    Suppose a domestic supply, Q1 of commodity i——in and t denoting non—
tradables   and tradables respectively, with   the latter including importables (z)
and exportables (x)——that is a simple positive function of the amount of
inputs   engaged in production process (Fl) and the productivities of

such inputs (FR). Total factor employment is assumed to be demand—
                                            —5—



determined, hence a negative function of its om input prices (q).3

Sectoral employment, however, is also influenced by business conditions in

that sector relative to others, nrasured by output prices. The signs

beneath the equation show the expected signs of' the partial derivatives of

the    dependent variable with repect to each argiiment)

(la)        Qfl =    EFn (pfl,pt,q), PR)   Q'   >0, Q' >0, Fn >0, Fn <0, Fn <0

(ib)        Qt = Qt [Ft (ptpnq) pJ Qt >0, Qt >0, Ft >0, Ft <0, pt <0; t=z, x


       Domestic demand for a comntdity (Di) is of standard form: negatively

related to its own price (p-) and positively related to the prices of

substitutes and to money income (y). Commodities are assumed to be gross

substitutes and norl goods.5

(2a) D = D" (pn, pt )                      D    <0, o >o, D >0

(2b)        Dt = Dt (pt P, y)              Dt <0, Dt >0, Dt >0; tz, x


Both the demand and supply equations are assumed to be homogeneous of

degree zero, so that prices and income can be defined either real or nomi-

nal. Since the price linkage is the present objective and since the

foreign exchange rates are not meaningfully defined other than between two

money prices, we will take money prices and money income as our arguments

in these equations.

       An   equilibrium in nontradables requires
()      Qfl (..)    = n ()•
The supply and the demand in tradables, however, need not balance, the

difference being the balance of trade. Since the world supply of the
                                           —6—

country's importables (Z) is assumed to be infinitely elastic at given

world price pZ*, actual equilibrium imports (z) can be written in a similar

form as home import demand, zd = DZ (..)          — QZ (..).
(1s)   z =   Z(P1,Pfl,y,q,PR)             Z1 <0, Z2 >0, Z3 >0, Z1. >0, Z5 <0

Supposing foreign demand for exportables is a positive function of

foreign      income ?, then equilibrium export (x) similarly is
()     x = X(PX,Pn,Y,q,PR,Y*).            X1 >o, X2 <o, X3 <a, Xj4 <o, X5 >o, X6 >0

The balance of payments         (BP) equation combines these trade equations with
net unilateral transfers (NF) and capital flows exclusive of official tran-
sactions (CF).
(6)     pX x(..) —   pzz(..)    ÷ NF + CF = BP

The aggregate goods market condition implied by equations (3) and (6) is

 EøQ-EP-D-+NF=CA                           i=n, t
where CA = BF — CF is the current account.

       The equilibrium condition in money market consists of the simple quan-

tity theory equation adjusted for an open econoIr according to the             monetary
approach to the balance of payments. Nominal demand for nney is directly
related to money income (y) by the Cambridge k, and the money supply includes
both domestic (H) and international components (R) of the monetary base.
We abstract      from the role of interest rate in the demand for money.
(1)     icy = m(H + sR)           OCsCl

The    coefficient, "m" is the money ntiltiplier linking the monetary base to
the money supply, and "s" represents the differing degrees of sterilization
by the monetary authorities. Limiting cases are of interest: so depicts
complete      sterilization which is often assumed implicitly r the Keynesian

analyses, while sl is the case of no sterilization, assumed in the urne—
                                                    —1—



taxy   approach. Equation (B)              spells   out the identity between the change in

international reserves and the balance of payments                 (B?).
(8)    Et =      R.j   + BPt

       The last equation in the system relates international and domestic

prices of tradables, given the exchange rate——the price of foreign currency

in terms of domestic money (e)——and trade impediment factor g.

()      pt   =   ePt*g         t =   x,z
       If the g is taken to be constant, then there exists a one—to—one

correspondence between the world and the domestic prices of tradables. No

such relationship exists for nontradables, in contrast to the monetarist

models where        the law of one price implicitly is extended to all goods.
       The rodel presented above is a simple, but fairly comprehensive one,
which includes both the direct price                 effect due to substitution in consump-

tion    and production and the indirect money and income effects through the
balance of payments. Our approach is in contract to the single—channel
treatment generally seen in the existing literature on international infla-
tion [see Krause and Salant (1911), for instance, for survey of this

literature]. Yet, the model adopts several salient features of the

existing models described in the literature. The characteristics of the

Scandinavian model are retained in our model by sectoral disaggregation of

the econonr and inclusion of the supply—side effects. The element of the

monetary approach to balance of payments is recognized in our money—supply

equation which includes international component of money supply. A

Keynesian spirit can be found in the sterilization possibility recognized

as well as in the tradable—goods equilibrium which incorporates net

exports.
                                         —8—


    The system can be summarized by three equations describing the

equilibrium in nontradables (equation 3), the balance of payments (equation

6), and the money—market equilibrium (equation 7), plus the commodity

arbitrage equation for tradables (equation 9). The price of tradables in

(9), however, can be substituted in domestic demand and supply equations

underlying (3) and (6). With total differentiation, the system can be

solved for changes in money income (y), money price of the nontradables

(pn), and the balance of payments CBP) under the fixed exchange rate

system. Capital—account variables (NF, CF) are taken as given. Exogenous
                                               *
variables consist of both international (pz pX , Y* ) and domestic
                                           *


(I-I,q,PR) characters.

    The elasticities of the price of nontradables with respect to three

foreign variables in the reduced—form solution are:6

                  p)(*
    E(pn,px)                         [kegNX + msBegNX —   Dneg(pxxx
                                                            y
                                                                         + x)] > 0,
                  pn dpx       Apn



    E(Pr,P1) j-          IkegNZ + msBegNZ + msD'eg(P1Zz + z)1 >0 ifIE(Z,PZfl ) 1,


    otherwise indeterminate,


    where A(k+msB)(Dn —                  +                      c 0,
                                QnFn)        sD(FXXn_PZZpn)

    B =
          (PXXy
                  —
                      Pzz)   > 0, Nx =         —   Dx   < 0, and Nz =
                                                                        QnF"z
                                                                                — Dnz < 0.




Subscripted variables indicate partial derivatives.

    A rise in the world price of tradables directly causes a rise in the

domestic price of tradables through the law of one price given the trade

barriers and the exchange rates. This rise in the domestic price of
                                        —9—

tradables     will then be spilled over to the nontradables sector both through

the direct price channel due to substitution in consumption and production

between sectors, and through the indirect channel through changes in the

balance     of payments, the money supply and income.
         In the price elasticity formalae, the first terms which contain Nt, t=x
and z, reflect the direct impact spillovers from tradables to nontradables
due to the price effect of substitution in consumption and production. The
third terms represent the indirect effects that operate through the balance
of payments (the bracketed term), the money supply (ms), and income (DT).
The middle terms, with both Nt and B in the expression, reflect general—
equilibrium consequences of the direct impact spillovers: a rise in the
price of nontradables as a result of the direct spillover from the trad—
ables due to substitution nay affect the balance of payments, which——
following the money/income channel——may in turn affect the price of nontrad—
ables. This contrasts with the indirect effects which start with an ini-
tial increase in the price of tradables. A pictorial view of the chains of
transmission in the case of the fixed exchange      rate system is provided in

figure     1. Endogenous variables are in the boxes. Exogenous or policy
variables which can intervene in the transmission process are shown without
the boxes.
                                      FIGURE 1


     *
pt
                                     — 10 —



       Several interesting points enrge. First, the overall impact of

transmission depends on the relative size of the direct and the indirect

effects. The direct price spillovers through substitution are positive, but

the indirect effects depend on demand elasticity. When import demand is

elastic, the indirect price effects are positive. With inelastic demand,

however, the indirect effects on nontradables ceteris paribus are negative.

The overall impact on the price of nontradables, therefore, depend on the

demand—reducing    (hence deflationary) effect of the balance—of—payments
deterioration, and the demand—increasing and the supply—reducing (hence
inflationary) effects in the nontradables market due to consumption and
production substitution.
       With elastic import demand, the indirect effect (of a change in the
price of the irnportables) reinforces the direct price effect, but offsets
it when import demand is inelastic.1 The conclusion from the conventional
one—commodity transmission model which, by definition, predicts
uni—directional price changes is supported only when import demand is
elastic. This highlights the importance of the industry structure——
tradables and nontradables——in the transmission of inflation, insofar as the
indirect    effects depend on the import demand elasticity, and the general

level of prices is a weighted average of the two different sectoral

prices.

    Second, the case of an increase in foreign income is a special one in

that    it involves the indirect channel of adjustment only: there is no
direct impact spillover due to substitution (or the general equilibrium
consequences    of it naturally). The effect in this case is straight—

forwardly positive on the price of nontradables.
                                            — 11 —



                E(Pn,y*)K_         (_msDflPXXy*)
                                        I            0,
                            APn

      Finally, in the same        spirit,   even complete sterilization of the balance—

of—payments pressures l,r     the monetary authority (s0) cannot "insulate" the
donestic econow completely as far as the prices are concerned. The direct
spillovers from tradables to nontradables due to substitution are still
possible.  Further, due to the removal of an uncertain indirect effect term
which depends on demand elasticities, the effect of a change in Pt* on
pfl is now unambiguously positive. Importation of foreign inflation can be
mitigated with complete sterilization,9 but not prevented completely, since
the direct price channel is still very 3mch alive.1-0 The "insulation" of
the nontradables sector by these institutional schemes is found to be a
special case where there is only one commodity, or where the substitution
effect    is ruled out.11

2.   An Empirical Application

     In   this section, the structural model suggested in the theoretical
analysis will be implemented empirically for Japan using the annual data from
1956 to 1977.     While   modifications were necessary in individual equations
to comform to Japanese realities, the overall empirical system basically
matches the theoretical construct in all important respects. In par-
ticular, the system contains, as required, three major channels of
transmission both over time and across equations.. A potentially difficult
problem of identifying the industry structure turns out to be not difficult:
Japanese exports are almost entirely manufactured goods and over 80% of          all
imports are primary commodities. Services, and products from other ter-
tiary industries in national income accounting, plus construction, are
defined nontradables.
                                        — 12   —




     Estimation is done by the ordinary least square or the Cochrane-Orcutt
regression method. In the case of the latter, indicated by the presence of
an autocorrelation coefficient, p, a specification of the lag structure is

required       in system solution. The full empirical ntdel is provided in

Appendix I. Definitions and the data sources of the variables are in

Appendix II.

     The system consists of four sectors. The first direct price—linkage

sector relates the world prices of Japanese exportables and importables to

the domestic prices of the same commodities. This is done in two steps:

first, through the "law of one price" equations estimated in logarithmic

form,. and, second, through the bridge equations connecting the domestic

prices of actual imports and exports with those of import—competitive pro-

ducts (primary industry) and potential exports (manufacturing industry).
         In   the foreign trade sector, real goods import is a log—linear function

of   the relative price between imports and nontradables, real wage rate, the
foreign       exchanges available from goods and services exports plus net trans-

fers and capital flows, and the oil shock dummy. Inclusion of the

available foreign exchanges reflects an observation that the Japanese eco—

nont,r    has grown basically export—dependent. This takes a role of income
variable left out due to its domination of the relative price term which is
important        in our context. The magnitude of the coefficient of the relative

price term indicates that Japanese import demand is in fact inelastic due

to her dependence on raw material imports. Exports are estimated directly

in value form; a real export equation performs poorly. Arguments included

are foreign income measured by the trade—weighted index of real GDP's in

developed (Japan excluded) and developing market economies as aggregated in
                                    — 13 —


U.N.,   Yearbook of National Accounts Statistics, the price ratio between

exportables and nontradables, and the l913714 oil—shock dumw. Real

domestic GD? is also included to capture negative domestic demand pressure.

      In the monetary sector, the money supply comes from the monetary reserves

of both domestic——exogenously controlled by the monetary authority——and

international——related   to the balance of payments——sources. The elasticity
of the money supply, Ml, with   respect to reserve is rather low (0.31)   in
the short run but unity in the long run. The usual demand—for—money func-
tion, which includes the interest rate as its argument, is not included for
two reasons: it is difficult to implement empirically in Japan and it is
not important in our theoretical analysis. Following the convention in
Japanese macro econometric modelling,12 the real and the financial sectors
are   linked, instead, through domestic credit.   In addition, a dumny

variable is included to measure possible structural changes since the

start of the flexible exchange rate system in the 19105.13

      Finally, the domestic sector determines real income and the price of

nontradables.    The real income depends on dorrestic credit and imports of
goods and services——which represent two important factors for Japanese
growth as most Japan—observers would agree——plus a post oil—shock dumrrw and
a lag. The income equation should be viewed as an equilibrium condition
where the real balance of domestic credit is a shift (increase) parameter
in aggregate demand, and where increased access to imported materials simi-
larly   boosts the aggregate supply. This specification of an equilibrium

output would appear to be more satisfactory than the usual hypothesis of

demand—determined   (for developed econony) or supply—determined econonv (for
developing econonw), given the fast—track growth of' Japan in the post-
war period. This takes us a bit out of the theoretical specification, but
                                      — 114   —




enables us to identify the income (output) channel of transmission

separated from the monetary channel, which would not have been possible

with a pure demand—determined income equation.

      A change in income affects the price of nontradables through the

wage   rate. The wage rate depends on the general level of prices——the GDP
deflator—— and the real GDP reflecting general activity level. The real
GDP is used in lieu of the conventional demand—supply gap measures such as
unemployment rate or the capacity utilization rate. The conventional
measures are thought to be relatively unimportant in Japan, the reasons being
the importance of "life contracting" in the labor market, and the high and
fairly steady growth of the Japanese econox,r in this period. In any event,
the wage rate is but an intermediary in the indirect channel of
transmission,      connecting the income and the price of the nontradables.
3.    Simulation   Results
      The model performs fairly well in its ability to track the Japanese
experience during the period under consideration. Mean absolute errors for

the l14—year simulation period (1963—1916) are 1.5% for the price of nontrad—

ables and 2.0%     for the GDP deflator.      Indeed, errors are rather small if

one   considers that the model is basically a "transmission" model without a
fully—developed     domestic sector, and that the present simulation includes

volatile years of the 1970s.

      The model can be simulated for the impacts of various "foreign" shocks.

The control solution is obtained           solving iteratively the dynamic system

after storage of the single—equation residuals as additive adjustments in

the    constant term. The storage of residuals enables us to impose the shock
in    the vicinity of real world numbers, which is important in a non—linear
                                     — 15   —




 system such as the present one since the system response to a shock nay not
 be independent of initial values.
       We experiment with three "foreign" shocks: (a) a 10% increase in the
world price——in the U.S. dollars——of Japanese imports; (b) a 10% increase
in     the world price of Japanese exports;     and (c) a 1%   increase in the level
of real GDP in foreign countries, computed as a Japanese trade—weighted

average of index of real GDP's in developed and developing regions of the

world. In addition, a series of "partial" simulations were experimented

with an eye on highlighting the differential impact of each channel of
transmission. All shocks were exogenous, and were sustained over the sintu—
lation period. The shocks were computed as percentage deviations rather
than absolute deviations, to minimize the impact of volatility in the under-

lying series.

     The theoretical analysis suggest that, under the fixed exchange rates,

the general level of domestic prices is affected by a rise in the world

prices of the country's ixuportables in the following ways:

(a) positively, due to an increase in domestic prices of importables via

       comnndity arbitrage, and entry of these items in the general price

       index;

(b) positively, as a result of an impact spillover of the price pressures

       from tradables (importables) to nontradables due to consumption and

     production substitution via the direct price channel; and

Cc) positively or negatively, depending on whether import demand is

     elastic or inelastic, asa result of an improvement or deterioration

     of the balance of payments, and the resulting increase or decrease in
                                      — 16   —




        the   nnney supply and income, in the absence of effective offsetting

        government policy.

       The overall effect, therefore, is unambiguously positive if import

 demand is elastic. With inelastic import demand, however, there is uncer-

tainty on the direction of the change in the price of nontradables with a

 rise   in import prices, depending on the relative strength of the spillover
 due to the direct price effect——(b)——and the deflationary forces of the
balance—of—payments deficits due to the indirect nney and income
effects——(c). The same possibility exists for      the general level of prices,

but    the presumption here is much stronger towards   a positive effect, owing

to the direct entry of imported consumer goods in the price index——k).

      The introduction of a supply shock facilitates separation of the

supply—determined     output/income effect from the demand—determined money
effect. It, however, complicates the analysis further. Barring Giffen
goods, real imports (of foreign inputs) will fall with a rise in the price
of foreign inputs which would——through the production function——reduce the
real    GDP. But,   the value of imports will decrease or increase according to
whether     import demand for foreign inputs is elastic or inelastic, hence the

effect on the balance of payments, real income, and prices are in general

uncertain.

      The   simulation results for 1963—76 with the three exogenous shocks are
provided in Table     1. The numbers in the table are the percentage

deviations between the shocked and the control solutions, and can be viewed

as   elasticity nultipliers——percentage changes in domestic prices I uiit
percentage changes in the shocked foreign variables. The results from the
0iniport—price shock confirm that Japanese import demand is inelastic with
                                   — 17 —




Table 1: Sinulated Effect of Exogenous Foreign Shocks
            (Percentage Changes)



                 io%     Import     10% Export           i% Foreign
                 Price Increases    Price Increases      Incorre Increases


                  pfl       p         pn      p           pn      p


         1963    0.16      0.56      0.614   2.25                 —



         19614   o.144     1.08     1.02     2.56                 —



         1965    0.55      1.141     1.24    2.56         —       —



         1966    0.75      1.83     1.50     2.93        0.25    0.12
         1967    0.83      1.98     1.67     3.03        0.24    0.23
         1968    1.01      2.01     2.35     3.35        0.18    0.145

         1969    0.98      1.92     2.82     3.714       1.19    0.75
         1970    0.80      i.8o     3.10     3.90        1.50    0.80
         1971    0.75      1.63     3.11     3.83        1.60    0.96
         1972    0.63      1.65     3.05     3.75        1.62    1.01
         1973    0.65      1.39     3.09     3.69        1.55    0.90
         1971    0.47      1.36     2.83     3.80        i.hi    0.81
         1975    0.145     1.145    2.88     3.511       1.147   0.95
         1976    0.36      1.37     2.73     3.38        1.143   0.83

Notes:
pn = the price of nontradables; P = general level of prices
[see Appendix II for detailed definition and data sourcesi
                                     — i8 —



respect to prices.]b Real GDP declines as a result of both the
balance—of—payment    deterioration and a fall in   real imports of intermediate

input.

     As indicated by the net positive impacts, in the nontradables, the

positive    direct price spillover outweighs the deflationary effect of the
balance—of—payments deterioration with a rise in import prices. However,
the price changes are significantly smaller in nontradables than in the

tradables, as implied by higher percentage impacts, as shown in the table,

in the general level of prices than in the price of nontradables. Thrther,
the sectoral differences are nnintained over the entire simulation period.
These results support what Kravis    and Lipsey (1978) had found for other

economies,    that sectoral price differentials are both substantial and per-
sistent, and contrast with such aggregate or the monetarist models which
assume or predict long—run homogeneity in sectoral prices.
     All in all, a io% sustained increase in the world import prices brings

about a 0.6% increase in general level of prices in the first year, with its

peak effect reaching 2% in the sixth year. The time it takes to the peak

is   rather long, which probably reflects the inclusion of slow—responding
production    sector in our model. Effects on the price of nontradables are

much     lower with the impact effect of 0.2%, and the peak of 1% only. The
stability of the system is evident not only in prices, but in real GDP
which tends towards the original level (deviations tend towards zero),
although there exhibits some    fluctuation in trade figures in later years

reflecting general uncertainties of the 1970s. The balance of trade

remains out of balance, suggesting again a possible non—homogeneity in
                                   — 19   —




sectoral price movement even in the long run when import demand is
inelastic.
   The effects of the export—price shock are similar to those of the
import—price shock, except that the ambiguity is removed. Since the value
of exports and the balance of payments would now improve, the indirect
effect thrcBlgh the money and the income channel is unambiguoUslY infla-
tionary with a rise in export prices. The indirect effect now        reinforces


the   direct effect, producing a tendency towards a long—run balance of

payments equilibrium. The response patterns are sectorally more homoge-
                       differentials appear to be narrow over time.      Due to
neous, and the price
                                                through the worsening balance of
the lack of possible deflationary effects

payments, the effect on domestic prices is greater with an export price

 shock,   than the same percentage shock in import prices.
                                                 where the direct linkage
      The foreign income shock highlights a case
 between foreign and domestic prices in tradable market, and the subsequent
                                            the price channel, are absent. All
 spillover to the nontradables through
                                          the indirect channel. Through the
 impacts reflect transmission through

 indirect channels, the price of nontradables, and hence the general level

 of prices, would rise consequently.      The boost in exports would cause an

 increase in imports due to the improved foreign exchange situation,
                                                         in the balance of
 contributing to a gradual approach to equilibrium

 payments.
                                              indirect channel can be closed by a
        An interesting point is that this

  complete
             monetary sterilization. The differences between a foreign real
  (activity) shock and a foreign price (nominal) shock should also be noted.
                                         and income channels which can be stopped
  The   former works through the money
                                    — 20 —



by the monetary authority, but the latter works through the price as well
as   the money and the income channels which can be   blocked only partially.
4.   Partial   Simulation Results

     To continue on this note of differentiation among various channels of

transmission, a series of "partial't simulations were carried out, i.e.,    the
simulations    with one of these channels turned off. The first "partial"
experiment blocks the entry of iruportables and exportables to the price
index.   The sec,ond simulation disconnects the relationship between the

international reserves and the money supply, so that the money supply is

effectively exogenized. The third experiment removes the real—imports term

in real—output equation; the income effect not associated with the money

effect   is hence closed off. These three "partial" models were simulated
with imposition of 10% shocks on import and export prices.
     Tables 2 and 3 report the dynamic simulation results from these
"partial" experiments. In the case of an import price shock (Table 2), it
is immediately clear——by the comparison with the "full" simulation results
(Table U——that the effects on the domestic prices are minimal if the
direct price channel is closed. In fact, the impacts on the price of
nontradables turn negative in later years, as the deflationary effect of
the balance—of—payments deterioration with inelastic import demand over-
takes the small initial price spillovers.15 With closing of the monetary
channel, the effects of the import—price shock are greater than under the
"full" simulation, since the deflationary indirect effects are now elimi-
nated. Similarly, the removal of the income channel facilitates the direct
price impact to rise above the full simulation case, but by substantially
smaller margin compared to a case when the money channel is closed. This
                                         — 21   —




"perverse" result that the price impacts can be greater under partial than
under   full simulation arises from the fact that Japanese import demand is in-

elastic; the closing of the money and income channels in this case removes

the deflationary effect of the balance—of—payments deterioration,       hence
the   transmission effects are greater without them.

      The relative importance of these three channels is nore clearly seen in

the case of an export price shock. None of the partial simulations now
yield the price transmission effects which exceed those of full sinulation.
Table 3 presents the losses in transmission for each of the three partial
simulations,   as compared to the results from the full simulation. Numbers
in the table are the differential price effects in the nontradables sector
under   partial simulations, over the results from the full simulation,

for the case of 10%   exogenous   increase in export prices.

      It is apparent that the losses are greatest if   the   direct price channel

is   closed. The price channel is especially dominant in early years, while
the money and income effects are initially insignificant and gain strength
over time. In the 8th year, the monetary channel——measured by losses if
it   is closed off——reaches a parity with the price channel. Toward the end of

lb-.year simulation, the monetary channel, however, declines while the price

channel still retains 46% loss ratio. The income channel reaches its peak

at 31% loss in the 7th year, which is significantly lower than 19%

loss in the 9th year if the monetary channel is closed off. These

results from partial simulations suggest that serious biases may exist in

many aggregate models of transmission which do not specify the direct price

channel [Darr (1978) for instancel)-6
                                      — 22 —




Table 2: "Partial" Sii1ation Results of 10%
             Increases in Import Prices
             (Percentage Changes in the Price of Nontradables)



               Price Channel     Money Channel     Income Channel
               Closed            Closed            Closed


     1963      0.00       -
                                 0.16              0.16
     19614     0.15              0.1414            0.4l4

     1965 +0.00                  0.55              0.55
     1966 +0.00                  0.88              0.75
     1967      0.00              1.07              0.83
     1968      0.00              1.23              1.01
     1969     —0.11              1.30              1.08

     1970 —0.20                  1.30              1.00

     1971     —0.19              1.22
     1972 —0.27                  1.1414            0.99
     1973     —0.16              1.71              0.98
     19714 —0.20                 1.68              o.j14
     1975 —0.19                  1.98              0.70
     1976 —0.30                  2.08              0.65
                                   — 23 —




 Table 3: Loss in Transmission with Partial Simulations*


                   Price Channel       Money Channel       Income Channel
                   Closed              Closed              Closed

       1963        1.00                0.00                0.00

       1964        0.85                0.00                0.00
       1965        1.00                0.00                0.00
       1966        0.83                0.08                0.00
       1967        0.86                                    0.00
       1968        o.6                 0.34                0.24
       1969        0.58                0.42                0.31
       1970        0.52                0.45                0.26
       1971        0.48                0.49                0.21
       1972        0.47                o.4y                0.15
       1973        0.47                0.42                0.13
       1974        0.47                0.33                0.07
       1975        0.47                0.20                0.02
      1976         o.46                0.08                0.00
*
    Computed   as (1—partial/full simulation), for the effect of
10% export price increase on the price of domestic nontradables.
                                      — 24   —




5.    Summary   and Conclusions
      We have constructed a simple, yet comprehensive model of the price
linkage between the world market and the domestic, nontradables sector
which includes major balance—of—payments adjustment mechanisms. The struc-
tural equations suggested in the theoretical analysis have been implemented
empirically for Japan and simulated dynamically with several "foreign"
shocks.
      The main theoretical conclusion is the importance of the industry
structure in international transmission of inflation. The reason is the
possible conflict that may exist between the direct price effect due to
production     and consumption substitution in nontradables sector, and the

indirect money and income effects that operate through changes in the

balance of payments in tradables sector. Further,      depending on import
demand elasticity, the two sectors may react     differently to a given foreign
price     shock; uni—directional and homogeneous price movement implied in con-

ventional one—commodity     models is possible only when import demand is
elastic,     or when some sort of demand for international reserve is extli—

cit]..y   specified. The recognition of these different channels of
transmission    also proves the specialty of the alleged monetary "insulation"

schemes:      complete "insulation" is possible by the monetary sterilization,

only when there is a single commodity, or when the direct price effect is

ruled outj7

     The simulation results provide some evidence of the "imported" infla-

tion in Japan. Due to     the inelastic import demand, sectoral differences in

price     responses to an import—price shock, hiever, are maintained. The
prices are sectorally more homogeneous in the case of the export price
                                      — 25   —




shock.    The results from the more "special" case——the foreign inconE shock——
and from "partial" sinnlátions provide a clue on the relative magnitude of
various channels in Japan. The importance of the direct price channel
found    underscores the possible downside bias that nay be present in some

existing studies where only the indirect channels——mostly the money effect

at that——are specified. A foreign real shock is shown to impact dif-

ferently from a foreign price shock; the former works through the indirect

channels only, while the latter operates through the direct as well as the

indirect channels of transmission.

    The    magnitude   of the imported inflation estimated for Japan, however,

should    be qualified in terms of the several important deficiencies of the
model: exogeneity of the exchange rates, and the validity of the
"small—country" assumption for Japan. The theoretical section, being a
comparative—static analysis, suffers from the lack of dynamics involved
with the inflationary transmission. The implications of capital flows,
expectations, and others can also be examined in future studies.
                                     — 26   —




                                    FOOTNOTES



1. Branson and 1vrhrinan (1976) suggest merging the Scandinavian model with
     the Phillips curve. However, such a direct marriage would seem rather
     awkward since both cannot be the price equation; one of them should
     either be entirely passive or determine some other variable than
     price.

2. This specification is also consistent with the multi—commodity corn-.
    parative advantage model, where substitution takes place between
     neighboring comdities only in the comparative advantage hierarchy,
     with nontradables in the middle separating the two kinds of tradables.
     This view implies that all comnDdities potentially are tradables
     except for natural and nan—made trade barriers.

3.   The nDdel is not completely general since the factor prices are given
     exogenously. A sufficient condition for the negative sign for import
     prices is that factor supply is perfectly elastic at given factor
     prices. This assumption allows for factor unemployment.
h. Commodity definitions are given, i.e. , the possibility of commodity
    reclassification as a result of changes in prices is not addressed in
     this   paper.

5.   The case of complementarity can easily be incorporated by changing the
     signs of the cross price terms.

6.   The elasticities of P with respect to three domestic variables
     (H, q and PR) can be obtained likewise. The effects of q and PR
     depend    on trade structure as do those of world prices. Interestingly,
     the results confirm conclusions from the Scandinavian theory in which
     the price in the sheltered sector is a positive function of the
     productivity differential between      the advanced exposed——tradables----
     sector and the lagging sheltered—--nontradables——sector. See Choi
     (1980).
7. No similar complications are present with respect to export prices
    under our assumption of elastic world market. The unit—elastic import
     demand will side with whichever case that has definite results. The
     "small country" assumption made here is actually more restrictive than
     necessary; all that is necessary is greater elasticity of world demand
     for exportables than domestic supply of exportables, and greater
     elasticity of world supply of inrportables than domestic demand for
     importables.

8.   The importance of the industry structure is obvious with inelastic un.-
     port demand since the direct and the indirect effects work in opposite
     directions. With elastic import demand, these two effects are of the
     same sign, but   the industry structure would still natter as far as the
     general level of prices is concerned, since there is no reason to ex-
     pect that the resultant change in the price of nontradables is identi-
     cal to the change in the price of tradables.
                                    — 27   —




 9.   Strictly,   this is true only in terms of
                                              reduction of the number of
      transmission channels, since the reduced number of transmission
      channels does not necessarily mean a reduction in the magnitude of
      price pressures that are transmitted.

10. Hanada and Makoto (1978) profess a similar view in a two—country
     model which employs a standard supply—dominated international trade
     model combined with the Phillips curve.
11. The collapse of the general open—econonrj model to a closed—econow
     case requires——in addition to the balance—of—payments being zero——
      an assumption of a-single commodity, the absence of the relative
      price terms in the sectoral demand and supply equations, or a dis-
      carding of the law of one price equation.
12. The Bank of Japan (1972) and the Economic Planning Agency Model of
     Japan [Baba amd Others (1978)]. See P. Komiya and Y. Suzuki in
      Krause and Salant (1977); and Ackley and Ishi (1976) for discussion
      of Japanese institutional features.

13. A lax monetary discipline, for instance, has been suggested in the
     literature with the start of the flexible exchange rate regime. See
     Crockett and Goldstein (1976).
i1. Similar results were reported by Houthakker and Magee (1969) for
     earlier period.

15. The effects on overall prices are still positive owing to the direct
     positive impact on domestic tradables.

16.   Darby reports "barely detectible direct influence of foreign prices
      on domestic prices" for several industrial countries, but his results
      are contingent on having an aggregate model with a money supply re-
      action function.

11. Assuming, of course, that the nation continues to trade inter-
     nationally. Several authors [Turnovsky (1976) and others] also
     suggested the same possibility —— the incomplete insulation by a
     monetary or exchange regime —— in other contexts, such as the role
     of uncertainty and information.
                                               — 28



                                             APPENDIX 1

                     The Japanese Model of Transmission of Inflation


The Direct Price Linkages

(i) log pZt = —4.5391 + 0.7614691 log e + 0.933346 log pz*
                      (—6.89)       (6.78)                    (28.21)
      B2 = .995             SE = .024                 DW = 1.90              p =   .59
(2) log pXt = —5.2861t8 + 0.9043914 log e + 0.95687 log pX
                       (—9.22)       (9.15)               (18.32)
      R2 = .992             SE= .019                  DW=l.30                p = .85

(3)   pZfl =   —0.213565 + 0.3372314 pzt + 0.9243144
                  (—3.90)         (3.15)               (8.31)
                                                                     pZ
                                                                      —

      B2 = .973             SE = .079                 DW =    2.89
(4)   pXfl =   0.913512 + 0.621565          pXt
                  (3.59)         (6.09)

            = .976          SE = .043                 nw =    1.86           p =   .85


Foreign   Trade

(5)   log   Z = 1.23722 + 0.240053 log AR + 0.854396 log
                                                         _j_
                  (14.09)        (1.69)                      (2.37)
               —0.696806 log        zt + 0.102660            D311
                  (-4o)                           (i.%)
      where       =
                      pXt X + VXS + NF + CF
      B2 = .987             SE = .087                 DW = 1.75

(6)   log (PXtX) = —22.7682 + 6.59086 log Y + 0.759935 log PXt
                        (—17.72)     (13.09)                        (3.65)
                  —0.107626 D34 —1.33928 log Y
                      (—2.20)              (—fl.8i)
      B2 = .997             SE = .056                 DW =    2.06
()    El' = 2XtX _pZtZ + VXS — VZS + NF + CF
                                               — 29 —


The Monetary Sector

 (8) R=R1+BP
 (9)   log H = 0.5214731 + 0.372252             log (H + B) + 0.6373142            log !.t_1
                  (3.05)      (2.22)                                   (3.90)
       B2 = .997               SE = .0514                      DW =    1.33
(io)   log CR = 0.895840 + 1.069)48             log H —0.10492 D17
                (15.97)   (40.92)                       (—1.92)

       B2 =   996              SE = .065                       DW = 2.29


The Domestic Sector

(ii) log Y = 1.29690 + 0.156611                log CR + 0.302928               log (z +       zs) —0.0378884 D37
                    (5.53)        (2.06)                P        (4.64)                             (—2.24)

               + 0.414199         log L1
                      (3.36)

       B2 = .999               SE =   0.022                     DW =    1.83

(12)     =


(13)   P = aP'1 + bPZn +       cP                                       a + b +    c =    1

(14)   log q = —1.60902 + 0.693972 log P + 0.381695 log I + 0.809324                              D3T
                (—6.64)      (2.88)           (7.24)           (2.80)

                    + 0.418363 log q—i


       B2 = .999+              SE = .020                        DW =    1.54

(15)   log P' = 0.122818 + 0.439044 log q —0.16466 log PR + 0.302055 log                                —
                      (3.18)          (4.16)                (—1.77)                   (1.86)
       B2 = .993               SE = .034                        DW =    2.00




The numbers in the parentheses are the t ratios. The logarithms are to
the base e.
                                        — 30   —




                                       APPENDIX II

                  Definitions of the Variables in the Japanese Model



pZt       Domestic Price of Import Goods
pXt Domestic Price of Export Goods
pZfl      Deflator for Primary Industry Output
          (Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery, and     Mining and Quarrying)

pXfl      Deflator   for Manufacturing Industry

          Deflator for Service Industry Output
          (Wholesale and Retail, Transportation and Comnunication, Construction,
pfl

          Services, Governments, and Others)
      *
          Unit Value of Import Goods in the World Market, U.S. Dollar
pZ

pX
      *
          Unit   Value of Export Goods in the World Market, U.S. Dollar
e         The Value of One U.S. Dollar in Japanese Yen, Period Average

Z         Import of Goods, Constant Price

 X        Export of Goods, Constant Price

 VXS Export of Services, Current Price

 VZS Import of Services, Current Price

 ZS        Import of Services, Constant Price
 NF Net Unilateral         Transfers

 CF        Net Capital Inflovs exclusive of Official Transactions

 q         Annual Wage Rate, Million Yen

 Y         Gross Domestic Product, Constant Price

 y         Gross Domestic Product, Current Price

    P      Deflator for Gross Domestic Product

    1*     Index of Real GDP's of Developed (excluding Japan) and Developing
           Market Economies, veited by Japanese Trade

    BP     The Balance of Payments on Official Settlement Basis

    R       International Reserves, End of Period
                                         — 3]. —


M      Money Supply (Ml), End    of   Period

11     Domestic Reserves, End    of    Period

CR     Doxrestic Credit, End    of   Period

PR     Productivity of Labor Index

D34    Dummy, 1973 —

fliT    Dummy, 197].   —   71

D31     Dummy, 1973 —      Ti




All money variables, unless otherwise noted, are in thousand billion
Japanese Yen. Price indexes are in the unit of one with the base year of
1970.


Data Sources
 OECD, Ithin Economic Indicators and National Accounts of OECD Countries; UN,
 Yearbook of National Accounts Statistics,        Yearbook of International Trade
 Statistics, and Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Pacific; IMF,
 national Financial Statistics, and Wharton Econometric Forecasting
 Associates, Inc.
                                    — 32   —




                                  REFERENCES

Ackley, G. and H. Ishi. "Fiscal, Monetary, and Related Policies," in
    H. Patrick and H. Bosovsky, eds., Asia's New Giant: How the Japanese
    Econonv Works, Washington, D.C.: The Brookirigs Institution, 1976.

Aukrust, Odd.    "PRIM I: A Model of the Price and Income Distribution
    Mechanism of an Open Econoimç," Review of Income and Wealth, March 1970.
Baba, Koichi and Others. "Economic Model for Short—Term Prediction SP—iB,"
    Economic Planning Agency, Economic Research Institute, Discussion Paper
    No. 19, Tokyo, March 1978.

The Bank of Japan. "The Bank of Japan Econometric Model," Statistics
    Department, Preliminary Note, August 1972.

Branson, W.H. "Monetarist and Keynesian Models of the Transmission of
    Inflation," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 1975.
Branson, W.H. and Johan Myhrnan. "Inflation in Open Economies: Supply—
    Determined versus Demand—Determined Models," in H. Frisch, ed.,
    Inflation   in Small Countries, Berlin and New York: Springer—Verlag,
    1976.

Brunner, Karl and Allan Meltzer. "The Explanation of Inflation: Some
    International Evidence," American Economic Review, Papers and
    Proceedings, February 1977.
Bruno, M. "The Two—Sector Open Econocry and the Real Exchange Rate,"
    American Economic Review, September 1976.
Choi, J. "International Trade and Transmission of Inflation in a General
    Equilibrium Framework," Ph.D. Dissertation, New York University, 1980.

Choi, J.  "International Price Linkage under Fixed and Flexible Exchange
    Rates," mimeographed, 1981.

Crockett, A.D. and M. Goldstein. "Inflation under Fixed and Flexible
    Exchange Rates," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, November
    1976.

Darly, Michael R. "The NBER International Transmission Model: The Mark II
    Disequilibrium Version, Estimates and Lessons," University of
    California at Los Angeles Discussion Paper No. 137, December 1978.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. "Peal and Monetary Aspects of the Effect of Exchange
    Rate Changes," in R.Z. Aliber, ed. , National Monetary Policies and the
    International Financial System, Chicago and London: University of
    Chicago Press, 19Th.

Edgren, 0., Faxen, K.O. and C.E. Odhner. "Wages, Growth and Distribution
    of Income," Swedish Journal of Economics, September 1969
                                    — 33   —




Ramada, K. and S. Makoto. "International Transmission of Stagflation under
   Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates," Journal of Political Econory,
    October 1978.

Hernandez—Cata, E. "The Japanese Sector of the Multi—Country Model," Board
    of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Dis-
    cussion Papers, Number 131, February 1919.
Houthakker, H.S. and S.F. Magee. "Income and Price Elasticities in World
    Trade," Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, May 1969.

Johnson, Harry G. "Inflation: A Monetarist View," in H.G. Johnson,      Further
    Essays in Monetary Economics, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
    University Press, 1973.

Jones, R.W. and Corden, W.M. "Devaluation, Non—flexible Prices, and the
    Trade Balance for a Small Country," Canadian Journal of Economics,
    February 1976.
Katseli—Papaefstratiou, L.T. "Transmission of External Price Disturbances
    and the Couosition of Trade," Journal of International Economics, 10,
    August   1980.

Katz,Samuel I. "Imported Inflation and the Balance of Payments," New York
    University Graduate School of Business Administration, The Bulletin,
    Nos. 91—92, October 1973.
Krause, L.B. and W.S.          eds. Worldwide Inflation, Washington, D.C.:
                         Salant,
    The Brookings Institution, 1971.
Kravis, Irving B. and Robert Lipsey. "Price Behavior in the Light of
    Balance of Payments Theories," Journal of International Economics,     (8),
    1978.

Laidler,    D.E.W. Mi Elementary Monetarist Model of Simultaneous
    Fluctuations in Prices and Outputs," in H. Frisch, ed. , Inflation
    in   Small Countries, Berlin and lew York: Springer—Verlag, 1916.
Machiup,    Fritz. "How Inflation is Transmitted and Imported," Eurorrcney,
    September    1915.

Miller, M.H. "Can a Rise in Import Prices be Inflationary and Defla-
    tionary? Economists and U.K. Inflation 1973—74," American Economic
    Review: September 1976.

 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. "The International
     Transmission of Inflation," OECD Economic Outlook, Special Section,
     July 1973.

 Parkin, M. "A 'Monetarist' Analysis of the Generation and Transmission of
     World Inflation, 1958—11," American Economic Review, Papers and
     Proceedings, February 1971.
                                        - 34   -



Prachowny,    M.F. "The Effectiveness of Stabilization Policy in a Snail
    Open Econonr,     Weltwirtschaft]Jches Archiv, 109(2), 1973.

Shinkaf, Y.     "A Model of Imported Inflation," Journal of Political     Econozq,r.
    JuIy—August 1973.
Turnovsky, S.     "The   Relative Stability of Alternative Exchange Rate Systems
    in   the Presence of Random Disturbances," Journal of Money, Credit and
    Banking,    February   1976.

Turnovsky,    S.J. and Andre Kaspura.    "An   Analysis of Imported Inflation in a
   Short—Run Macroeconomic Model," Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 7,
   August 1974.
