NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO OWNS THE ASSETS IN A
DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLAN

Jeremy I. Bulow
frron S. Scholes

Working Paper No. 924

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

July 1982

Presented at the NBER Conference on Pensions, Amelia Island
Plantation, Florida, March 25—26, 1982. We thank the participants
of the conference for their comments, especially our discussant
Jerry Green. The research reported here is cart of the NBER's
research program in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #924
July 1982

Who Owns the Assets in a Defined Benefit Pension Plan

ABSTHACT

The liability to employees in a defined benefit pension plan is the
present value of vested benefits, the present value of the benefits that
employees would receive on the immediate termination of the pension plan.

This is the literal and simple definition of the liability. Although it leads
to an understanding of the economics of the promise of a pension, several
common provisions of pension plans make it necessary to expand the

definition. Anomalies such as vesting, early retirement benefits, lump sum
provisions, and ad hoc increases in benefits for retired employees indicate
that employees accrue benefits that exceed their benefits on a termination of

the plan. These anomalies, however, can be explained by requiring that
employees as a group possess specific human capital. Although losing one or a
few employees from the group would be a small loss, losing the group of

employees would be a great loss. In this group model, employees bargain with
the stockholders over the compensation of the entire group; they allocate
their compensation according to marginal product, returns from previous equity
investments in the human capital of the group, and to purchases and sales of

claims on this capital. The model explains the anomalies as a natural
outgrowth of the transactions of members within the group. In addition, the
model explains the use of defined benefit pension plans, and how employees
could have claims, in excess of vested benefits, on the assets in the pension
plan.

Jeremy I. Bulow
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University

Stanford, CA 94305
(415) 497—2160

I',

962—7281
Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago,
1101 E. 58th St.,
Chicago, Illinois, 60637

Myron S. Scholes
.

WHO OWNS THE ASSETS IN A DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLAN

Jeremy I. Bulow and Myron S. Scholes'
Graduate School of Business, Stanford University
and
Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago

I. Introduction

Who owns the assets in the defined benefit pension plans of

corporations? Some may feel that this question is easy to answer; pension
funds are legal entities separate from the corporation. This distinction has
been made more explicit with the enactment of the Employees Retirement Income

Security Act of l972 (ERISA). The provisions of the act regulate the funding
and the investments of the fund as well as the benefits to employees. In
addition, the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC), which guarantees a
level of benefits for employees, has the power to tax the corporation to

secure the payment of pension benefits. The firm contributes to the pension
plan; the administrators of the plan have responsibilities as other
fiduciaries, and the employees receive benefits from the pension plan during

their years in retirement. Although, prior to the Act, employers have had
easier access to the assets of the fund, greater control over the funding and
investing decisions, and could use the assets for corporate purposes, the
provisions of the Act closed many routes to the assets of the fund.

Pension plans are too large and are growing too fast, however, for
economists to be stopped by the literal description of the pension plan or for
them not to try to strip away the legal form and to reveal the economics of

2

defined benefit pensioll plans. As explained in Bulow et al. (1982), there
have been significant changes in the economics of the defined benefit pension

fund subsequent to the passage of ERISA. Currently, pension assets in all
plans exceed $600 billion, while the assets in non—insured private pension

plans exceed $300 billion. In recent years, pension contributions for Fortune
500 companies have averaged approximately 12 percent of pretax profits. These
funds represent a large pool of' assets: to define ownership to these assets is
an important task.

Understanding the ownership of defined benefit pension funds, however, is

a difficult task. Early papers in the area by Treynor (1972), Treynor et.
al. (1978), and Sharpe (1976) considered that the pension trust was
essentially an asset of the corporation. The liabilities to the employees
were classified as essentially corporate obligations. Black (1976) argued
that most of the risk of holding assets in a defined benefit pension plan is

borne by corporate stockholders. Bulow (1981) has argued that the pension
promise is comparable to a discount bond: the current reduction in salary is
the present value of the bond, and the future promise is the face amount of

the bond. As a first approximation, the value of the corporate pension
liability would then be only the accrued benefits, benefits that must be paid
if the plan were terminated immediately.

Sharpe (1976), assuming a no tax world, argued that it made little
difference to the stockholders or the pension beneficiaries as to how the
assets of the pension fund were allocated between bond and stock investments.
With rational expectations neither group would expect to fool the other

group. Black (1980), Tepper (1981) and Feldstein & Seligman (1981) assume
that retirement promises to employees are corporate liabilities, with little

3

risk,

and most important, promises that are independent of the pension fund,

in concluding that there were tax advantages to corporate stockholders of
investing the assets of pension funds in bonds.

There are, however, several cracks in this armor on various fronts,

including the tax front. Sharpe and Harrison (1982) argue that with insurance
provided by the PBGC and with taxation, the policy of the fund may shift

toward either all stocks or all bonds within the fund. Miller and Scholes
(1981) and Bulow (1982) argued that the pension claims of the employees were
not independent of the value of the assets of the fund; some groups of
employees consider that the assets in the defined benefit plan belong to them,

just as if the plan were a defined contribution plan. Depending upon the
question to be answered, economists have assumed that different parties owned
the pension fund.

In the last several years, however, many financial economists have come
to the view that the pension plan of large corporations is a corporate asset,
and that the obligation to pay employees during retirement is a corporate

liability. This argument seems reasonable, since beneficiaries of a defined
benefit pension plan receive a pension based, in part, upon a percentage of
their final salary with the firm, or receive a pension based on a fixed dollar
amount multiplied by up to a maximum number of years of service with the

firm. Although, as a legal entity, the pension fund may be separated from the
firm, employees look to the firm to pay their retirement benefits. These
payments, therefore, have been assumed to be obligations of the corporation,
promises to pay benefits to employees, similar in economic effect to promises

to its other creditors. If benefits received by the employees are independent
of the performance of the fund, or its assets, then the assets of

1I

the firm include the assets of the pension plan: both

are

the security for the

pension claim. Tepper (1981) assumes this independence by treating the assets
and

liabilities

of the pension fund no differently than assets and liabilities

held on corporate account in constructing an augmented balance sheet of a
corporation.

We want to contribute to the discussion of the issues in several ways.
In the first section we discuss the implications of interpreting literally the

provisions of a defined benefit pension plan. Doing so, leads to some
implausible conclusions even if the method used to account for pension
benefits is the most consistent with accounting for other forms of employee

compensation. These inconsistencies imply, that when valuing the employee's
claims on the pension fund, it is necessary to look beyond the literal
description of the compensation agreement.

In the second section of the paper, we explore what can be learned from
the form of the pension contract as to the nature of compensation to the group

of employees within the firm. The traditional view that stockholders set up
forms of "implicit contracts" is rejected for the view that employees, within
the salaried pension plan, should be looked at not as individuals but as a

group. The group negotiates with the stockholders of the firm (
directors of the firm or its management representatives )

over

the board of

the division of

the profits earned by the firm.

By considering the workers as members of a group, many of the anomalies

considered in the first part of the paper disappear. We conclude that viewing
the

pension fund and the corporate assets of'

account

is

too simplistic.

a firm as a single consolidated

5

II. Who Owns the Pension Fund? A domatio view of the pension covenants

At the start, we will consider only defined benefit pension plans for

salaried employees. Such plans are almost always well funded: if the plan
were to terminate today, assets would be more than sufficient to assure all of

the accrued vested benefits of the employees in the plan. As employees leave
the firm, their pension wealth in the plan could be calculated easily by

taking the present value of their vested benefits. As Bulow (1982) shows, the
present value of vested benefits is the correct measure of pension wealth
under either of two models of labor compensation: (1) a "marginal product
model", and (2) an "orthogonal model".

In a "marginal product model", an employee's total compensation each
period is equal to marginal product, making little difference if the employee
leaves or stays with the firm. It. would be extremely tenuous to argue that
the present value of the employees' vested benefits is not the correct measure

of the employer's liability: future benefit accumulation is part of future
compensation, and is paid for by providing future services to the firm.

In an "orthogonal model", the form of the pension plan is assumed to be
independent of any deviations between employee compensation and their marginal

product. Some recent work (e.g. Medoff and Abraham (1981)) indicates that
after correcting for differences in marginal product, older workers may be

paid more than younger workers. This does not mean, however, that these
differences need be related in any way to the form of the pension plan.
Stanford, for example, has a defined contribution pension plan yet may be as

"paternalistic" as Sunstrand Corporation, with its defined benefit plan. In
both organizations, the young workers may be underpaid and the old workers

6

might be overpaid. No one, however, would suggest that Stanford calculate a
"projected liability" representing the amount of compensation the school will
have to pay in excess of the present value of the future output of the
employee, (even though under the tenure system those liabilities are more
explicit than those of a private firm).

For firms with defined benefit pension plans, it does not make sense to
calculate an implicit pension liability using projections of future salary

scales and termination rates. In computing the liability of the firm to the
beneficiaries of the plan, the liability should be be no greater than the

liability on terminating the pension fund. The liability should be unrelated
to the form of the pension plan, whether the plan is of the defined benefit or

the defined contribution type. Furthermore, since pension benefits represent
less than ten percent of total labor compensation, the calculation of a
liability for implicit compensation by only using pension data would be
subject to large errors in measurement.

Using these arguments, actuaries are justified in setting the value of
the employeest pension equal to the present value of vested benefits, the

benefits they retain on immediately leaving the firm. These are exactly the
same benefits that employees would receive on the termination of a well—funded
pension plan.

Anomalies in the Accrued Benefit Method of Accounting for Pension Liabilities

We have found several ways, however, where accounting for pension wealth
in this manner, fails to reflect the present value of an employee's pension

wealth. These anomalies make it difficult to accept the accrued benefit
method, in total, and

without

question or adjustments.

7

The anomalies that we have found that are most interesting include the
following problems.

Vestin& occurs on discrete dates. Until employees vest, they have no
pension wealth; on "vesting day", however, their entire accrued benefits

become part of their pension wealth. Under ERISA, in the most extreme form of
vesting, if employees leave the firm with less than ten years of service, they

have no pension; however, after ten years they are fully vested. No one would
believe that employees accumulate their entire ten years of pension wealth on

the final day before vesting. Although this appears to be a serious
deficiency, it is not as important as it might seem: the present value of the
benefit is generally less than one half a month's pay for a newly vested
employee who is about 110 years old. If need be, the firm could pay salary
that was fractionally less during the last year before vesting, knowing that
the employee will consider loss of pension in deciding whether to stay with
the firm.

Although the employee may receive salary that is independent of the day
of vesting,

for

proxy

this

bonus is too small to invalidate using vested benefits as a

pension wealth. We have better candidates to challenge the vested

benefit approach to valuing the pension benefit.

Early Retirement Benefits. Employees receive large lump sum benefits by
remaining with the firm until the first date of early retirement. Many plans
allow employees to retire early with benefits that are too high relative to

the benefits received on remaining with the firm until normal retirement. For
example, a plan may have the following provisions: (1) If the employee leaves

8

before the early retirement date, Ce. g., age 55), the employee is eligible
for a vested pension with benefits beginning at age 65; (2) If the employee
stays until the early

retirement

date, the employee is eligible for perhaps 70

percent of a full pension, starting immediately, and (3) By staying until the
early retirement date, the employee may become eligible for extended health
benefits and periodic upward adjustments in pension benefits, which are lost

by those employees leaving the firm prior to the early retirement date. The
employee's incentive to stay with the firm until the early retirement date may
exceed one full year's salary.

Staying until early retirement has a dramatic effect on the employee's

pension wealth. Looking strictly at vested benefits as a measure of pension
wealth fails to account for the large jump on that one day. Employees may
receive quite a few lump sum benefits during their careers but none comparable
to the gain, achievable by staying with the firm until the date of' early

retirement. Clearly, those employees, soon to become eligible for early

retirement,

have substantial equity beyond their vested benefits.

To preserve comparability to the manner in which we account for other
items, we still might choose to account for early retirement as a one time
windfall, that is realized on reaching the date of retirement. For example,
some employees at universities receive tuition benefits for children attending
college; that item is expensed and not accrued throughout employment.
Employees, however, do not de facto have such large lump sums payments as part
of their compensation.

Possibly, early retirement provisions are substitutes, in part, for

9

severance

pay. That is, employees that are fired before the date of early

retirement might have a more generous severance arrangement than those of

their colleagues. The early retirement date would still serve as a
significant milestone; after that date, the employee, on retiring voluntarily,
would receive severance pay through pension in lieu of severance. (L.azear

(1982) has worked on a closely related question.)

Lump Sum Distributions. Lump sum distributions from pension plans have a
significant effect on pension wealth. Numerous pension plans permit some or
all retirees to take their pensions in a lump sum, with promised benefits that

are discounted at low rates of interest. According to a recent survey, 90 of
the 51j5 companies surveyed, offered lump sum payment options while only

assuming rates of interest that averaged around 6 percent. (New York Times,
April 5, 1981.)

By using low rates of interest, the lump sum distribution has greater
present value than receiving the pension through time; therefore, accrued
benefits, at all dates prior to retirement, would be the present value of the

lump sum. This has an interesting side effect: if the firm also uses a low
rate of interest in valuing pension liabilities, then its book liability

equals its literal valuation liability. There are, however, two major
problems with this approach.

First, firms have a large degree of flexibility in changing the interest

rate used in determining the lump sum. It may seem implausible that a firm
could unilaterally reduce the present value of its pension liabilities by as
much as 25 percent by changing its assumption on interest rates from 6 percent

10

to

9

percent.

corporations

Texaco, American Airlines and RCA Corporation are among
that have raised the interest rate in recent years, to the

consternation of retiring employees. (Pensions and Investment Age, May 10,
1982.)

Second, firms have the power to decide whether a specific employee will

be permitted to receive a lump sum benefit. For example, some plans may make
it easier for high level executives, deemed to possess more financial acumen,

to receive lump sums. At this stage of the analysis, however, it is puzzling
that employees would give to the firm as much discretion over the present

value of their benefits. The vested benefit method of valuation does not
allow for discretion of this type.

As hoc Increases in Benefits. Ad hoc increases in the benefits of
pensioners are a corporate give away. The vested benefit method of valuation

of pension benefits requires that future promises be known. Firms, however,
grant ad hoc increases in benefits to already retired employees.

These

grants, at random times during retirement, do not fit the vested benefit
approach to defining pension wealth.

Claims on Pension Assets. The stockholders have an equity position in
the pension fund at least equal to the market value of the assets in the
pension fund minus the present value of the liabilities of the fund. In
addition, if the right to put the liabilities to the PBGC, the "pension put",

has value, the stockholders have a more valuable claim. On the other hand, if
the "pension put" has no value, a well—funded plan, then the stockholders are
the

sole gainers (losers) from increases (decreases) in the market value of

11

the pension fund. The stockholders, not the employees, are concerned with the
Wwastingfl of excess assets in a well—funded pension plan.

Recent events, however, imply that this separation of the claims on the

assets in the plan is incorrect. For example, retirees of Grumman
Corporation, not the stockholders, sued the trustees of the pension plan for
wasting the assets of the pension fund, by buying stock at a premium,

presumably, to prevent a takeover by LTV. With a vastly overfunded pension
plan, it appears that the retirees were not injured; only the stockholders
were hurt if they missed an opportunity to sell their stock at a higher price,

and if paying the premium was a waste of the excess assets of the plan. The
benefits of retirees were still safe and active workers may have been better
of f because their own pensions remained intact and their jobs may have become

safer because of the anti—takeover activity.

Under ERISA, the assets of the plan are to be managed for the sole

benefit of the beneficiaries of the plan. The courts appear to follow this
interpretation in defining the claimants to the assets of the plan. The
Grumman case points to the difficulty in using the excess assets in the plan
for corporate business purposes.

In another case, the A. & P. Corporation terminated its pension plan.
After negotiating with the union, and although no contract specified a
division of the surplus, the surplus in the pension fund was split into two
parts, one half to the firm and the other half to the employees through
increased benefits.

12

These anomalies lead us to conclude that the vested benefit method for

valuation of pension benefits does not give a complete picture. In actuality,
employees have complex employment contracts with the firm, and the pension

plan is only part of total compensation. To understand pension compensation,
in addition to direct salary, we must also understand the various other
aspects of the compensation package.

In the next section of the paper we discuss a model of compensation that
tries to explain how a firm could offer a compensation package that includes
lumpy payments, such as the large bonus for staying until the date of early

retirement. This analysis, we believe, gives us an insight into the nature of
the claims of both the employees and the stockholders against the pension
fund.

III. A Model of Labor Contracts

In the last section we showed that anomalies arise if we value pension

benefits as termination benefits. In this section, we present an alternative
model of the labor contract that reconciles many of these anomalies.

We eschew the standard "implicit contract" approach to labor relations,

an approach where young workers are paid less than marginal product and old
workers are paid more than marginal product because of some unwritten pact

between the firm and the workers. Although some of the implicit contract
models explaining the upward sloping wage/tenure profile have been ingenious,
such as the work by Harris and Holmstrom (1982), they typically depend upon

the firm honoring a non—contractual obligation to the employees. In a model

13

such as Harris and Holmstrom, it must be in the interest of the firm to renege
on its implicit liabilities at some point, unless those liabilities can grow
indefinitely by at least the interest rate, (a possible Ponzi scheme).
Although we present a model in which we expect to observe an upward sloping
wage/tenure profile there is no reliance on an implicit labor contract.

In this model we study firms that earn economic rents, that, in part, go

to the labor force. The labor force is able to extract some rents because the
employees develop some human capital specific to the firm. The firm cannot
earn its rents without employing the workers, who have experience with the

firm and who educate new and inexperienced workers. Each generation of
workers is willing to take a low wage when young to gain experience and to

become part of the group that negotiates a larger total wage bill. The older
workers are essentially equity holders in the firm, and they sell their equity

to the young workers. The sale takes place through differential wage rates:
it cannot occur through sale to stockholders. There is no claim that can be
sold in the market.

No generation of employees gets what is ex ante better than a fair deal;

there is no queue for employment with the firm. Individual employees,
however, accept low salaries because they are buying equity from other

employees——not because of an implicit contract with the firm. The senior
members of the organization, who at any moment possess the rents accruing to
the labor force, are able to do as well via high salaries when old, as they
would if they could suddenly disembody the rents of the labor force and sell
all future rents for their present value.

1
We distinguish three types of human
transferable human

capital,

capital.

First, is fully

such as the knowledge gained on earning an M.B.A.

degree. Second, is human capital specific to the individual; for example, an
administrator who knows a tremendous amount about a particular company, with
some of these skills not easily or at least quickly replicated at the firm.
Third, is firm specific human capital, not unique to a particular individual,

and, therefore, shadow priced at the margin at zero. Although, if one
employee leaves the firm, there is no loss in that the employee's marginal
product is as high inside the firm as outside the firm, if a whole group of
such employees left the firm, all at once, there would be a loss to the firm.

It is this third type of group human capital that we use in the model.
Empirically, if we could observe the marginal product of these employees

individually, it would be low. The marginal product of the group, however, is
high. If employees negotiate their compensation as a group, either explicitly
through union negotiations or implicitly through a management team, they may
be able to garner part of the "quasi"—rents that are earned because of the
firm—specific human capital of the group.

In another paper, Bulow and Scholes (1982), present a complete model of
this concept and its implications for contracting among members of the group.

To illustrate the ideas and the concepts, we use a simple model and a

numerical example. This will serve as a lead into our discussion of the
ownership of the assets of the pension plan.

15

Assume that a firm is created that will last exactly for four periods and
that the production function each period is as follows:

j•

C

q1,

where

) =

120

E

+ Jia

q13/ —

192

quantity of experienced employees

q1

quantity of inexperienced employees

Assume that these employees only develop firm specific human capital.
The opportunity cost of working for the firm is of the same amount regardless
of the experience of the employee. For the purposes of' the model assume that,
in each period, W, the opportunity cost of' each worker, is 15.

Assume that no individual employee can be employed for more than two

periods——one when inexperienced and one when experienced. In the first period
there are no workers with experience. Finally, assume that the rate of
interest, r = 100 percent.

It can be shown that optimal employment would involve hiring 16
inexperienced employees in the first period; employing 16 experienced and 16

inexperienced employees in each of periods 2, 3, and k. Under those
circumstances, the marginal product of both experienced and inexperienced

employees will be 15 (the market wage) in each period. The net present value
of the project will be zero.

If individual employees acted as price takers, then all employees could

receive a wage of 15 in every period. If the employees, however, are able to
negotiate their salaries as a group, they will be in a bilateral bargaining

16

position with

the

stockholders of the firm, (presumably through the Board of

Directors or their representatives), and

the

experienced employees may be able

to negotiate a higher level of compensation in periods one, two or three.

For example, in period four, the total income produced by the firm would
be 120 (16)1/2 + ho

— 192 = 608.

From this amount, each inexperienced

employee, would have to be paid 15 in a competitive labor market. The
experienced employees, however, conceivably could negotiate any amount of
salary between 15, at which level they would be indifferent to staying with
the firm, and 23, at which level the stockholders would be indifferent to
shutting down the firm.

Any assumption can be made as to the expectations of the employees as to
how the bilateral negotiations for salary will be resolved in periods two,

three, and four. We can then calculate the expected total compensation of
employees in each future period, the distribution of total compensation
between experienced and inexperienced employees in each future period, and the

salary that will have to paid in the first period. For example, assume that
everyone expects that in each period the employees will negotiate a
compensation package under which they receive 25 percent of the rents earned
by the firm. In each period, the opportunity cost of the 32 employees is 1180,
and the firm has gross income of 608; therefore, we assume that all parties
expect the total compensation of the employees in the last 3 periods will be
h480 +

.25

C 608 — 1180 ) or 512.

In period four, inexperienced employees will command a wage of 15 each.

Therefore, the experienced employees will each receive C 512 — 16x15)/16 =

17

17. In period three, the inexperienced employees, expecting that they will
receive 17 when old, will settle for' a wage of 14 when young: the present

value of their compensation will be the same as with a wage of 15 each year.
Continuing backwards, we can compute a table, as in Table 1, of' the expected
salaries of the experienced and the inexperienced employees.

Table 1

Expected Salaries of' Experienced and Inexperienced Employees

Period

Experienced

Inexperienced

2

18.50

13.50

3

18.00

14.00

4

17.00

15.00

Since young employees expect to earn 18.50 in period 2 when they acquire
experience, they will settle for 13.25 in period 1, which is 1.75 below the

market salary. Given the wage in period 1, and the expected wage bill in
periods two, three, and four, the firm regards the investment as as a zero net

present value project. Instead, if in each period, the firm were to pay

18

market salaries to all of its employees, it would have cash flows of —112,

+128, +128, and +128. Because the stockholders must bargain with the
employees in periods one, two and three, their expected share of the cash

flows falls to +96, (75% of 128). Naturally, the lower salary that the
employees accept in the start—up phase of the enterprise reduces the initial
cash outflow in that period from 112 to 8k.

Essentially, in period one, the inexperienced employees make an

investment that is equal to 25 percent of the equity of the firm. At the end
of the start—up phase of the enterprise, the firm will have a market value
equal to only three quarters of what it would be if the employees had no

equity participation, (loosely speaking, Tobin's q" would be less than one).

The inexperienced employees settle for a salary of 13.25, which is 1.7k
below the market salary, because they expect to earn an extra 3.50 the

following period. Of this extra amount, 2.00 comes from the 32.00 in rents
that are split among the 16 experienced employees; 1.50 comes from selling the
present value of the their future share of the rents of the firm to the new,
young employees.

In the context of this model, representatives of the stockholders

negotiate a total salary bill with the employee group. There are no implicit
labor contracts——management and the employees are expected to negotiate as

hard in each and in every period. Nevertheless, there are some employees,
generally the young and inexperienced, whose salaries are less than their
marginal product, and some employees, generally the more senior and
experienced, whose salaries are greater than their marginal product.

19

The model assumes that the employee group acquires an equity position
within the firm, and the model assumes that they can sell these property

rights only to new employees entering the firm. In the start—up phase of the
firm, both the stockholders and the employee group might have provided the
investment capital——the stockholders with direct investments; the employee
group with reduced salaries. The firm earns rents that are shared over time
through higher "dividends" to the employee group.

In this model of group compensation, we could observe large lumps of
salary to selected members of the employee group at particular times, such as
staying with the firm until early retirement day, or such as receiving tuition

for children attending college. As long as the total compensation bill is in
line with previous negotiations, the stockholders do not object to paying a
disproportionate amount to any one employee. Individual employees, therefore,
need not worry about the stockholders trying to reduce their salaries at times
when they become eligible to receive significant employee benefits.

While this model does not in itself explain why compensation should be
parcelled out in any particular form—— it is hard to justify tuition benefits

at universities, without considering that in part, these benefits are
tax—exempt income—— the model does open the door for individual compensation

not equal to marginal product at each point in time.

In the next section, we discuss the implications of the model to

answering the question of who owns the assets of a pension plan. Important is
the notion that the employee group has an equity share in the firm, a share
that is sold to younger employees through a salary reduction plan.

20

111. Who Owns The Assets In Defined Benefit Pension Fund?

In the model above, the employees of the firm negotiate with the employer
for a total compensation package, and allocate compensation among members of
the group according to marginal product, returns from previous equity
investments, and purchases and sales of claims on the equity of the firm.

There are three important implications of this model for the ownership of

the assets of the pension fund. First, the model appears to justify using
defined benefit pension plans. Under these plans, the present value of the
pension accruals of the experienced, older employees, are far greater than the

accruals of the inexperienced, younger employees. If younger employees are
buying the equity rights of older employees, a pension plan that skews pension
savings to older employees might be preferred by both groups of employees.

Under a defined contribution plan, however, employers are constrained to tie
pension compensation to salary, and not to make it directly dependent on age.
The defined benefit plan allows the younger employees to pay for equity shares
at a slower rate, which they might prefer, and allows the older employees to
defer, at the before tax rate, the returns on the equity shares in the firm.
Second, employers can aggregate over the many employees in the plan, to
compute the liability of the firm, even if' the estimates of the individuals of'

their own pension wealth do not aggregate to these totals. That is, the labor
model does not require that individual employees be paid anything close to

marginal product each period. The University of Chicago accounts, and
reasonably at that, for the cost of its tuition benefit program by expensing

the cash outlay each year. Individual employees, however, may include, and
rightly so, some accrued tuition benefit wealth on their own personal balance

21

sheets. To reconcile this seeming inconsistency, consider that the employee
group owns part of the surplus generated by the university; employees, with
children approaching college age, know that when their children become
undergraduates, the university, acting as the agent, will give them a

disproportionate share of the employee surplus. This allocation would be
entirely consistent with how the employee group had determined to allocate the
surplus aniong themselves. Similarly, in the pension area, that an employee
will be eligible for early retirement next year, and therefore will have
sharply increased vested benefits means that the employee will estimate

pension wealth at being greatly in excess of current vested benefits. This
employee is in line to receive, in the next year, a disproportionate share of
the equity claim of the employee group, just as the employee whose child is

about to enter college. Third, the group model of compensation implies that
the surplus in the pension fund——plan assets less the present value of accrued
benefits——is owned, in part, by the firm, and, in part, by the employees.

The employees trade—off current compensation for future compensation when

receiving a promise of a pension. In our model, compensation is not as well
defined: employees may be buying and selling equity rights as well as

receiving the value of their marginal products. In a simple model of
compensation, employees are just price takers, without any need to acquire
experience with the firm. The tradeoffs between current salary and a pension

can be explained by using a defined contribution pension plan. In this plan,
the employee gives up a dollar of current salary (before tax); this dollar is
invested in a fund, such as a mutual fund (

a CREF or a TIAA account). The

retirement benefits of employees are uncertain to the extent of the risk they

22

take in their investment account and up to changes in their marginal tax rate

in the pre and post retirement period. The firm acts as an agent, dividing
salary between a check for the employee and a check for the retirement
account; for the firm's tax purposes, the division of salary is irrelevant.
Employees make their own funding and plan choices based on current and future

consumption trade—offs, as well as the desire to assume risk. There is ample
evidence that employees desire some risk in their pension accounts:
university professors, persumably a representative group, albeit more risk
averse, have placed approximately half of their defined contribution account
money in common stocks, (CREF), and the remainder in risky bonds and in risky

mortgages, (TIAA). For university professors, these pension accounts may
represent the largest fraction of their savings in the form of stocks or
bonds, and as explained in Miller and Scholes (1978), the contribution limits
are so generous, professors may not need to hold common stock for retirement
other than in their CREF account.

In early work, it was assumed that pension promise was a bond contract, a

nominal but definite promise to the employees of the firm. If there were some
probability of defaulting on the bonds of the firm, the pension claim was of

equal priority to these bonds. This assumption is not correct for several
important reasons. On a strict termination basis, bondholders have a higher
priority on the assets outside the fund; employees on the assets inside the

fund. Assets in the fund increase the security of the pension claims of the
employees. If to some extent, prior to ERISA, employers could use the assets
in the pension fund for there own purposes, the provisions of ERISA made it
more difficult for the firm's stockholders to obtain the surplus of the fund

23

upon its termination. Furthermore, in our model, the employees own part of
the surplus of the fund——group negotiations and ERISA give them increased
bargaining power to obtain part of the surplus of the pension fund with and

without plan termination. By analogy, just as bondholders seldom receive what
their covenants entitle them to in bankruptcy, stockholders seldom receive
what their covenants entitle them to in a plan termination.

The pension fund is not a savings account of the stockholders of the

firm. Most corporate pension funds invest in bonds and in stocks.
Approximately, 60 percent of the assets of pension funds are invested in

common stock. Black (1980) and Tepper (1981), however, suggest that investing
pension fund assets in bonds dominates these current investment policies.
They assume that the pension fund and the pension promise are separate: the

fund is an asset of the firm, the promise is a liability of the firm. Given
this assumption, the stockholders are better off if the pension fund invests

in bonds: (1) in the Black model, because, the firm can keep its equity risk
the same by substituting bonds for stocks in the fund, and by leveraging by
buying back common stock with newly issued bonds on corporate account—— the

bonds in the fund earn at the before tax rate, while the offsetting bonds on
corporate account require payments at the after—tax rate; (2) in the Tepper
model, individual investors offset, on their own account, the change in the
risk of their equity that results from substituting bonds for stocks in the
pension fund——assuming the Miller (1977) model, with equilibrium marginal
after—tax rates of corporations equal to after—tax rates of individuals.
Miller and Scholes (1981), and Bulow (1982) examine the crucial assumption of
the independence of the assets in the pension plan from the promise of pension

2k

benefits to employees.

The tax models assume that employees do not make claims on the assets of

the pension fund. If, in the extreme case, the bondholders and

the

stockholders of the firm believed that the entire pension fund was owned by
the employees, there would be no tax advantage to the firm to funding in

bonds. The collateral security for the loan is bad. With partial claims on
the assets of the pension fund, the collateral security is tainted. The
equity model implies that the collateral security, if not bad is at leant

tainted. With complicated equity claims on the assets of the pension fund, it
might be difficult to write bond contracts that allow bondholders to extract
the surplus in the pension plan to pay—off debt claims.

As in Bulow, Scholes and Menell (1982), the Employees Retirement Income
Security Act and the establishment of the Pension Benefit Guarantee

Corporation changed the economics of the defined benefit pension plan. If
there were opportunities prior to ERISA to move assets from the pension
account to corporate account or to overfund the pension fund to obtain tax

advantages, ERISA has reduced these opportunities. Since employees, with
claims of the assets of the pension fund, do not have redeemable claims, the
PBGC serves to monitor the actions of corporate stockholders to preserve the

rights of the pension beneficiaries. These property rights, coupled with the
power of the PBGC, to enforce them, makes it difficult and uncertain as to how

to use the assets of the fund as collateral security on a loan. Even
employees in retirement look to the PBGC to secure rights to the assets of the
fund.

25

Since it is possible to change the level of funding in the pension plan,
to some extent, as long as it is done slowly or without large changes, there

is still a tax advantage to overfunding the pension plan. On the other hand,
this implies that with large unanticipated changes in the circumstances of the
firm, or with changes in the ERISA rules, the collateral security of the
pension fund may be claimed by other than the bondholders of' the firm.

That employee share an equity ownership in the firm, may explain some of
the other anomalies. Group negotiations prevent unilateral changes in interest

rate assumptions that can change the value of lump sum distributions. By
thinking of the employees negotiating as a group, we can understand and
interpret the anomalous provisions of retirement plans, such as the early
retirement and the lump sum payout provisions.

IV.

Conclusion
The assets of the pension fund are not necessarily the assets of the

firm. This makes the question "Who owns the assets in a defined benefit
pension plan" more uncertain than if the assets were assets of the firm or if
the fund were a defined contribution plan and the assets belonged to the
employees. In the augmented balance sheet model of pension finance, the

stockholders own the assets in the pension plan. In the group model, the
employees and the stockholders share ownership of these assets.

26

The employees, managing and running the firm, negotiate with the
stockholders for a wage package; the wage package is distributed among

the

employees as current salary and as future pension (and other benefits). In
part, the total wage is used by some members of the group to buy equity and to
make investments from other members of the group.

To some extent, the stockholders of the firm may be able to overfund the
pension fund to capture some tax advantages. By changing funding assumptions,

employers adjust their contributions into the pension fund. It is unlikely,
however, that the PBGC will allow large changes in the fund or in the company
without notification; it is unlikely that pension beneficiaries will allow

large changes (at least downward) in the value of the pension trust. In
recent years, many companies, trying to change pension or corporate benefit
policies, have been challenged by pension beneficiaries.

To actually use the pension trust as collateral for a loan is difficult

for all but the most secure companies. No contract can be drafted; the claim
must be a general obligation of the firm. The firm could change its policies
at any time; pension beneficiaries and

the

PBGC could step in between the

bondholders and the assets of the fund. The collateral security of the fund
is bad or tainted. The stockholders would find it difficult to borrow on the
assets on which others have a partial claim, namely, the pension
beneficiaries.

With modern corporations, outside stockholders are risk takers, and

expect to be compensated for assuming capital risk. As Fama (1980) has
argued, the internal management team, or employee group, is separate from the

27

stockholders, other than through the board of directors of the firm. As long
as stockholders earn a competitive rate of return on their holdings within the
firm, and the correct share of any new rents through investment, the
shareholders are indifferent as to how employees monitor each other within the
firm. In the context of' the large corporation, the pension plan could not be
used as a device to monitor the actions of employees; in particular, for the
young employee, the pension plan is of' little, if any value.

The vast majority of large pension funds contain assets far in excess of

the accrued benefits of the plan beneficiaries. A literal interpretation of
pension covenants implies that the entire surplus within the fund belongs to

the stockholders. We have seen, however, that if employees can negotiate as a
group and if' the provisions of ERISA are ambiguous as to whether the employees

or the stockholders own the surplus, we cannot give a unique answer to the
question: who owns the assets in the pension plan.

28

References

Arnott, R., and Gersovitz, M. 1980. Corporate financial structure and the
funding of private pension plans. Journal of' Public Economics 7,
April.

Barnow, B., and Ehrenberg, H. 1969. The costs of defined benefit pension

plans and firm adjustments. Quarterly Journal of Economics XCIII,
November.

Black, F. 1980. The tax consequences of long—run pension policy. Financial

Analysts Journal July—August, 3—10.
______• 1976. The investment policy spectrum, Financial Analysts Journal

January/February.

Bulow, J. 1979. Analysis of pension funding under ERISA. NBER Working Paper

No. O2, Novemeber.
______• 1981. What are corporate pension liabilities? Stanford University

Working Paper, July.

______•

l981a. Pension funding and investment policy. Stanford University
Working Paper, October.

Bulow, J., Soholes, H., Menell, P. 1982. Economic implications of ERISA,
Stanford, Graduate School of Business, May.

Bulow, J., Scholes, H. 1982. Labor contracting with equity participations,
Stanford, Graduate School of Business, June
Fama, B. 1980. Agency problems and

the

political EconomY, 88, no. 2.

theory of the firm. Journal of

29

Feldstein, M. and Summers, L. 1979. Inflation and

the

taxation of capital

income in the corporate sector. National Tax Journal, XXXII,
December.

Feldstein, M. and Seligman, S. 1981. Pension funding, share prices, and

national savings. Journal of Finance, XXXVI, September.
Goodman, H., Munn, F., Phillips, A., and Vasarhelyi, M. 1981. Illustrations
and analysis of disclosures of pension information, Financial Report
Survey 22. American Institute of Certified Public Accountants,
New York, New York.

Harris, M. and Homistrom, B. 1982. Ability, performance and wage dynamics,
forthcoming Review of Economic Studies
McGill, D. 1977. Fundamentals of Private Pensions. Homewood Ill, Irwin.

Miller, M., 1977. Debt and taxes. Journal of Finance, 32, May.
Miller, M., and Scholes, M. 1981. Pension funding and corporate valuation.
University of Chicago Working Paper.
and, _________. 1978. Dividends and taxes, Journal of Fiancial

Economics, 6, 333_361.

Sharpe, W., 1976. Corporate pension funding policy, Journal of Financial

Economios 3, June.
Sharpe, W., and Harrison, M. 1982. Tax and investment considerations of ERISA,
Stanford, Graduate School of Business. May.

Tepper, I., 1981. Taxation and corporate pension policy, Journal of
Finance, XXXVI, March.

Tepper, I., and Affleck, A. 197k. Pension plan liabilities and corporate
financial strategies, Journal of Finance, December.

30

Treynor, J.,

Regan, P., and Priest, W. 1976. The financial reality ot

pension funding under ERISA, Homewood, Ill., Dow Jones—Irwin.
Treynor, J., 1977. The principles of corporate pension finance, Journal

of Finance, XXXII, May.

