                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF ERISA



                         Jeremy I. Bulow

                         Myron S. Scholes

                           Peter Menell


                      Working Paper No. 921




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                               July   1982




Presented at the NBER Conference on Pensions, Amelia Island
Plantation, florida, March 25—26, 1982. We thank the rarticipants
of the conference for their comments, especially Fischer Black, and
our discussant Richard Zeckhauser. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Pensions. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #927
                                                         July 1982



                          Economic Implications of ERISA


                                    ABSTRACT


        If the intent of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, ERISA, was

to assure that beneficiaries of insolvent pension plans receive adequate

pension benefits, sharp increases in nominal rates of interest have blunted

that purpose. Without an increase in these rates, the Pension Benefit

Guarantee Corporation, PBGC, the insurance agency established to guarantee

benefits, faced large liabilities on the terminations of pension plans. We

examine the economics of pension funds and the funding of pension funds before

and after the enactment of ERISA. The Act changed the economics of pension

funds. The PBGC, the employer, and the employees have interests in the assets

of the pension plan. The PBGC can tax corporations to pay off liabilities and

to fund guaranteed benefits; employers can terminate pension plans or overfund

them; employees can ask for more benefits or claim the assets in the fund.

Although the PBGC insures benefits, the insurance agent forbears, not acting

quickly to protect its own interests. To prevent potential huge increases in

its liabilities, the PBGC could require that employers hedge the guaranteed

benefits, and fund their increases in promised benefits. Given its policies,

these requirements could protect the PBGC.



    Jeremy I. Bulow                             Myron S. Scholes   (312) 753—3686
    Graduate School of Business                 Graduate School of Business,
    Stanford University                         University of Chicago,
    Stanford, CA 94305                          1101 E. 58th St.,
                                                Chicago, Illinois, 60637
    (   415) 497—2160
                                                Peter Menell
                                                Economic Department
                                                Stanford Ilniversity
                                                Stanford, CA 94305
                        ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF ERISA



              .Jeremy I. Bulow, Myron S. Scholes and Peter Menell

              Graduate School of Business, Stanford University,

             Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago,

                  Economics Department, Stanford University



I. Introduction


     On enacting the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) in l97,

Congress changed the ownership rights to the assets of defined benefit pension

plans. These ownership rights were changed through the establishment of the

benefit insurance program, through the definition of fiduciary responsibility

of plan administrators, and through the minimum vestirig and benefit accrual

standards for plan beneficiaries.


     If, in part, the intent of ERISA was to assure that the beneficiaries of

virtually insolvent pension plans would receive adequate pension benefits,

sharp increases in nominal rates of interest, in recent years, have blunted

the extent of the impact of' this policy. The enactment of ERISA created a huge

liability to pay pension benefits, a liability that fell upon the Pension

Benefit Guaranty Corporation, (PBGC), the agency established to insure pension

benefits on the termination of corporate pension plans. As rates of interest

rose, however, the PBGC found that the present value of its liabilities fell

sharply, and that it no longer faced the likelihood of a funding crisis: it

no longer faced a significant threat of multiple terminations of underfunded

pension plans. Naturally, the PBGC will continue to guarantee its share of
                                          2


 the benefits of the plans of corporations entering bankruptcy. Although

significant in dollar amounts, these liabilities are small relative to the

value of the claims on the PBGC on the enactment of ERISA.


        Under ERISA, rules constrain the uses of the assets in the pension fund;

rules constrain the way the assets in the pension fund are managed; rules

require audits and reports to Government agencies, and rules require that

insurance premiums be paid to the PBGC. The defined benefit pension plan,

however, remains as a viable alternative to other types of pension plans, such

as a defined contribution pension plan, the major competing alternative that

is not subject to ERISA limitations. Balancing the increased costs of ERISA

are    rules   that allow overfunding of the pension fund. By overfunding, the

firm's stockholders earn the before—tax rate of return on the overfunded

portion of the assets in the pension fund. With higher rates of interest, and

with prospects in the late seventies and early eighties for decreasing

corporate rates of tax, employers had powerful tax incentives to retain

defined benefit pension plans and to overfund them. In addition, when the

rules under ERISA were defined, revised and understood, adjustment to them was

relatively inexpensive, and in the end, there were still as many "loopholes"

with nearly as much potential to skew benefit accruals as before ERISA.


       Although increases in the rate of interest limited the impact of ERISA

through reducing the present value of pension liabilities, ERISA would have

had an enormous impact if interest rates were to have remained unchanged or

were to have fallen after the enactment of the Act. Without the reduction of

pension liabilities, as a result of unexpected and high rates of interest, the

PBGC   would have faced a plight analogous to the plight that confronts the
                                      3



Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) with the same

unexpected and high rates of interest. If interest rates had fallen in the

late seventies, the liabilities of many plans would have increased to such an

extent that employers would have had a far greater incentive to terminate

their pension plans and to pass the liabilities of their plans onto the PBGC.

With the PBGC forced to assume these liabilities, its likely first response

would have been to raise premiums. For employers with overfunded plans,

increased premiums, however, coupled with low rates of interest, would have

reduced the relative tax advantage of retaining defined benefit pension

plans. For the insurance system to have remained solvent, employers with

overfunded plans, would have had to agree to increase the subsidy to employers

with underfunded and terminated plans. Faced with this prospect, many

employers, with overfunded plans, would have selected out of ERISA coverage by

switching to defined contribution plans. Thus, a dramatic change in the

Pension Reform Act would have been needed to prevent the ultimate collapse of

the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. Given the current opportunity,

however, modest changes in the pension law could rectify the structural

problems that could again cause damage, changes in the law that would reduce

the value of terminating a pension plan.


     In the first section of the paper, we examine the economics of the

pension funds and pension funding before the enactment of ERISA. We discuss

the fundamental differences between plans that are overfunded and plans that

are underfunded. We discuss possible reasons for establishing a defined

benefit plan and how these reasons affect corporate funding policy. The

post—ERISA environment is analyzed in the second section of the paper. The
                                       4


 crucial plan termination rules are presented. We show how the effects of

 ERISA are different for overfunded plans than for underfunded plans. We

 emphasize the importance of the effects of changes in rates of interest to an

 understanding of the long term economic effects of ERISA. In the final

 section, we analyze several approaches to changing the current pension law

 that could prevent future difficulties and could provide viable long—term

 benefit insurance.




II. Defined Benefit Pension Funds Before ERISA


Pension Liabilities


     Prior to the enactment of ERISA, pension liabilities were not liabilities

of the firm. When a plan terminated, beneficiaries had claims on the assets

of the pension fund only: if funds were insufficient to cover accrued

liabilities, the beneficiaries of the plan had no recourse to the general

assets of the firm. Whether terminating the plan caused redistribution from

one group of participants to others or from participants to stockholders is

ignored at this stage of the analysis. We assume that all parties have worked

out arrangements to try to protect themselves against adverse agency

problems.


     When a plan terminated, the priority of claims on the assets in the fund

was determined by the rules of the plan; for example, already retired workers

might have had priority over active workers in the firm. The aggregate claim

of all the beneficiaries could be expressed as:
                                              5




      (1)                        T = mm   (   F,V   )


    where      T =   benefits   of beneficiaries if plan terminated

               F     value of assets in the pension fund

               V     present value of vested benefits, discounted at the
                                  risk—free nominal interest rate.


     The claims of the pension beneficiaries could be looked at in two

equivalent ways:    (1) the beneficiaries "owned" the assets in the pension

fund, but management had the option to call the assets in return for paying

off the vested benefits of V, or (2) the stockholders "owned" the pension

assets, but had the right to "put" them to the participants in the plan in

satisfaction of their claim V against the firm. To understand the value of

these options, it was necessary to consider the interests of both the employer

and the employee group, for example a union, in negotiating a new short—run

labor contract when confronting a pension plan that was underfunded as

contrasted to one that was overfunded.,1



Underfunded Plans


     Difficulty in Running an Underfunded Plan. Although there were

circumstances under which plans could remain underfunded for long periods of

time, pressures did exist for employers either to fund or to terminate defined

benefit pension plans. For a plan to remain underfunded required two

important and sustainable conditions: (1) workers negotiated their salaries

and benefits, not individually, but as a group, and (2) workers possessed firm

specific human capital—— the present value of rents expected to be earned
                                          6


through future employment——that capital being greater in value than the value

of the underfunding. To show that these were sufficient conditions, we will

consider all four possible combinations of "worker negotiation" and "human

capital".


  Let

                 pension benefits to worker i if the plan terminates.

        V1       benefits to worker i on leaving the firm assuming the plan
                 continues and pays off all vested benefits.

        P1       opportunity cost of worker i (present value of future
                 compensation from alternative employment).

                 present value of future marginal product of worker i.

        F    =   total   amount of money in pension fund, (      f1).
        V    =   present value of vested benefits, (      vi).
        P    =   total   worker present value, (   Pt).



        Individual Salary Negotiations and No Firm Specific Human Capital. If

the plan were never terminated, worker i would still earn P on leaving the

firm, but retain v1 in already accumulated pension benefits. Therefore, if

the employer were to assure their pensions, workers would expect total future

payments worth P + V.     If the firm terminates the pension plan, however, the

cost of its work force would be less, only P +     F: each would receive a
termination benefit of f1 and a salary of          The employer has an incentive

to terminate the underfunded pension plan.
                                           7



            Individual Salary Negotiations and Firm Specific Human Capital. If the

plan would never terminate, future compensation (including payouts of already

earned pension benefits) would be negotiated as an amount between P + Vj           and
   +   v1   for each worker. If the plan terminates, however, each worker receives

only f1 and future compensation is bargained between p and m. Because f

V, under any standard bargaining solution, the employer would have at least

as low a cost terminating the pension plan as continuing it.


            Group Salary Negotiations and No Firm Specific Human Capital. With

group negotiations and no firm—specific human capital, workers would not

expect to receive more than P +    F,   the amount they would receive in pension

benefits upon termination of the underfunded pension fund. If the workers,

however, were to believe that the plan would never terminate, and that they

would receive v in benefits if they quit, they would stay with the firm only

with a contract to pay each of them p +              or a total of P + V.
                                               v1,                          Therefore,
the total cost to the firm would be greater continuing the underfunded plan.

(The only way that not terminating the plan could be profitable is if the firm

could find a way, albeit unlikely, to maintain an equilibrium, where unfunded

benefits (V—F) could somehow continue to grow at least at the interest rate.)


            Group Salary Negotiations and Firm Specific Human Capital. Assume

that the workers, as a group, possess some firm—specific human capital.

Define H as the present value value of the workers' future output. H I

such that the marginal product of the total work force is greater than the sum

of the marginal products of the individual workers (e.g. if a few workers were

to quit there would be little if any loss, but if all the experienced workers
                                       8


left the firm there would be a large loss to the firm). With group

bargaining, the threat point for the workers would be P + F, the amount they

would earn if no new contract were signed and the plan terminated. Employers

would be willing to pay no more than M + F; otherwise, terminating the plan

and hiring new workers would be the better alternative. Individual workers,

recognizing that the plan would continue, leave unless they receive at least

   + v1, or at least P +   V in aggregate. Although the final compensation

package must be worth no less than P + F and no more than M + F, it is

conceivable that the package could be worth more than P + V.   The firm need

not terminate the plan. To value the liabilities of the pension plan,

however, we can still use the value of the plan on a termination basis. The

bargaining position of the firm is not impaired by the workers knowing that

the plan will never termainate.2


     This analysis implies that salaried workers, who do not bargain

explicitly as a group, are more likely to have pension funds that are funded

than do union workers, who do bargain as a group. This is consistent with

historical data. Even firms with a separate plan for salaried workers and for

hourly workers, invariably have better funded plans for the salaried workers.




     Claims on Underfunded Plans. For simplicity, start by considering a plan

that is so underfunded that there is no chance that F will exceed V by the end

of the next labor contract. If no new contract is signed and if the plan is

terminated, the workers receive the money in the fund, F. If a new contract

is signed, the value of the workers' claims at the end of the contract will be

the value of the assets in the fund at that time: the value is a function of
                                          9



firm contributions, investment policy, and disbursements. In this situation,

the firm's claim against the assets of the pension fund is of little, if any,

value. The firm is concerned only with the contributions it is required to

make to the plan in lieu of current salary to the workers.


     The firm   should   be interested in negotiating only the pension

contribution, and should not be interested in the investment policy or the

increases in vested benefits granted under the new contract. The only points

on the   "contract   curve" involve the workers setting investment and benefit
                                                            3
policy however they want to set the policy for "their" fund.


     Empirical work on testing these effects seems to bear out this analysis.

Inman (1980), in a study of municipal pension plans, estimated that there is

significant difference between how workers value extra vested benefits in

greatly underfunded plans and how they value benefits in well—funded plans.

They ascribe little value to promises of increased benefits if their plan is

underfunded.


     Anecdotal evidence also supports this view. For example, as part of

their financial concessions to a hard pressed New York City, union

representatives allowed the city, albiet for possible other payments, to buy

city securities with the assets in the union pension funds and to do so at

more than market prices. If the fund were overfunded, the workers would have

valued their pension as V, the vested benefits, and the reduction of the value

of the assets in the pension plan would have been costless for them and of no

benefit to the city. That the employees and the city officials felt that the

purchase of city bonds at below market rates of interest was a genuine
                                         10



concession indicates that the value of the claims in underfunded plans depends

crucially on the value of the fund, F.


     Summary of Underfunded Plans. Before ERISA, when F was far below V,

contract negotiations centered on contributions to the fund. Workers gained

when the value of the fund increased and lost when the value of the fund

decreased. The fund belonged to the workers. Although the value of vested

benefits, V, was computed by discounting vested benefits at the riskiess rate

of interest, and V changed with changes in interest rates, a change in V might

not have implied a transfer of assets to either party, the firm or the

workers.




Overfunded Plans


     The second polar case concerns a plan that was well funded and could

cover its vested benefits. Since the minimum of F and V was V, negotiations

centered on granting additional benefits, increasing V. For these plans,

employees were not concerned with changes in the assumed interest rate; they

were not affected by a reduction in contributions to the pension

fund——benefits would still have been valued at V despite the inframarginal

reduction in F. Plan participants were not concerned with the investment

policy of the fund; the stockholders, however, as residual claimants were

concerned with investment policy.


     In an overfunded plan the risk of the plan, (risk in F), was borne by the

stockholders of the firm. The value of the pension claims, V, remained

approximately the same with changes in the value of the assets in the plan.
                                      11



Unanticipated changes in V, however, mainly due to changes in interest rates,

represented transfers between the employees and the stockholders.




Why Have a Defined benefit Pension Plan?


     Defined benefit pension plans are more complicated to analyze than

defined contribution pension plans. There is little literature on valuing

pension liabilities in a defined contribution plan——everyone knows that at any

given time, the value of a pension in a defined contribution plan is simply

the amount of money currently in the plan. No complicated actuarial methods

are needed to allocate defined contribution pension costs——simply, the costs

in any year are the contributions for that year. The valuation of defined

benefit pension liabilities, however, has received significant attention over

the past five years and there still is uncertainty about the correct method to

value these benefits.


     Given that defined benefit plans are complicated, why do so many firms

use these plans? Prior to ERISA, there were at least four reasons why it was

in the interests of corporations to use these plans. First, defined benefit

plans were used to shelter income from the corporate tax. A defined

contribution plan is always funded fully——never overfunded or underfunded. If

there is a tax advantage to overfunding a pension plan, the advantage could

only be gained through having a defined benefit plan.


     How the tax advantage to overfunding the pension plan comes into being

depends on the model of capital market equilibrium. Since in a Miller (1977)

model, there is no advantage to issuing corporate debt——in equilibrium the
                                         12



effective personal and corporate brackets are the same——the tax advantage

arises from holding bonds in the pension fund that earn at the pre—tax

corporate rate. In the "debt capacity" model, the tax advantage comes from

issuing debt on corporate account. Holding extra assets in the pension fund

increases debt capacity. In addition, with expectations of a falling

corporate tax rate, there is an incentive to overfund the plan, at least for

corporations paying taxes.


     Prior to ERISA, however, the annual tax savings possible through

overfunding were limited. Nominal interest rates were low, and prospects were

not as bright for a reduction in the corporate rate of tax. With low rates of

interest it was difficult to understate the interest assumption to increase

the funding of the plan. Additionally, the incentive to accelerate

contributions to a pension plan was significantly less than with high rates of

interest.


     It was, however, relatively easy to move money into and out of a pension

fund——there were no minimum funding standards. Since the tax advantage of

overfunding belonged to the stockholders, the ease of moving the excess

between the pension fund and the corporate account made the location of the

money important only for tax purposes. There were many examples of firms

moving money into and out of their plans, (e.g. U.S. Steel in 1955).


     Second, a defined benefit plan can be used to leverage total

compensation. Since pension benefits are tied to final average salary, an

increase in salary of one percent can increase total compensation (pension

plus salary) by more than one percent.
                                           13


        Third, there may be information conveyed by the form of the pension

 plan. For example, workers might receive early retirement benefits in lieu of

 severance pay. With a defined benefit plan, the firm accumulates severance

 pay in a tax free account, and formalizes the arrangement with workers.

 Workers, leaving the firm early, know what severance pay they will receive and

 that they will earn it whether they quit or are fired by the firm.


       As a last point, Bulow (1981) has shown that most accruals of benefits in

 a pension fund are credited to the older workers. The defined benefit plan

provides an easy way to skew pension compensation towards older workers while

still appearing to be somewhat evenhanded in the treatment of all workers.

Although no one is necessarily fooled by this approach, older workers do tend

to save more for retirement than the younger workers. It is extremely

difficult to skew benefits in a defined contribution plan.        Expanding on this

theme, some have argued that these plans, being complicated, have been used to

fool workers and government officials, and have been used to smooth corporate

earnings.




ummarv of Pre-ERISA Environment


       Before the enactment of ERISA,   workers, in   effect, owned the assets   of
the   underfunded pension plans; the stockholders owned the assets in     excess of

funding requirements in the overfunded pension plans. Only the plans for

organized labor could remain underfunded for any length of time without being

terminated.
                                        14




     The overfunded plans, on the other hand, could be used to shelter funds

from tax for it was fairly easy to move funds between the pension fund and the

corporation, and vice versa. The tax advantage, however, was seldom great;

interest rates prior to 19711 were relatively low. In addition to any tax

advantage, defined benefit plans could be used to lever compensation, to

accumulate a form of severance pay or to skew pension compensation towards

older workers.




III. Defined Benefit Pension Plans After EHISA


     With ERISA, the legal claims of beneficiaries and of employers changed.

Most important was the introduction of a form of plan termination "insurance"

that guaranteed approximately eighty—five percent of all vested benefits.

With this insurance, beneficiaries of underfunded plans, mostly members of

organized labor, gained at the expense of the PBGC. If interest rates had not

risen and, thereby, sharply reducing the value of these claims, the PBGC would

have faced many more plan terminations than actually did occur since the

enactment of ERISA. To understand how to reform the rules and to prevent a

possible collapse In the future, we will explain the economic effects of the

rules for terminating a pension plan.


     In addition to promulgating the rules for terminating a plan, ERISA also

tightened the standards that apply to a fiduciary managing a pension fund. A

major effect of these changes has been to restrict the movement of assets to

the corporation from the pension plan. With these restrictions it became more

costly to overfund and to pull back the funds as needed, just as the level of
                                              15


the   interest rate made it more advantageous to overfund the plan. ERISA,

however, failed in taking aim at curtailing "backloading"——the skewing of

benefit accruals towards long term employees.



Pension Liabilities After ERISA


        We use the following notation to describe the rules mandated by ERISA:



            A     accrued benefits

            G     guaranteed benefits

            E =   "net   worth" of the firm

            F =   value of the assets in the pension fund
            T value of the worker's claim on termination of the fund

        PBGCL     liability of PBGC on termination of the fund

           FL     liability of firm on termination of the fund




        Accrued benefits are the sum of vested and nonvested benefits.

Guaranteed benefits differ from vested benefits in several respects: (1) there

is a maximum to the amount guaranteed each worker in the plan; (2) the

guarantee of benefits arising from an amendment to a plan is phased in over

five years, [ERISA, Section 14022(b)(1) and (8)]; (3) ancillary benefits such

as death benefits are not guaranteed, and (1)      the PBGC is not required to

grant    lump sum payments or early retirement benefits if the present value of
these   benefits   exceeds the present value of normal retirement benefits, [PBGC

Opinion Letters 75—33 and 77—1141]. From current PBGC experience, it

guarantees approximately 85 percent of the vested benefits of employees in
                                                        16



covered plans that were terminated with deficits.


       Under ERISA Section 1062, the employer maintaining an underfunded plan at

termination is liable for up to 30 per cent of the "net worth" of the

corporation. This section states that "net worth is determined on whatever

basis best reflects, in the determination of the Corporation (PBGC), the

current status of the employer's operations and prospects at the time chosen

for determining the net worth of the employer". The PBGC appears to be able

to use any method of' valuation to secure its guarantees.

Under ERISA then:



        (2.1)      T    max (G, mm            (   A,F))


        (2.2)     FL    mm C      A -    F, max (0, mm (G—F, .3      E)))


        (2.3) PBGCL =   mm    (   0,    F +       .3   E —   G   )




Note   that T — FL —PBGCL =       F; the total value of all claims against the fund

add to the amount in the fund.


       Overfunded Plans. If a plan is overfunded, F > A, ERISA has little

direct impact other than the requirement that the employers pay annual

insurance against plan termination, (currently $2.60 per employee). The main

impact of the Act was to require employers to adhere to rigorous standards

when acting in the capacity of a fiduciary for the defined benefit plan.

Although the firm owns the excess assets in the fund, it is restricted greatly

in its ability to use these assets. ERISA Section k0114 (d)(1) states that any
                                           17



 residual assets in a terminated plan revert to the employer only if the

 pension plan explicitly provides for such a distribution in termination. Thus

 in many cases, the PBGC has contended that excess assets should go to plan

beneficiaries. Despite these restrictions, employers are still able to

withdraw funds from pension plans by at least the following indirect methods:

 (1) by making small reductions each year in the amounts contributed to the

plan; (2) by increasing the fraction of total compensation in the form of

promised pensions, or (3) by increasing early retirement benefits. These

routes, however, are not as clear cut and as fast as some might like,

especially the creditors of the firm.


       nderfnded 1'lans. ERISA brought about major changes for plans that were

underfunded, i. e. plans for which F < A. Beneficiaries of plans that were

underfunded to the extent that the PBGC would bear some residual liability on

termination, (F +     .3 E < G), and that applies mainly to union plans, found
that their benefits were raised to G: an amount independent of the assets in

the plan. The PBGC assumed the risk of a default, while previously, union

members bore this risk. A literal interpretation of the rules implies that a

firm can terminate its plan and require that the PBGC pay up the amount G — F

—   .3 E to members of the union. The firm has an option to terminate its plan;

the exercise value of the option is the Max ( 0     ,   G   — F —   .3 E). Although the
pension put may be valuable, the PBGC can reduce its value to only the Max ( 0

    G — F —   .3 E) by requiring the firm to shore up the plan, or by taking over
the plan as soon as G exceeds F or the put becomes valuable. The PBGC,

however, may not move quickly to take over a firm because of the cost of

assuming 30 percent of the equity of the firm, or the cost of reorganizing
                                        18




the firm. This has resulted in a degree of uncertainty as to how the PBGC

responds when a pension fund becomes greatly underfunded. The PBGC may

forbear for a period of time and not act to shut down the plan: the put

option becomes difficult to value.



Why not terminate a defined benefit pension plan?


     By enacting ERISA, Congress made the PBGC immediately liable for the

unfunded guaranteed benefits that could not be covered by 30 percent of a

firm's net worth. For those firms with overfunded plans, the insurance

premium is akin to a tax, unless there was an expectation that the PBGC would

forbear in the future, or that the plans had benefits over defined

contribution plans that exceeded the insurance costs. Since the PBGC does

forbear, the reasons that a plan does not terminate include:


    (i) the firm loses the possibility of being liable for less than 30

        percent of its "net worth"; it may be more profitable to hold its

        option than to exercise it.



   (ii) "cash flow" considerations make continuation for the coming period

        profitable. To show this let



               Gt,Gt+i = value of guaranteed benefits in periods t and
                            t+ 1

              Dt+i
                        =   dividends paid by the firm in period t +   1


                            payouts by pension fund of guaranteed benefits in
                                                            19



                                       period t +       1


               r                   =   riskless       rate of'   interest

               C1                      contributions to the            plan in period t + 1.


Then, if



  (2.) Gti +       ti          —   (1       +   r)   Gt + Dt+i     —         > 0




it pays to delay termination, even if termination is likely to occur in the

future. The pension compensation from continuing the plan another period

(Gt+i +      —(1   +   r   )
                                Gt     ),    and the reduction in the value of the

PBGC'S equity claim through dividend payouts exceeds the required pension

contribution of the firm. By continuing the plan, the workers and

stockholders both gain at the expense of the PBGC.


     The value of the reputation of a firm might also make managers pause

before terminating a plan. For an overfunded plan there is no problem. Other

pension benefits could be substituted and employees would be as well off as

with the defined benefit plan. With an underfunded plan, a termination, with

a surrender of 30 percent of the net worth of the firm might result in a

backlash from its workers, from its customers and from its creditors.


     Difficulties in Applying EHISA. Although the potential for huge plan

terminations existed in the mid seventies, there were fewer terminations than

the analysis might suggest.                 On the enactment of Act, according to a strict

interpretation of the rules of ERISA, the PBGC had a large and mostly unfunded

liability. To some extent, the PBGC may have been slightly better off because
                                       20


 of ambiguity as to whether a firm could terminate an underfunded pension plan,

give up 30 percent of its net worth, and continue in business. Ambiguities

also existed as to what was the latitude of PBGC in defining what constitutes

"net worth". In PBGC opinion letter 80—5, a subsidiary of a firm submitted a

request for waiver of liability on terminating an underfunded plan because it

had negative net worth. The waiver was denied on the grounds that the parent

of the subsidiary showed adequate book and retained earnings. In that opinion

letter, the PBGC argues that in determining the net worth of a business, it

could look beyond book value and could use other factors that establish the

value of the business as a going concern. In PBGC opinion letter 80—6, the

PBGC states that "net worth", as used in Section 1062(b) of ERISA, refers to

an employer's fair market value, which in many cases may differ significantly

from an employer's balance sheet or appraised value. Naturally, the PBGC has

argued that in passing ERISA, the intent of Congress was not to bail out

underfunded pension plans. One important case involves Alloytek, that is

attempting to terminate its underfunded pension plan and to start a new plan

with the exact same benefits as the current plan. The firm has a negative

book value, and the shares of its stock are not traded; the firm argues that

its "net worth" is zero. The issue is whether a going concern can terminate

an underfuned plan at the expense of the PBGC: a win by Alloytek will

precipitate some immediate reforms in the pension law.


     The definition of net worth is a major issue of current pension fund

litigation. There is enough ambiguity interpreting "net worth" so as to make

it unclear as to what "net worth" really applies in defining the liability of

the firm. For example, Penn—Dixie, a bankrupt firm, negotiated a large payoff
                                        21



 to the PBGC as part of its plan of reorganization. Even with a bankrupt firm,

 the PBGC may have a claim closer to that of a creditor than an equity owner.

 This claim as a creditor may arise because the firm often violates a provision

 of ERISA if near bankruptcy; for example, by falling behind in contributions.


      Another major issue of definition arises in picking a rate of interest at

which to discount the future benefits to calculate the guaranteed benefits,

G. The PBGC calculates its interest rates using a survey of annuity rates

offered by major insurance companies, subtracts the expense and profit rates

of the insurance company, and adjusts for its own expense rates. On

terminating plans, employers have the following options: (1) let the PBGC take

over the assets of the plan along with the liabilities; (2) value the

liabilities according to PBGC rates, or (3) buy out some of the liabilities

through   private contracting with insurance companies. Even though the PBGC
rates of interest are below market rates, (increasing the value of the
guarantees)   most employers have opted to have the PBGC take over the assets

and liabilities of their plans. We suspect the reason for this is that many

of the plans that have terminated were the smaller plans, plans for which an

insurance company would add administrative charges to the rate of interest to

cover its own expenses. If a large plan terminates it may do better by buying

insurance in the market; if not, the low interest rate assumptions have

interesting implications. Using a low rate of interest overstates the value of

the guaranteed benefits. By overstating these benefits the PBGC can force a

firm, with insufficient assets in the pension fund, to pay up a greater

percentage of the value of its equity (up to 30 percent) upon terminating   the
pension   fund. Terminating a pension fund may be more costly than suggested by
                                      22



the rules.


Summary of Effects of ERISA on Underfunded Pension Plans


    By guaranteeing the pension benefits, ERISA transferred resources to the

beneficiaries of underfunded pension plans. This transfer came partly at the

expense of the equity holders of the firm, up to 30 percent of the security of

their equity value, and partly at the expense of the PBGC, which is required

to make up the difference between guaranteed benefits and the liability of the

firm. In the short run, underfunded plans would not have had an incentive to

terminate because of the value of the "put" option. A plan termination under

ERISA, however, does not imply that an employer abrogates pension obligations

to its employees. It may mean simply that the firm changes to a different

type of plan, (e.g. a defined contribution plan). Thus terminating a plan is

not necessarily a major disruption with the firm; it may have no effect on the

reputation of the employer.


     Most terminations were by fully funded plans. This does not mean that

the PBGC was financially sound at its creation. Remember that increases in

rates of interest reduced the present value of the promise to the

beneficiaries of pension plans guaranteed by the PBGC. At the end of 1980,

using a sample of 682 large corporations with defined benefit plans, we found

that only five firms had liabilities that would require PBGC payments: the

five firms were Chrysler, Uniroyal, Wheeling—Pittsburgh, Braniff and Cyclops.

(Our sample did not include International Harvester, and Braniff has declared

bankruptcy.) To estimate the liability, we used 1980 year end market values of

the firms in the sample, an 11 percent rate of interest, and the current
                                          23


relation between guaranteed benefits to reported benefits, G = .85 V ( firm

rate of interest / .11 ).75• We were forced to use the consolidated

liability, V, in making these estimates because some firms have both a union

and a salaried plan where union plans tend to be vastly underfunded and

salaried plans are usually well—funded, (e.g. Chrysler). Consolidation

understates the liability of the PBGC. Nevertheless, interest rates have

limited the problem of the PBGC to only a few firms. In fact, using only the

assets in their pension plans to cover the guarantee, only 25 pension plans

had guaranteed benefits in excess of the the assets in the plans. Therefore,

even with bankruptcies of a few major firms, it becomes clear why the

frequency of Savings and Loan Association bankruptcies and the status of the

FSLIC are salient issues in public policy relative to the solvency of pension

plans and the PBGC's ability to guarantee benefits.


     An interesting side effect of the ERISA guarantee, is that negotiations

of new labor contracts have switched from emphasis on contributions to

emphasis on benefits. Prior to ERISA, the union would have rejected a

Chrysler plan.to postpone indefinitely making any contributions to the pension

plan. Recently, the firm negotiated such delays for its underfunded hourly

plan without objection. Negotiations are primarily over benefits that

increase the amount of the guarantee.


Summary   of   Effects of ERISA on Overfunded Plans


     One major effect of ERISA has been to increase an employer's cost of

using defined benefit plans. Insurance premiums are required and the new

fiduciary rules make defined benefit pension plans less flexible. Balancing
this, however, are   tax   advantages of overfunding a defined benefit pension

plan. Whenever rates of interest are high or prospects for tax       rates   are

lower, employers have an incentive to continue using    using a   defined benefit

pension plan.


     A firm can increase the amount of overfunding in the plan by simply not

altering its assumptions about the rate of interest used to calculate the

present value of the benefits. Although IBM, for example, is approximately

fully-funded on its books, IBM uses only a 5.5 percent rate of interest.

Using current interest rates, its pension plan is overfunded by approximately

$3 billion. Because firms assume low interest rates and modify these

assumptions infrequently, increases in the market rate of interest tend to

increase the amount of overfunding possible in a plan.


     Balancing the benefits of overfunding, however, are    the   new rules that

fiduciaries must follow in managing the assets of the fund. These rules

obscure the ownership of the excess assets in the pension fund. ERISA has

made it more difficult to borrow against the assets in the pension fund. Some

firms, thus, may be reluctant to overfund, and this may help explain why many

firms reduce their accumulations in the fund by changing their actuarial

assumptions even though they did not need to make the change. About 15 percent

of the more than 1000 firms subject to FASB inflation accounting rules of

disclosure changed their actuarial assumptions in 1980, though not all changed

their interest rate assumption.
                                         25


 Ineffectiveness of Other ERISA Provisions


        ERISA requires that pensions of employees vest according to minimum

vesting    rules. Another stated objective of ERISA is to minimize the

backloading of benefits. "Backloading" is the practice of having a benefit

formula that biases the pension benefits in favor of the long—term employees.

For example, a plan might give a worker a pension equal to one half of one

percent of final salary times the number of years worked up to twenty plus two

percent of salary times the number of years worked beyond the twenty years.

Under current law, however, the annual rate of accrual cannot be more that 11/3

as great in future years than in the current year, [ ERISA Section 2011 (b) (1)

(B)).


        It is still possible, however, to backload. Backloading of a substantial

amount can occur by using the rules for integration with social security and

by using the high interest rates. As shown by Bulow (1982), if the provisions

of a plan state that a worker will receive a fixed percentage of final salary

times the number of years worked, then pension accruals are highly skewed

toward the last years with the firm. McGill (1977) explains that by using the

formulas for integrating social security with pension benefits under ERISA, a

disproportionate share of the accrued benefits of any worker leaving the firm

at a young age or any worker leaving after a short duration can be eliminated

by Integration with social security. Although it is easy to skew benefits in

a defined benefit plan, it is difficult to skew benefits in a defined

contribution plan. The designers of pension plans might use this feature to

better fashion the plan to the needs of the beneficiaries.
                                            26


IV.   Possibilities   for Reform of ERISA


       The PBGC has a direct interest only in plan funding, portfolio

allocation, and benefit accrual decisions: these decisions affect the value of

the "pension put". As we have discussed, the pension put is currently "out of

the money" for all but a few plans. Modest changes in the funding and

portfolio allocation rules will insure that the PBGC will not be as vulnerable

to plan terminations as it was in the mid 1970s.


      Under ERISA, the PBGC technically has the power to terminate any plan as

soon as it feels there is a danger that if a plan terminates, it would be

liable to pay benefits, [ERISA Section l4O12(a)J. Since the exercise value of

the pension put to the corporation is Max ( 0, G — F —       .3 E ), the PBGC, by
following the mandate literally, could make the value of the pension put equal

to zero by terminating the plan when G = F +     .3   E. If such a policy were

followed, pension insurance would be of no value to most firms. The only

reason that firms would continue to pay the insurance premium would be to

maintain the tax advantage of a qualified defined benefit pension plan.


      Actually, the PBGC has a policy of forbearance: it does not terminate

many plans. In any event, it would probably have some difficulty in the

courts if it tried to terminate a plan that was meeting the minimum ERISA

funding standards. Also, the PBGC is not equipped to take over large numbers

of pension plans, nor does it view the taking over of plans as being the

intent of Congress.


      If the PBGC does forbear in not terminating plans, its role changes to

that of the pension fund monitor. As a price for not immediately terminating
                                            27


insufficient plans, the PBGC could require funding and investment policies

that reduce the value of the pension put or at least keep it from becoming too

valuable. Three types of changes can protect the PBGC, and they will not

interfere, to any extent, with the management of the pension fund.


     First, the PBGC could require better matching of pension fund assets and

liabilities for firms where F +     .3   E is not significantly greater than G. For

a firm as well funded, and with as much equity as IBM, the PBGC does not care

about funding policy; there is no chance of F +          .3 E (about $15 billion for
IBM) falling below G (approximately $2 billion for IBM). For other firms,

however, a decrease in interest rates and        in   the stock market could create a

large liability for the PBGC. For these firms, the PBGC could require that

plan assets be used to "hedge" the guaranteed benefits. Because the

guaranteed benefits are almost entirely annuities and deferred annuities, the

appropriate hedge appears to be long term bonds with a duration similar to

that of the pension liabilities.


     Second, the rules could be changed for funding benefits that arise from

amending the pension plan. Hourly plans are able to remain perpetually

underfunded because each time the fixed nominal pension benefits are

increased, the increase is funded over a period of ten to thirty years, while

the benefits are   guaranteed   over a period of only five years. With this rule,

a firm may be able to perpetually increase its unfunded guaranteed benefits.

If not immediately, then, firms could be required to fund benefits over five

years, and at the same   rate   as the benefits become guaranteed.


     Third, consolidating plans within a firm reduces the risk of plan
                                      28


terminations. That is, if a plan were terminated with insufficient assets

within the plan, (e. g. a plan for hourly workers ),   the PBGC could have the
right to consolidate other plans within the firm, (for example, an overfunded

salaried plan).


     With so many plans in good financial health, these changes would have a

minimal short term effect on most firms. By adopting these safeguards now,

however, the PBGC can dramatically reduce its potential for disaster in the

future.
                                         29


                                   Footnotes



1
    For union plans, we include only single employer plans. Thus, plans

    run by the union, multi—employer plans, are excluded in the analysis.

    We assume that all benefits are vested, and we ignore that workers

    accrue benefits and become vested only after a number of years of

    employment with the firm. Although vested benefits are assumed to

    be paid in a lump sum at retirement, most pension plans have insurance

    features in that workers receive monthly payments for life. We assume

    that an insurance company sells a guaranteed life annunity to the firm.



2 It is uncertain as to why union representatives preferred to

    negotiate the sharing of the difference between M + F and P +   F, in
    part, as V > F. It may be that as long as the union controlled the

    process of bargaining, this was an efficient mechanism to transfer

    ownership rights of the human capital of the group, a transfer to the

    younger workers who assume the rights for the future. Older workers, and

    union representatives might skew benefits to themselves, yet this

    might have been efficient if younger workers and older workers had worked

    this out as a way to transfer these ownership rights. Changes in the

    rate of interest may affect the value of the "loans" through changes in V

    as the transfers took place; however, the firm may not have

    been involved directly. (See Bulow and Scholes, Who Owns the Assets of a

    Defined Benefit Pension Plan, this volume.)
                                            30




3
     Expanding on footnote 2, if sharing includes an underfunded pension

     plan, employers were not at a competitive disadvantage because they

     lost tax benefits. The employees, in part, owned "stock" in the firm

    through their share of the difference between M and P. If the assets of

    a pension fund include the stock of the firm employing the workers, as in

    this case, there is no tax disadvantage to an underfunded pension plan.

    This follows, since dealings in the firm's stock for corporate purpuses,

    sales and repurchases, do not result in any tax at the corporate

    level——the stockholders earn the before tax rate of return on dealings in

    their own stock.




    The PBGC considers accrued benefits to be the same as vested benefits;

    it assumes that everyone in the fund is fully vested on joining the plan.

    This treatment differs from the Financial Accounting Standard Board rules,

    that require a probability weighting on the vesting of benefits, an

    expected value calculation. For most plans, the difference is small

    in this accounting treatment. Maximum benefits are nominal benefits,

    limits   that   are set each year with changes in Social Security benefits.

    If workers in a plan that terminates in 1982 receive the maximum guaranteed

    benefit, approximately $1100 per month, they will receive $1100 per month

    on retirement, whether it is next year or twenty years hence. The maximum

    benefit is raised each year and applies only to plans that terminate in

    that year.
                                         31


                                    References


 Arnott, R., and Gersovitz, M. 1980. Corporate financial structure and the

          funding of private pension plans. Journal of Public Economics 7,

          April.

Barnow, B., and Ehrenberg, R. 1969. The costs of defined benefit pension

          plans and firm adjustments. Quarterly Journal of Economics XCIII,

          November.

Black, F. 1980. The tax consequences of long—run pension policy. Financial

          knalvsts Journal July—August, 3—10.


______• 1976. The investment policy spectrum, Financial Analysts Journal

          January/February.

Bulow, J. 1979. Analysis of pension funding under ERISA. NBER Working Paper

          No. k02, Novemeber.

______• 1981. What are corporate pension liabilities? Stanford University

          Working Paper, July.

______•    l981a. Pension funding and investment policy. Stanford University
          Working Paper, October.

Feldstein, M. and Summers, L. 1979. Inflation and the taxation of capital

          income in the corporate sector. National Tax Journal, XXXII,

          December.

Feldstein, M. and Seligman, S. 1981. Pension funding, share prices, and

          national savings. Journal of Finance, XXXVI, September.
                                       32


Goodman, H., Munn, F., Phillips, A., and Vasarhelyi, M.     1981. Illustrations

       and analysis of disclosures of pension information, Financial Report

       Survey 22. American Institute of Certified Public Accountants,

       New York, New York.

Ininan, Robert. 1980. Public pensions, public unions, and the local labor

       budget. NBER Summer   Institute Paper   No. 80—9, December.

McGill, D., 1977. Fundamentals of private pension. Homewood Ill, Irwin.

Miller, M., 1977. Debt and taxes. Journal of Finance, 32, May.

Miller, M., and Scholes, M. 1981. Pension funding and corporate valuation.

       University of Chicago Working Paper.

PBGC. 1976. Premium requriements for the single employer basic benefits

       insurance program. Part II.

Sharpe, W., 1976. Corporate pension funding policy, Journal of Financial

       Economics 3, June.

Tepper, I., 1981. Taxation and corporate pension policy, Journal of

       Finance, XXXVI, March.

Tepper, I., and Affleck, A. 19711. Pension plan liabilities and corporate

       financial strategies, Journal of Finance, December.

Treynor, J., Regan, P., and Priest, W. 1976. The    financial   reality of

       pension funding under ERISA, Hoxnewood, Ill., Dow Jones—Irwin.

Treynor, J., 1977. The principles of corporate pension finance, Journal

       of Finance, XXXII, May.
