                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INVESTMENT IN R&D, COSTS OF ADJUSTMENT
                        AND EXPECTATIONS


                        Mark Schankerman

                        M. Ishaq Nadiri


                     Working Paper No. 931




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                           July 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #931
                                                   July 1982




                INVESTMENT IN R&D, COSTS OF ADJUSTMENT

                           AND EXPECTATIONS




                              Abstract

      This paper proposes a framework which integrates convex costs

of adjustment and expectations formation in the determination of investment

decisions in R&D at the firm level. The model is based on cost minimization

subject to the firm's expectations of the stream of output and the price of

R&D, and results in equations for actual and multiple—span planned Investment

in R&D and for the realization error as functions of these expectations.

The model accommodates alternative mechanisms of expectations formation and

provides a methodology for testing these hypotheses empirically. We derive

estimable equations and testable parameter restrictions for the rational,

adaptive and static expectations hypotheses. The empirical results using

pooled firm data strongly reject the rational and static expectations

hypotheses and generally support adaptive expectations.




                                  Mark Schankerman and M. Ishaq Nadiri
                                  Department of Economics
                                  New York University and NBER
                                  269 Mercer Street
                                  New York, New York 10003
                                   212—598—7037
                                    I
                                                               Schanerman adiri

     This paper develops a simplified cost of adjustment model of R&D

investment by private firms in which expectations play a central role.

Our main objective is to provide a dynamic equilibrium framewor1 in which

alternative hypotheses of expectations formation can be tested empirically.

     Most of the existing empirical work on R&D investment at the vicro

level is based on static equilibrium models, sometimes modified by

arbitrary distributed lags, and on the assumption that firms hold static

or myopic expectations on the exogenous variables in the model (e.g.,

Goldberg 1972; adiri and Bitros 1980; for a cost of adjustment model,

Rasmussen 1969). it seems clear that static expectations ar,e inadequate

as an untested maintained hypothesis, and they have the additional serious

drawback of making it difficult to interpret the empirically determined

lag distribution in a meaningful way. it is virtually impossible to

disentangle the part ofthe observed lag structure which is due to costs

of adjustment from the lags reflecting expectational formation. Partly

as an attempt to rectify this problem and to give estiniate,d lag distributions

an economically meaningful interpretation, recent work on aggregate

investment in physical capital integrates rational expectations (in the

sense of Nuth 1961) into investment models and in some cases tests that

expectations hypothesis (Abel 1979; Kerinan 1979; Meese 1979). Eovever,

this approach has not been applied to R&D investment, and even more

important, no attempt has been made to formulate and empirically test

other less restrictive mechanisms of expectations formation. This paper

Tepresents a first attempt at these important tasks.

 -
      Our model is based on the assumption that the firm   selects   an R&D

investment profile (i.e., a current investment decision plus a stream of

future planned investment) which minimizes the present value of Its costs,
                                        2




given its expectations of the future price of R&D and the 3evel of output.
                                                         marginal cost of R&D
If there are convex adjustment costs (i.e., a rising

investment, either because of capital market imperfections or internal

adjustment costs), this yields a determinate rate of current R&D and of

multiple—span planned R&D. The optimal R&D profile is determined by the

firm equating the marginal    cost   of adjustment to the shadow price of R&D

expected to prevail at the time the investment is actually made. We show

that the marginal cost of adjustment depends on the anticipated price of

R&D, while the shadow price (which reflects the present value of savings

in variable costs due to investment in R&D) depends on the anticipated

demand for output. This links the optimal investment profile directly to

the firm's ecpectatioriS of these economic variables.      The model of R&D

investment also generates a realization function which relates the

difference between actual and planned R&D to revisions over time in the
                                                                        of the
firm's expectations of the exogenous variables. This integration

investment profile, the firm's expectations and the realization function

represents a formalization and extension of earlier work by Ilodigliani

(1961) and Eisner (1978).

      The   general   investment framework is designed to accommodate

                                            in order to provide the model with
arbitrary expectations hypotheses, but

empirical content a specific forecasting mechanism for the price of R&D

and the level of output must be postulated. We consider three alternative

specifications and develop a set of empirical tests for each. The first,

rational expectations, is based on the idea that the firm formulates its

 fcrecasts according to the stochastic processes (presumed to be) generating

 the exogenous variables. Using a third order autoregressive specification

 for these variables, we derive a set of testable nonlinear parameter
                                     3



restrctlons in the actual and planned investment equations and some

additional tests on the realization function. This represents an

application to R&D of the methodology developed by Sargent (1978, 1979a),

with some extensions to planned investment and the associated realization

function. Next, the model is formulated under adaptive expectations according   to
which the firm adjusts its forecasts by some fraction of the previous

period's forecast error. We show that this hypothesis also delivers a

set of testable nonlinear restrictions on the R&D investment equations..

Finally, we consider the conventional hypothesis of static expectations

and show that, since it is a limiting case of adaptive forecasting, it can

be tested directly by exclusion restrictions on the model under adaptive

expectations.

       The model under each expectations mechanism is estimated using a set
of pooled firm data which contains both actual and (one year ahead) planned

R&D. The empirical results indicate strong rejection of the parameter

restrictions implied by rational expectations, and general support for; the

adaptive expectations hypothesis. The hypothesis most favored by the

evidence appears to be a mixed one, with adaptive forecasting on the level

of output and static expectations on the price of R&D. We provide some

discussion of the possible reconciliation of rational expectations with

this mixed forecasting hypothesis.

      Section 1 develops the general model of R&D investment. The

specifications of the model under rational, adaptive and static expectations

are provided in Section 2. Section 3 provides a brief description of the

data, and presents the empirical results and their interpretation. Brief

concluding remarks follow.
                                              4



1. Investment Model for R&D

        Consider a firm with a production function which exhibits constant

returns to scale in traditional inputs (labor and capital) and which faces

fixed factor prices for those inputs. The firm's decision problem is to

select an R&D investment profile which minimizes the discounted value of

costs, given its expected factor prices and levels of output. This

"certainty equivalence" separation of the optimization problem and the

formation of expectations is justified by the separable adjustment costs

specified below. Formally, the decision problem is:



                                                               +
(1)
            <R      >   s=O
                               CC(K   '
                                          ,   Q
                                                  ' , w'   )       h(R )
              t,s

                        Kts+O — Kt,s+O_l =
                                                       —
             s.t.




where        is R&D investment in real terms planned in period t for t+s (we

refer to t as the base period, t+s as the target period, and s as the anti-

cipations span), c(') is the restricted cost function defined over the

stock of knowledge K and the vector of prices for variable inputs w, c =

1/(l+r)    and 6 are the (constant) discount factor and the rate of deprecia-

 tion of the stock of knowledge, 0 is the mean gestation lag between the

 outlay of R&D and the production of new knowledge, and h(s) describes the

 unit cost of R&D investment.

         Specific functional forms are assumed for h() and C(). First, we

 assume that the unit cost of R&D rises linearly with the level of R&D:
                                             5




(2)         h(R       )   =P     (H-AR   )       A>O
                t,s        t,s        t,s



where P5 is the anticipated price of R&D. This formulation implies that

total costs of R&D, Rh(R), are a quadratic function of the level of R&D.

Second, the assumption of constant returns to scale implies that C(K,Q,w) =

QF(K,w).   We also assume that F() is separable and can be written F(K,w) =

f(w)   — vK where v >     0, whence C(K,Q,w) = Q(f(w) —   vK))
        Two limitations of the basic model should be noted. First, the model

treats the stock of knowledge as the only (quasi—fixed) capital asset and

implicitly views traditional capital as variable in the short run. A more

general model would treat both capital and R&D as quasi—fixed assets with

associated costs of adjustment, but such a model would be considerably more

complicated. The advantage of the present formulation is that it obviates

the need to introduce the capital constraint in the determination of the

level of the firm's output. The second limitation is the assumption that

the parameter "v't is known and is the same for all firms. This parameter

is one determinant of the savings in variable costs due to a marginal in-

vestment in the stock of knowledge (aC/BK =       vQ).    One might expect differ-

ences across firms or uncertainty about the "productivity" of R&D (for

example, technological opportunity) to be reflected in the parameter "v".

This important aspect of the problem is not treated in the present model.

        With these qualifications in mind, we proceed with the derivation of

the optimal R&D profile. Using the specific forms          for   h() and C() and

the constraint in (1), the decision problem can be expressed
                                             6




         <K
          t,s >          s=O      tStS              —
                                                        vK5)   + P (Kt s+O —



                             + t,st,s+O —


where we note that the decision variable here is the stock of knowledge.

The first order (Euler) conditions are:



(4)
                     =             +   J6po + 2Ac°P,_0(Kt, - (l_6)K,_1)

                                                                               —
                         —   (l_6)                  -
                                                        2AaePt,j_e(Kt,j+l          (l_)K,)

                         =0

                                                    =            and defining RtPtjRtj
for j>O. Noting that Ktj —             (l_6)K,_1        Rt,j_O
for j>O, the Euler conditions can be written


                                                                       e
                                                          a        - avc
 (5)         (1 -
                     1
                         L) Rt,j+l_O = _aPt,j+l_e       + ptj.e

 where a =   l/2A,       =   (l—5)/(l+r)   and L denotes the lag operator.

       Since <l we can obtain the forward solution to the difference equa-
                                                                     = j+l—O for simplicity,
 tion in (5) (see Sargent 1979b, Chapter 9). Letting s

 this yields after some manipulation



 (6)          R5 = _aP,5          + [ c0           j—s—O VQtj
                                           j=s+O
                                               7




           Planned R&D depends on the expected price of R&D investment goods and the

           stream of future expected levels of output. To gain more insight into the

           solution, note that the term vQ. (j>s+O) represents the expected savings

           in variable costs in period t+j due to a unit increase in the stock of

           knowledge in t+j. This in turn reflects the marginal dollar of R&D

           planned for t+j—O. Hence the bracketted expression in (6) is the discounted

           value (in terms of period t+j—O) of cost savings due to planned R&D and may

           be interpreted as the expected shadow price of R&D,        Then (6) expresses

           the optimal planned expenditures on R&D as a linear function of the anticipated

           price of R&D investment goods and the implicit shadow price of R&D.

Figure 1         The model is illustrated in Figure 1. The marginal cost of R&D

           schedule rises linearly with the level of R&D, and is shifted by antici-

           pated changes in the price of R&D investment goods. The shadow price

           relevant to investment planned for year t + s in year t,       depends on

           the expected future stream of output (which determines the cost savings due

           to R&D investment), but it is independent of the level of R&D. The optimal

           amount of planned R&D, t,s' is fixed by the intersection of the shadow

           price and marginal cost schedules. Both the supply and demand schedules

           of R&D are driven by the firm's expectations. Any shift in expected output

           or the anticipated price of R&D will alter the optimal level of planned R&D.

                 An alternative form of the investment equation can be obtained in

           which the infinite series of expected output does not appear. Leading the

           target period in (6), multiplying by    and subtracting the result from (6)

           we obtain
                                      8




                                              +
(7)       R5 _aP,5 + aI' s+l + bQ s+O


where b = ava0.   We refer to equations (6) and (7) as the structural and re-

duced form investment equations, respectively. One advantage of the reduced

form in (7) is that it contains a testable implication of the cost of adjust-

ment formulation independent of the particular specification of expectations.

Specifically, the coefficient on the leading R&D anticipation, Rs+i should

be approximately equal to the gross discount factor    =   (l—cS)/(l+r).
      The realization function relates the difference between actual and

planned investment in R&D for a given target period (the realization error)

to its determinants. Using (6) the general form for the realization

function is



(8)   Dt5 R0 —
                            =
                                _a(Pt,0
                                          —    +   b              —




Note that the realization error depends on the error in predicting the
price of R&D and the discounted value of the revisions in expected output

 (i.e., the revision in the shadow price of R&D). Bence, the realization

 function reflects the use of new information regarding the exogenous

variables in the investment model which becomes available between the

formation and implementation of the investment plans. Iowever, the precise

 form of the realization function (and of the underlying investment function)

depends critically on how the new information is used, that is, on the

tanner in which expectations are formed.

       One general point of interest is that the realization errors viii

have zero mean under a variety of expect ational mechanisms. It follows
                                        9




                         = 0 if two conditions hold, i) E P    = E P —     and
from (8) that E D                                        tt,           s,s
                  tt,s
              =                where Et is the expectation operator over t.
ii) EtQt j+o   EtQt...5 j+O+s'
                                                          the firm forms
A sufficient condition for (i) and (ii) to hold is that

unbiased predictors of the price of R&D and the level of output.




2. Model Under Specific Expectations Hypotheses

         in this section we derive estimable forms of the investment and

 realization functions under three alternative expectations hypotheses.

 it should be noted that the avai3abie data set (described in section 3)

 contains actual and one—span planned R&D expenditures; no multiple—span

 anticipations are provided. Though the model applies to multi—span

 investment decisions, we are limited in the empirical work to the actual

 and one—span structural investment equation, the reduced form equation

 for actual R&D, and the one—span realization function (refer to (6) — (8)

 above).


 2.1. Rational Expectations

         The test of the rational expectations hypothesis is based on the

 ass.uDption that the firm forms expectations of the price of R&D and the

 level of output according to the stochastic processes (presumed to be)

 generating these exogenous variables. %e assume that each variable evolves

 according to an autoregressive process:


                    =           + . .   +          + t
                        biP_i               bPtm
  (10)                  c1Q_i + .   . . + c1Q +

 where       and u are mutually uncorrelated white noise disturbances.2

 Define
                                                     10


                   P
                       t
                                                Qt
                                                       -

                                                                                  1
                                                                                          ...                       b

        xt.                          ,z                       •       B •     1           0                          o

                                                                                          1




                                                                              0                              1       0
                                                -
                                                                                                     u
        c                                                                             ,

                                      •


               :

              0                ...    1     0


and the ixin and lxri vectors d                      (1 0 .       .    . 0)   and e           (1 0 . .           . 0).
If the eigenvectors of B and C are distinct, we can write B                                              NAN' and

C NN —1,      where A and 1 are diagonal vatr1ces of eigenvalues and N and N
are matrices of associated elgenvectors. Then one can show that under the

rational expectations hypothesis the following set of equations results:3


(ha)                       =
                               [—daB      x + EebN     +OJN1:           z                     s =   0,   1



(llb)                      =   da(B   -
                                          I) x +     [ebC0        z + Rti

Chic)         Di = _dac
                                 *
                                     + 1ebN2 JN
                                                —*
                                                                                      —1
where H is a diagonal matrix with elements (1 — BAi)                                          and        are the

                                                                                                                   and
-eigenvalues in A, J is a diagonal matrix with elements (1 —                                         Bw)1
are the eigenvalues of fl, and the bracketed terms represent the vector of

coefficients under rational expectations.

        The structural equation for planned R&D s—periods ahead in (ha) is

simply a distributed lag against m past prices of R&D and n past levels of
                                     11



output, where m and n are the orders of the autoregressions in (9) and

(10). The reduced form equation in Cub) includes these determinants

plus the leading R&D anticipation (i.e.,   planned   R&D for one period ahead).

Equation (lic) relates the one—span realization error to theunanticipated

components (or "surprises") in the price of R&D and the level of output

which are realized between the formulation and the implementation of the

planned R&D investment. Since under the rational expectations hypothesis

the firm exploits the available information onthe exogenous variables

fully (i.e., according to their true stochastic structures), the

realization error should be determined solely by these surprises.4

      The unconstrained version of (ha) —    (lic)   is overidentified. The

rational expectations hypothesis delivers a set of nonlinear parameter

restrictions both within   and across equations (given by the bracketed terms

in (ha) —   (lhc))   which serve to identify the parameters a, b and 8. These

restrictionsare related to the parameters in the underlying stochastic

representations of the exogenous variables in the model. It should be

noted, however, that since the realization function in (lic) is definitionally

related to the investment equation (ha), the parameter restrictions in

(hic) contain no independent information. Therefore, the basic system of

equations which we estimate consists of the autoregressions in (9) and

(10), and (ha) and (hub). First the unconstrained system is estimated

and then the parameter restrictions are imposed and tested. In addition

to these parameter restrictions, the rational expectations hypothesis

implies two testable propositions on the realization function. First, only

the contemporaneous surprises in the price of R&D and the level of output

should matter, since earlier surprises are known when the R&D plans are

formed and should already be reflected in those plans. Bence, lagged
                                       12




surprises should be statistically insignificant when added to (11c).

Second, since the unanticipated components L1 and u have zero means by

construction, the mean of the realization errors must be zero under

rational expectations. This simply reflects the unbiasedness property of

Jational forecasts and the linearity of the model in the stochastic

exogenous variables.


2.2. Adaptive Expectations

        Suppose that the firm forms its forecasts of exogenous variables

according to an adaptive expectations mechanism, revising its single—span

forecast by some fraction of the previous period's forecast error:


(12a)
                  —                —            0c     < 1
                      Pt—1,1

(12b)
                  —            X(Q —             0c   A <   I

It   is well known that this procedure implies forecasts which are

geometrically weighted averages of all past realizations:



(13a)        ,1 y(1 -

(13b)        QiuAI(1_x)1Qt_i
                  i=0


We also note that if (and only if) P and       are (mean) stationary

processes, the adaptive forecasts in (13a) and (13b) are unbiased predictors.5

        For present purposes we also need multiple—span forecasts since they

appear in the expression for the shadow price o R&D. 1owever., the adaptive

expectations hypothesis is silent on how agents form multiple—span forecasts.

Iluth (1960) has shown that if the underlying stochastic process is of a
                                        13



particular form for which adaptive forecasts are also rational, then the

(minimum mean squared error) multiple and single span forecasts are identical.

This line of argument, however, erases the distinction between adaptive and

rational forecasts. An alternative way of linking single and multiple—span

forecasts would be to construct an explicit model of learning in which agents

do not know the true stochastic structure but form adaptive expectations

which are "optimal" predictors on the basis of some subjectively assumed

structure, and then somehow update their knowledge of that structure and the

associated coefficient of adaptation. Models of this type, however, are not

yet available in the literature and to construct one here would take us far

afield. In the absence of a learning model we adopt the arbitrary assumption

that a firm which forms its single—span expectation adaptively also holds that

forecast for multiple—spans, that is,         =        and           =   for sl.6

Although this assumption is formally identical to Muth's result, it is riot

assumed here that the multiple—span forecasts are minimum mean squared error

predictions.

         Using this assumption and (13a) and (13b), we obtain the following

system of structural (l4a) —   (14b),   reduced form (14c) and realization functions

(14d) under adaptive expectations:7




 (14a)                 _aP + a(1 -            +              + (1 -




 (14b)         Ri _ayP + ay(1 -                   +              -



                      + (2 —
                               Y_A)R_i,i
                                             — (1 —   )(1    —
                                                      14




(14c)
                  -   -a(l             -          + a(2          -    y   - A —   By(l   —



                      - a(1            -   X)(l   —
                                                      ''t-2 + bXQ - bX(1 -
                      + 8Ri +(2 —                          - A)R_i,o          — (1 -     A)(1 -


                      - 8(2            -
                                           y_A)R_i
                                                                 + 8(1 - A)(1 -




(14d)        Di -         apt
                                   4 a(1 +        y -      A)Pi
                                                                          - ay(1 -
                                                                                       t-2
                              bA
                                              +       bX(1—X1              t—2 + (1 —
                      —
                          1    —   B                       1 —    B                           A)R_j ,

                      — (2 - y -             A)Rt21
                                                              + (1 -        y)(l   -
                                                                                         A)R_3i
                                                                                       the coefficients of
        The model provides qualitative predictionS on
                                                                               unconstrained model is
all variables in the unconstrained system. The
                                                                                              implies a set of
overidentified, and the adaptive expectations hypothesis
                                                                                   — (14c) which serve to
fifteen nonlinear parameter restrictions in (14a)

identify the five underlying parameters a, b, B. y and A. Estimation of

the realization function (14d) Is redundant since it is a lineaT

combination of (14a) and (14b). Therefore, the basic set of estimating

equations consists of (14a) —                 (1lc).         1.e first estimate these equations

unconstrained, and then impose and test the identifying restrictions.
                                                                           forecasts are unbiased If the
Finally, it was noted earlier that adaptive

stochastic exogenous variables are (mean) stationary.                                        This property

                                                              the realization errors have a zero
implies the testable proposition that

mean.
                                     15



2.3. Static Expectations

      Under the static expectations hypothesis the firm    assumes   that the

future values of exogenous variables will remain at their current levels,

that is P5 P and                   for a ! 1.   It is clear from (12a) and

(12b) that this hypothesis is a limiting case of adaptive expectations

where y A — 1.     By substituting this condition into (14a) and (14b) we

observe that, under static expectations, the structural investment equation

depends only on the contemporaneous price of R&D and level of output, while

the realization error depends solely on the most recent actual (not

unanticipated) changes in these exogenous variables.

      The most straightforward way of testing static expectati9ns is to

.iwpose the constraints y     A   1 in the system of equations under adaptive

expectations. This procedure generates thirteen exclusion restrictions

in (14a) —   (14c) which can be tested directly. In addition, we estimate
the realization function under static expectations (by regressing the

realization error against the most recent actual change in the price of

R&D and the level of output) and test the joint significance of lagged

changes in these variables.



3. Data and Empirical Results

3.1. Description of Data

      The data set used in this study is drawn from annual surveys of

actual and planned investment expenditures on plant and equipment and R&D

by firms, conducted by the )lcCraw—Hill.Publishing Company (for a fuller

description see Eisner 1978 and Rasmussen 1969). There was a problem of

sporadic missing observations in the data for different firms. Using some
                                    16

supplementary information, we were able to construct a set of data on

actual and one—span planned R&D for the period 1959—1969 and   on sales for

1954—1969 for forty—nine manufacturing firms, subject to the requirement

that no firm   have more than two missing observations. Because the missing
data vary by firm and by variable, the usable sample depends on the model

being estimated. It is not entirely ciear whether the reported data on

planned R&D should be interpreted as expressed in current or anticipated

prices. Since the )icGraw-Hill surveys request information on plannfd R&D

expenditures and do not indicate that these should be in present prices,
we interpret them as in anticipated (one—year ahead) prices (which is

consistent with the definition of        in the model; see section 1). The

sales data are deflated by the Wholesale Price Index for total manufacturing.

We also require (as an independent variable) a price index for R&D

lnvestment goods. To construct a firm—specific index would require

information on the firm's composition of R&D expenditures, which is not

available. e therefore chose to use an aggregate index for manufacturing

constructed on the basis of the mix of R&D inputs at the (roughly two—digit)

industry level (Schankerman 1979). This is essentially equivalent to using

time dummies in the regressions.
      Estimation of the model under rational expectations is conducted on

detrended variables. Each variable is regressed on a constant, a linear

trend and trend squared (for each firm separately), and the residuals from

these regressions are used as data in estimating the R&D investment model.

This is frequently done (Sargent 1978, 1979a; Ileese 1979) to ensure

stationarity of the stochastic variables in the model and on the argument

that the theory under rational expectations predicts that the deterministic

components (presumed to be known) of the process linking endogenous and
                                              17



          exogenous variables will not be characterized by the same distributed lag model

          as their indetertuinistic components. Detrending prior to estimation is an

          attempt to isolate the indeterininistic components.   We also estimated the model

          without detrending and the major conclusions reported later did not change.

          These arguments in favor of detrending do not apply to the model under
                                                             forecasting devices are not
          adaptive and static expectations because these

          based on the underlying stochastic processes generating the exogenous

          variables, and hence they do not distinguish between the deterministic and

          indeterministiC components. We therefore estimate the model under adaptive
                                                   detrending. This means of course
          and static expectations without prior
                                                   rational expectations cannot be
          that the fits of the equations under

          compared directly, since the dependent variables are measured differently.


          3.2. Empirical Results Under Rational ExpectatiO!!
                                                           seemingly unrelated equations
                All models were estimated by Zeliner's
                                                                                for
          technique (Zeilner 1962), which is generalized least squares allowing
                                                                             the
Table I    free correlation in the errors across equations. Table 1 presents

           unconstrained estimates of the model under rational expectations using a
                                                       for the price of R&D and the level
           third order autoregressive specification

           of output.8 Because the means were removed in the .detrending procedure,
                                                                                 We
           the results in Table 1 represent within—firm, over—time regressions.
                                                             imply both real an4 complex
           first note that the estimated autoregressions
                                                    condition that the largest modulus
           roots which satisfy the stationaritY

           be less than unity. The low R2 in the autoregression for output indicates
                                                                         The much
           a large unanticipated component in the prediction of output.
                                                                         statistical
                  R2 in the autoregression for the price of R&D is not a
           higher
                                                             price index for all firms
           artifact reflecting the use of the same aggregate
Table   1.    Empirical. Results Under Rational Expectations



                                                                     Independent Variable

Equatfonf
                      P                   P                           Q                 Q_       R          S'              R2     DW
Dependent                 t       P_
                                   ti         t—2    P_
                                                      t3      Qt          ti    Q_
                                                                                 t2      t3          t,1     t       t
Variable
Structural                11a                                 .071    .16      —.17                                         .13   Z.65
                     (.13)                                   (.027) (.03)      (.03)
   Rt , o
Reduced      Form    —.27          .65                        .020   .039                         .85                       .88   1.44
                     (.15)        (.26)   (.16)              (.010) (.011) (.011)                (.002)

Structural            .70         —.92        .31             .060   .140 —.19                                              .11   2.51
                     (.22)        (.28)   (.17)              (.029) (.032) (.034)
   Rti
                                                                                                           162a      .23    .05   2.10
Realization
                                                                                                           (1.13)   (.05)
   0t,l
                                  1.08        .12    —.55                                                                   .95   2.38
Autoregression
                                  (.03)    (.05)i    (.03)
   Pt
                                                                      .33      —.27      053a                               .11   1.82
Autoregression
                                                                     (.05)      (.05)   (.055)

Notes:       Estimated standard errors              re
                                           in parentheses.                     A superscript "a" denotes statistical
             insignificance at the 0.05 level.

   P    —      —              —           —           where the b's are the estimated coefficients in the autoregression for
                    b1P1          b2P2        b3P3
               —              —           —           where the c's are the estimated coefficients in the autoregression for             Q.
   t                              2—2         C3QI3
                                     19



in the sample. Estimation of this autoregression on a single time series

yields an R2      .98. There is in fact only a very small unanticipated

component in the measured price of R&D.

         Most of estimated coefficients in the investment equations are

statistically significant. The sum of the output coefficients is positive

in two of the three investment equations, which is expected since a

sustained increase in the level of output should raise the shadow price

and hence the optimal level of R&D. By analogous reasoning weexpect the

sum of the price coefficients to be negative, but it is essentiallY zero

in the empirical results. ot much can be deduced from the particular

pattern of coefficients since under rational expectations this pattern is

related in a highly nonlinear way to the eigenvalues from the autoregressions

for price and output. We formally test these restrictions later. Also

•note that the structural investment equations account for only about ten

percent of the within—firm variance in actual and planned R&D. The much

better fit of the reduced form equation for actual R&D is due to the

presence of the leading anticipation, Rt1P as a regressor.

         One notable result in Table 1 is the coefficient on R 1 in the

reduced form equation for R0. We showed in section 1 that this coefficient
                                     = (1 — 5)/(1 + r). Assuming r = .10
 should equal the gross discount factor

           .10 we expect to obtain        0.8, which is close to the actual
 and 6

 estimated value       .85. As we will see later, however, the estimate of 8

                                                            formation and hence
 is robust to different specifications of expectations

 the result in Table 1 should not be interpreted as evidence in favor of

 rational expectations.
                                        20


         The realization function in Table 1 relates the (one—span) realization

error to the contemporaneous unanticipated components in the price of R&D
                             P      Q
and the level of output (St and Se). These components are defined within

the estimation procedure to ensure that they are consistent with the

estimated autoregressions for price and output (see motes to Table 1).

The "surprise" in output has a significantly positive effect on the

difference between actual and planned R&D, which is the expected result

    since a positive surprise in output raises the shadow price of R&D and

hence the optimal R&D investment. The expected effect of a surprise in the

price of R&D is negative since an unexpected rise in its price shifts the

marginal cost of R&D schedule upward and hence lowers the optimal investment

in R&D. The estimate in Table 1 has the wrong sign but is statistically

insignificant.

•        Je turn next to various tests of the rational expectations hypothesis.

•The first, and least stringent, test concerns the realization errors. It

was pointed out in section 1 that the mean of the realization errors will

be zero if the firm forms unbiased predictors of the price of R&D and the

level of output. Since rational forecasts are unbiased1 this is an

implication of the rational e:pectations hypothesis. The mean of the

realization errors (based on data prior to detrending) for the entire

sample is not significantly different from zero (—0.83 with a standard

error of 2.18). When computed separately for each firm, only three of the

forty—nine firms exhibit non—zero means and each of these cases is only

marginally significant. We conclude that the rational expectations

hypothesis passes this weak necessary condition, but it is important to

reiterate that any unbiased forecasting device would also satisfy this

requirement.
                                                21


                                                                           rational
                   The formal parametric tests are considered next. First,
          expectations implies-a set ofnonlinear restrictions on the paraneters of

          the system of investment equations. These restrictions are expressed in

          terms of the eigerivalues of the autoregressive structures generating the

          price of R&D and the level of output. 've use the following two—stage

          testing procedure: First the unconstrained systeu1(9) — (10) and
                                                                               The
           (ha) —    (lib))   is estimated and the eigenvalues are computed.

          nonlinear restrictions embodied in (ha) —       (hib)   are then computed

          numerically, and the constrained system is estimated. e do not iterate

           on this   procedure (using   the new estinates for the autoregressions), but

                                                                                      The
           the   second—stage constrained estimates are consistent in any case.
              test requires an assumed value for the gestation lag, e.    The reported

           results are based on a       2 (from Fakes and Schankerxnan, this volume) but

              they are not sensitive to different values (we experimented with 1 < 8 c 4).

Table 2   -
                   The results are summarized in the first row of Table 2. The parameter

              restrictions are strongly rejected. The computed F of 21.4 greatly exceeds

              the critical value of 1.62. Imposition of the restrictions reduces the

              total mean squared error by 11.2 percent. However, one may object to a

              simple F—test at a fixed level of significance in a sample as large as ours

              (1444 observations in the system as a whole). The reason is that any null

           hypothesis (viewed as an approximation) will be rejected with certainty as

              the sample size goes to infinity if the Type I error is held constant.

              Leamer (1978, Chapter 4) argues forcefully that the critical value of the

              F—statistic should rise with sample size to avoid this interpretive

              problem. He proposes an alternative measure of the critical value (which

              we call the Bayesian F) which has the property that, given a diffuse prior
                                             22




Table 2. Tests of Expectations ypotheses


                                  Computed F Critical F 05           %MSE Bayesian Fa

     Rational

                                     21.4     F(181426)       1.62    11.2        7.54
(1) Investment
    Equations

(2) Realization                      10.5         F(4,376) = 2.39     11.0        6.05
    Function

     Adaptive

                                      4.32    F(15,1201)      1.67     4.4        7.31
(3) Investment
    Equations

     Static

                                      3.84        F(5,1201)   2.22     1.5        7.22
(4) Investment
    Equations y       1

                                    189.0     F(13,1201)      1.73   201.0        7.29
(5) Investment
    Equations y       )       1

                                     12.8         F(4,439)    2.39    10.4        6.23
(6) Realization
    Function



a                  T ;    k   (TP/T — 1) vhere T is the sample size, T —     k   denotes
    Bayesian F =

    degrees of freedom and p is the nber of restrictions.
                                             23


          distribution, the critical value is exceeded only if the posterior odds

                                                            F is repoted in the last
          favor the alternative hypothesis. The Bayesian

          column of Table 2. In the case of rational expectationS, the Bayesian F

          is 7.54 'which is far below the computed F of 21.4. We conclude that the
                                                                                after
          paraiDeter restrictions under rational expectations are rejected even

          this adjustment for sample size.

                The second row in Table 2 summarizeS the test of the joint significance

                                                  of R&D and the level of output in the
          of two lagged surprises in the price

          realizati on function. Under rational expectations only the contemporaneOUS

          surprises should affect the realization error since earlier surprises were
                                                             the computed F statistic
          kno'n 'when the R&D plan was formulated. Again,

          of 10.5 exceeds both the conventional and the Eayesan critical values

          (2.39 and 6.05, respectively), and the null hypothesis is rejected.

                We conclude from these results that the evidence does not support

          the rational expectations formulation of the model, at least one based on

                                                        of the price of R&D and the
          a third—order autoregressive representation
                                                                       for this
          level of output. Various qualifications and explanations

          negative finding will be discussed later, but first we examine the

          empirical results under alternative expectations hypotheses.


           3.3. Empirical Results Under Adaptive and Static Expectations

                The unconstrained estimates of the model under adaptive expectations

Table 3    are reported in Table 3. The fits of the regression are very good,

           especially since the data contain both cross sectional and time series.

           variation (the cross sectional variance comprises about 75 percent of the

           total variance in the sample). On the whole, the pattern of estimated

           coefficients is consistent with the adaptive expectations hypothesis.
Table 3.     Empirical Results Under Adaptive Expectations



                                                          Independent Variable

                                                                                                                    2
Equation/                                                                                                          P.    DW
Dependent                 'ti     Pt—2                        R_i,0    R_2,0    Ri      R....i,i   R_2,i    Rt,l
                  Pt

                                                                .74                                                .80   1.98
Structural       _29a       29a            024
                                         (.004)                (.02)
   R   ,.        (.27)    (.28)
    t,'j
                                                                                 .84    —.36        •037a          .99   2.03
                            20a   _05a    035 —.033             .49    _•085a
Reduced Form     _,15a
                                                               (.05)   (.05)    (.01)   (.04)      (.053)
                  (.11)   (.19)   (.10) (.009) (.010)
   Rt0
                                                                                         .66        •095'          .75   2.26
                 _25a      •25a          _013ab   0451)
Structural                                                                              (.06)      (.038)
                  (.31)   (.32)          (.017) (.017)


                                                           A superscript "a" denotes statistical insignificance
Notes:      Estimated standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                          an estimated coefficient which has the wrong sign
            at the 0.05 level. A superscript "b" denotes
            according to the model.
                                     25



The estimated coefficients on the price variables are uniformly insignificant,

which may reflect the inadequacy of the aggregate price index used in the

estimation)° However, all but two of the other coefficients are statistically

significant and seventeen of the twenty estimated parameters have the sign

predicted by the model. Also note that the point estimate of the

coefficient of R ,   in   the reduced form equation for R
                                                         t,0
                                                             is 0.84, which

is very close to its predicted value. This is almost identical to the

estimate under rational expectations, and as we indicated earlier it

should be interpreted more as support for the cost of adjustment formulation

of the model than for either specific expectations mechanism. The

magnitudes of the other parameter estimates in Table 3, however, do tend

to support the adaptive expectations hypothesis. A comparison of these

results with the corresponding parameters in (14a) —   (14c)   indicates that

many of the parameter restrictions implied by adaptive expectations are

satisfied approximately by the unconstrained point estimates.

      Before turning to the formal tests of adaptive expectations, we first

note that this hypothesis is not consistent with the zero mean of the

realization errors. The reason is that the observed price of R&D and the

level of output are not mean stationary and hence adaptive forecasts as

formulated in (13a) — (13b) are not unbiased. This violation should be

qualified by two considerations. First, we have only single—span

realization errors to test the hypothesis. Second, and more important,

the adaptive forecasting device in (13a) — (13b) can be modified easily to

account for (known) trends in the variables and the modified version will

produce unbiased forecasts (see Note 5 for discussion).

      The formal tests of adaptive expectations are presented in the third

row of Table 2.      There are fifteen nonlinear restrictions implied by the
                                          26



                                                                     value
hypothesis. The computed F statistic is 4.32, compared to a critical
                                                           1owever, imposition of
of 1.67 and the hypothesis is rejected formally.

the constraints raises the mean squared error by only 4.4 percent. This
                                                                      of
suggests that the restrictions may not be a bad approximation in view

the large sanple size. A testing procedure using the Bayesian F supports

this view. The critical value is 7.31 and the adaptive expectations

restrictions are not rejected. It is worth reiterating that the proper

interpretation of this result is that, given a diffuse prior distribution
                                                                    the
on the paraeters, the posterior odds favor the null hypothesis that

restrictions hold.

        As indicated in section 2.3, static expectations are a special case
                                                1. Inspection of the unconstrained
of adaptive expectations where y A
                                                                I is more reasonable
estimates in Table 3 suggested that the constraint y

                and we therefore test the former separately.      The results are
than A •   1


summarized in rows 4 and 5 of Table 2. The computed F for the, five

restrictions implied by y —      1   is 3.84, while the critical value is 2.22.

                                                  but the change in the mean squared
The restrictions are marginally rejected

error is a negligible 1.5 percent.        'nen judged against the Bayesian F of

 7.22, the hypothesis y       1 is easily accepted. 1owever, the restrictions

                                         — A      1 (competely static expectations)
 implied by the joint hypothesis .y
                                               F of 189.0 greatly exceeds both the
 are strongly rejected. The computed
                                                     and the mean squared error more
 conventional and Bayesian critical values,

 than doubles when the constraints are imposed.           As an additional check,

                                         functjon under full static expectations
 we also estimated the realization

 and   tested   the joint significance of two lagged changes in the price of

 R&D and the level of output. Under static expectations only the
                                        27


contemporaneous changes in these variables should influence the realization

error. As row 6 in Table 2 indicates, the hypothesis is rejected at both

conventional and Bayesian critical values.

        We conclude from these tests that the evidence generally supports the

adaptive expectation hypothesis and decisively rejects the strong version of

static expectations. Actually, the hypothesis most favored by the data is a

mixed one with static expectations on the price of R&D and an adaptive

mechanism on the level of output.

         We can use the constrained estimates from the adaptive version to iden-

tify the underlying parameters in the model. The estimates (standard error)

are:      = —.003 (.009),    = .85 (.015), A = .17 (.032),     = 1.28 (.080), and

  = .013 (.017). The estimate        has the right sign but is insignificant, and

  lies outside the required range 0 <     y <   1 but not substantially so. (This

violation can occur because the restrictions are rejected under classical

testing criteria, but accepted after a Bayesian adjustment for sample size.)

The ) implies an average lag of about five years in the formation of output

expectations ((1 — 5'X)/ =   4.9).   The estimate b can be used to compute the

elasticity of R&D with respect to the shadow price of R&D, rq• Using equa-

tions (6) and (7) we can write r   =     b( E Q •)/R.
                                                 t,j
                                                      Evaluating at the
                                rq
                                             j=s+O
sample means (denoted by bars) and letting            =        =
                                                                   Lb/—
This yields the point estimate (standard error) rq =       1.45 (0.82). The point

estimate is imprecise (which may not be surprising since             is a nonlinear

function of estimated parameters) but it indicates that a ten percent

increase in the shadow price of R&D raises the optimal level of R&D by

about fifteen percent. It is interesting to note that this estimate of

       is broadly similar to estimates of the elasticity of the investment—
rq
capital ratio with respect to Tobin's q for traditional capital (Abel 1979;
                                     28


Cicollo   1975). Also note that our model of investment in R&D is based on

cost minimization and as a result the shadow price of R&D is proportional
                                                                  may also
to the expected levels of output in the future. Therefore,

be interpreted as the elasticity of R&D with respect to a sustained
                                                                1.45 then
increase in all future levels of output. The estimate rq

implies    that R&D rises somewhat wore than proportionally to the ("permanent"
or sustained) level of output. Given its statistical imprecision, this
                                                             the relationshiP
finding is not inconsistent with the empirical literature on

between    R&D and output (for a review see Scherer 1980).




 3.4. ptive versus Rational Expectatfons
          The statistical tests conducted in sections 3.2 and 3.3 yield two
 main conclusions. First, the data do     not support a rational expectations
 formulation    based on third—order autoregressive representations of the

 exogenous variables (price of R&D and level of output). Second, the

 evidence is generally consistent with adaptive expectationS and especially

 favors adaptive forecasting on output and static expectations on the price

 of R&D. Why would a firm employ two different forecasting devices for the

 two exogenous variables? The simple answer that the empirical confirmation

 of this mixed hypothesis is weak and should not be taken too seriously

 seems at odds with the statistical tests. A more interesting explanation

 might argue that this finding reflects rational forecasting for the true

 stochastic processes generating the exogenous variables and that the

 rejection of rational forecasting in section 3.2 is due to a misspecification

 of these processes. Is the mixed static—adaptive expectations hypothesis

 consistent with rational expectations?
                                      29


        As indicated earlier (note 8 in section 3.2), there is some evidence

that a moving average specification of the stochastic processes might be

more appropriate than a third—order autoregressive one. 1owever, in order

for this alternative explanation to work the true stochastic processes

must be of a particular form: (1)          must be an IMA (1,1) (integratedmoving

average) process       =      +   —             where   is a white noise
                                           1'

error, since Muth (1960) shows that for this process rational forecasts

are also adaptive, and (2) Pt must be a random walk process P                 +
where       is a white noise error, since for this model static expectations

are rational.

        We cannot test this explanation rigorously with the available data

but several pieces of indirect evidence are worth noting. First Muth

(1960) shows that for an IMA(1,1) process the adaptation coefficient in

the rational forecast (A in our notation) equals the ratio of the variance

of the permanent component to the total variance. A consistent estimator

of this ratio is given by the R2 from the fitted IMA(1,1) regression.

Under this hypothesis the estimated autoregression on            in section 3.2

is of course misspecified, but it is interesting to note that the R2              .11

from that regression is quite close to (and within two standard errors of)

the constrained estimate of the adaptation coefficient A           .17. Similarly,

the         .98 from the autoregression on P is very close to the restricted

value y —   1   which was accepted by the data. These observations lend some

credence to this alternative explanation.

        On the other hand, if this alternative were true one would expect

the adaptive expectations formulation to be confirmed on detrended data

(where the nonstatioriarity in the observed price and output series has been

removed). Bowever, re—estimation of the model under adaptive expectations
                                    30


on detrended data indicates that the parieter restrictions are rejected
                                               values of the F statistic.12
both at conventional and Bayesian critical

As a further check, ye estimated a first order autoregressive process for

detrended P. Under this explanation, the coefficient on lagged P should
                                               trncorrelated. The estimated
be unity and the errors should be serially

coefficient is essentially unity, but there is strong evidence of serial

correlation (Durbiri Watson =   0.57)   and in this respect the first—order

specification is distinctly vorse than higher—order autoregressive processes.

      We conclude that the evidence is mixed on vhether rational expectations

can be reconciled with the empirically supported adaptive—static expectations

scheme.


 Conc3udin Remarks
       This paper proposes a framevork which integrates convex costs of

 adjustment and expectations formation in the determination of actual and

 multiple—Span planned investment decisions in R&D at the firm level. The

 framework is based on cost minimization subject to the firm's expectations

 of the future stream of output and the price of R&D. The model results
                                                       R&D investment and for
 in equations for actual and multiple—span planned

 the realization error as a function of these expectatOnS. One of the

 unique features of the model is that it accommodates alternative mechanisms

 of expectations formation and provides a methodology for testing these hypotheses

  empirically. In order to give the model empirical content, a specific

 mechanism of expectatiors formation must be specified.     We investigate the

                                                      adaptive and
 three leading forecasting hypotheses__ratioflalt

  static expectations. Estimable equations and a set of testable parameter

  restrictions tare derived under each of these three hypotheses.
                                    31



     The   models   are estimated on a set of pooled firm   data   covering the

period 1959—1969. The empirical results indicate that the parameter

restrictions implied by both the rational and (fully) static expectations

hypotheses are strongly rejected. The evidence generally supports

adaptive expectations, both in terms of qualitative consistency of the

unconstrained estimates with the predictions of the model and the formal

tests of the parameter restrictions. Actually, it appears that the

hypothesis most favored by the data is a mixed one, with adaptive

forecasting on the level of output and static expectations on the price

of R&D. We also investigated whether this basic empirical finding could

be reconciled with rational expectations and the formal rejection of this

hypothesis explained by a misspecificatiOn of the stochastic processes
generating the exogenouS varabies in the model. The available evidence

for this interpretation is mixed. We emphasize that the basic empirical

conclusion of this paper is that adaptive (or mixed adaptive—static)

expectations are confirmed by the data. The appropriate interpretation of

this result, however, remains an open question.

     The theoretical framework and the empirical findings suggest

directions for future research. The model could be improved by endogenizing
                                                  maximization rather than
the level of output and proceeding from profit

cost minimization, and by treating both R&D and physical capital as

quasi—fixed assets subject to costs of adjustment.     On the empirical side,

richer data sets are needed to explore the formation of expectations more

fully, and specifically to establish whether the adaptive expectations

hypothesis constitutes a substantive alternative to or simply a guise for

rational expectations.
                                             32


                                        Notes


           *
               We thank Roman Frydman, Zvi Griliches, Ariel Pakes and Ingmar Prucha

for constructive suggestions on an earlier version of this paper. All

remaining errors and interpretations are our responsibility. Gloria Albasi

provided steady research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge the financial

assistance of The National Science Foundation, Grants PRS—7727048 and

PRA—8108635.

           1. This assumption implies that the marginal savings in variable costs

due to R&D is a constant, i.e., 2C/K2 = 0.                This violates the standard

second order condition for restricted cost functions that 2C/BK2 < 0 and, in

a static context, generates as infinitely elastic demand for R&D (and hence an

indeterminate level of R&D). In a cost of adjustment framework the analogue

is an infinitely elastic shadow price of R&D, but an optimal level of R&D is

ensured by an upward sloping marginal cost of investment schedule (see

Figure 1).

           2. The following setup is based on Sargent (1978) but we extend the

argument to planned investment and realization functions. The assumption that

ut and           are contemporaneously uncorrelated simplifies the prediction formulas

for        and         This assumption is subjected to an empirical test (see note 8).

               3. The procedure to derive (ha) —        (lic)   is as follows. From the

                                      = 0 for j >       0 we obtain Pt5 = dMAsMlxt and
assumption E(c+) =           E(u+)
       =                  Substitutions of these expressions into (6) and (7) and
               eNcN'z.
some manipulation yields (ha) and (llb). To derive (llc) note from (9) — (10)
                                                                                                 *
                                                  *                  s      + Cs_l*
that   x       = Bsx   + Bs_l*       + ...   +        .and z =   C               u_51 + ... +   Ut.

Using      these and the expressions for P    and Q              in      (8) yields (hic).
                                          t,s       t,s
                                             33



         4. Similar implications appear in the literature on the efficient

market hypothesis (Fama 1970) and recent work on the permanent income

hypothesis under rational expectations (Bilson 1980; Hall 1978).

         5. if the forecasted variable, say P,            is    trended then the adaptive

forecast in (13a) will be biased. If the series is growing at the rate g,

then an unbiased predictor is obtained from the modified adaptive forecast


          (1 + g)y        (1 —             Given that the agent forecasts adaptively
Pt 1 —
                     i0
and g is ascertainabie, it is reasonable to assume the agent uses the

modified formula.

         6. If P and             are gro.'ing at rate     and         and the firm   uses   the
                                                                 8q
unbiased modified version of adaptive forecasting (note 5), we have

          (1 + gp)5_P,1 and                 (1 +                      Then the coefficients
                                                   gq)S_lQ1.
in the system of equations in (lLia) — (14d) are slightly modified.

         7. Equation (14a) is obtained by substituting (13b) into (6) for

a      0 and performing a Koyck transformation on                (to remove the infinite

past series on              To obtain (14b) substitute (13a) — (13b) into (6) for

£      I and perform two sequential Koyck transformations on                   and

Equation (14c) is derived by a similar procedure using (13a) — (13b) in (7).

Finally, (14d) is obtained by lagging (14b) and subtracting it from (14a).

          8. Two points should be noted. First, we checked the assumption that

    the disturbances        and u in (9) and (10) are contemporaneously uncorrelated

 by testing the univariate autoregressive representations against a general

 bivariate specification. This involves testing the joint significance of

    three lagged values of          in the autoregression for          and three lagged

    values of    in the autoregression for              The computed F statistics are
                                   34



1.42 and 1.60, respectively, compared to the critical level F(3,548) =   2.60.

The simplifying assumption E(cu) 0 is accepted. Second, there is evidence

that a higher order autoregression is appropriate, but including more than

three lagged values of output and price would reduce the sample size unaccept-

ably. These higher order terms affect only the last coefficient in the AR(3)

representation and they do not improve the equations in terms of serial

correlation. Still, they probably do indicate that a moving average or mixed

process is more appropriate, but the structure of our data does not permit

use of such specifications. In section 3.4 we discuss the implications of

these considerations for the interpretation of the empirical findings under

rational expectations.

      9. The assumed 6 = .10 is much lower than the rate estimated by Fakes

and Schankerman (this volume). However, in our model 6 is the rate of

decline in the ability of R&D to "produce" cost reductions, not the rate of

decline in appropriable revenues considered by Fakes and Schankerman. For

more on the distinction see Schankerman and Nadiri (1982).

     10. One problematic result is that the price coefficients in each

equation sum to zero. This suggests that the true model should relate the

stock of knowledge to the price of R&D, since the first—differenced version

(involving R&D flow) would then yield the observed result. On the other

hand, the result may just reflect the rather poor price index which we use.

       Li. e also reformulated the model in (14a) — (14c) using the

modified version of adaptive expectations, and estimated the unconstrained

and restricted systems. This required estimates of the trends in          and

which were obtained from regressions of the logs of these variab'es against

time. The formal tests of the parameter restrictions were qualitatively

similar to those reported in the text.
                                  35




      12. The computed P is 8.59, compared to the conventional

F(15,1171)   1.67 and the Bayesian P —   7.29.   Imposition of the restrictions

raised the mean squared error by 10.0 percent.
                                  36                         Schankerman & Nadiri


                              References


Abel, A. 1979. Empirical investment equations: An integrative framework.

     Report 1932, Center for )athematical Studies in Business and

      Economics, University of Chicago.

Bilson, 3. 1980. The rational expectations approach to the consumption

      function: A multi—country study. European Economic Review 13: 272—308.

Ciccoio, J. 1975. Four essays on monetary policy. Ph.D. diss, Yale.

Eisner, R. 1978. Factors in business investment. BER General Series

      No. 102. Cambridge, 1ass.: Ballinger.

Fama, E. F. 1970. Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and

      empirical work. Journal of Finanç 25: 383—417.

Goldberg, L. 1972. The demand for industrial R&D. Ph.D. diss., Brown.

Hall, R. 1978. Stochastic implications of the life cycle—permanent income

      hypothesis: Theory and evidence. Journal of Political Economy 86:

      971—88.

Kennan, 3. 1979. The estimation of partial adjustment models with

      rational expectations. Econometric 47: 1441—55.

Leamer, E. E. 1978. Specification searches: Ad hoc inference with

      nonexperimental data. New York: Wiley.

Meese, R. 1980. Dynamic factor demand schedules for labor and capital

      under rational expectatiOnS. Journal of Econometrics 14: 141—58.

Modigliani, F. 1961. The role of anticipations and plans in economic

      behavior and their use in economic analysis and forecastin_&.

      Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

lluth, 3. F. 1960. Optimal properties of exponentially weighted forecasts.

       Journal of the American Statistical Association 55: 299—306.
                                   37


            1961. Rational expectations and the theory of price movements.

     Econometrics 29: 315—35.

Nadiri, N. I., and Bitros,C. C. 1980. Research and development

     expenditures and labor productivity at the firm   level:   A dynamic

     model. In 3. W. Rendrick and B. N. Vaccara, eds., New developments

      in productivity measurement and analysis. NBER Studies in Income

      and Wealth, Vol. 44. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Paves, A., and Schankernan, Mark. 1979. The rate of obsolescence of

     knoviedge, research gestation lags, and the private rate of return

      to research resources. This volume.



Rasmussen, 3. A.   1969. Research and development, firm size, demand and

      costs: An empirical investigation of research and development

      spending by firms. Ph.D. diss., Northvestern.

Sargent, T. 3. 1978. Rational expectations, econometric exogeneity, and

      consumption. Journal of Political Economy 86: 673—700.

            1979a. Estimation of dynamic labor demand schedules under

            rational expectations. Journal of Political Econoy 86: 1009—14.

        •   1979b. Macroeconomic theory. New York: Academic Press.

Schankerman, Mark. 1979. The determinants, rate of return, and productivity

      impact of research and development. Ph.D. diss., Barvard.

Schankerman, Mark, and Nadiri, N. I. 1982. Restricted cost functions and

      the rate of returns to quasi—fixed factors: An application to R&D

      and capital in the Bell System. New York University, Mimeographed.

Scherer, F. N. 3980. Industrial market structure and economic performaç.

      Chicago: Rand McNally.
                                  38



Zeilner, A. 1962. Ar efficient method of estinating seernngiy unre3ated

     regressions and tests for aggregation bias. Journal of the American

     Statistical Association 57: 348—68.
                                           Schankervan & adiyI



                       Figure Legend



1. Detertnination of Optimal Planned R&D
NC(R,)
                                       )
              Mc(R5) Pt,S (1+2AB




              =   e
                             VQt.++e
                      j =0




         'S                       'S
