                   NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE AMERICAN FISCAL DEFICIT:
                       FACTS AND EFFECTS




                       Herschel Grossman




                     Working Paper No. 934




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                           July 1982



Prepared for presentation at a symposium on Current Problems of
Public Finance in the United States and Japan, sponsored by the
Japanese Ministry of Finance and the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Tokyo, July 19 and 20, 1982. Marc Hayford provided
valuable research assistance. Herschel Grossman is Merton P.
Stoltz Professor in the Social Sciences and Professor of Economics
at Brown University, and a Research Associate of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                   NBER Working Paper #934
                                        July 1982




                             Summary
                  THE AMERICAN FISCAL DEFICIT:
                        FACTS AND EFFECTS


     The main objective of this paper is to understand and to
evaluate recently expressed popular anxiety about large American
fiscal deficits. The paper begins with a discussion of problems
involved in measuring the fiscal deficit. A general conclusion
is that all interesting measures of the federal fiscal deficit
have increased substantially over the past eight presidential
terms and are likely to increase further in the near future. The
paper goes on to analyze possible connections between fiscal
deficits and inflation, economic growth, and fluctuations in the
level and composition of economic activity. Important
conclusions are that monetary policy, inflation, and aggregate
economic activity are all largely independent of the fiscal
deficit, but that the fiscal deficit can have major effects on
the division of output between consumption and investment.
Key elements in the analysis are the effects of taxation on
consumption and investment demands and the relations between real
and financial developments.




                                       Herschel Grossman
                                       Department of Economics
                                       Brown University
                                       Providence, RI 02912
                                       401—863—2606
     The alleged evils of fiscal deficits are a popular theme in
American political rhetoric. In Congressional debates, the size
of the federal budget deficit always generates considerable heat
and political posturing. In presidential elections, the party
out of power regularly uses budget numbers to indict the party in
power for fiscal irresponsibility. In 1976, candidate Carter
attacked President Ford for allowing large fiscal deficits and
asserted that a Carter Administration would balance the Federal
budget.  In 1980, candidate Reagan attacked President Carter for
allowing large fiscal deficits and asserted that a Reagan
Administration would balance the Federal budget. Even back in
1932, candidate Roosevelt attacked President Hoover for allowing
large fiscal deficits and asserted that a Roosevelt
Administration would balance the Federal budget.

     Belying the admonitions of candidate Reagan, both the Office
of Management and Budget and the Congressional Budget Office
early in 1982 projected deficits in the Federal budget over the
next few years exceeding $100 billion annually. In light of
American political tradition, it is not surprising to see
Washington political circles quickly focus on these numbers as
the most worrisome aspect of current economic policy. This
latest outcry, however, involves a substantial shift away from
the usual claim that budget deficits bear primary responsibility
for inflation. With inflation declining rapidly, this indictment
looses its prima facie appeal.

     Recent expressions of concern instead emphasize other
alleged bad consequences of fiscal deficits. Many commentators,
mainly former public officials and former government economists,
warn that large fiscal deficits depress capital formation and
thereby retard prospective improvements in productivity and
future economic growth. This hypothesis that fiscal deficits
"crowd out" private investment has received considerable atten-
tion in the theoretical literature on fiscal policy, and the
discussion below reviews the essential issues. Although
                              —2—
empirical research has not as yet produced any firm conclusions
about the practical importance of "crowding out", recognition of
this possibility surely represents a positive contribution to the
level of the public discussion.

     Most of the political debate, however, does not take this
long—run perspective on the effects of fiscal deficits.
Politicians tend to be concerned mainly about the immediate
economic situation. In this spirit, many public officials of
both parties, as well as some government and business economists,
express serious concern that current fiscal prospects are
inhibiting "economic recovery" and, in wilder moments, suggest
that reduction of anticipated fiscal deficits is both necessary
and sufficient for this "economic recovery".

     These claims have caused academic economists to bemoan yet
again the confused and fickle nature of popular impressions about
economic policy. Are these politicians claiming that budget
deficits can worsen and prolong a recession? If so, they
apparently have not learned the basic lessons that conventional
macroeconomic analysis teaches about fiscal policy. They seem as
misguided as the presidential candidates were in the election of
1932, mindlessly blaming fiscal deficits for anything that goes
wrong in the economy.
     A main objective of this paper is to sort out this confusion
and to determine which aspects of recently expressed popular
anxiety about fiscal deficits reflect realistic and meaningful
economic concerns. To this end, the paper analyzed possible
connections between fiscal deficits and inflation, economic
growth, and fluctuations in the level and composition of economic
activity. Even though recent experience mutes simplistic claims
about the inflationary impact of fiscal deficits, the analysis
reveals that the interactions between fiscal and monetary
policies and between the real and financial aspects of fiscal
policy are central to understanding the effects of fiscal
deficits and to appreciating the emphasis on fiscal deficits
expressed in current popular discussions.
                              —3-.

     Although time and space do not permit a careful evaluation
of relevant empirical evidence, the discussion that follows
suggests some tentative conclusions about the actual importance
of various likely effects of fiscal deficits.  In this regard, it
is worth pointing out that effects of fiscal deficits are
difficult to isolate and to measure econometrically, and that
econometric analysis of the phenomena discussed below has been
notably inconclusive.
                              —4—
1. Facts About the American Fiscal Deficit
     This first section discusses problems of measuring the
fiscal deficit and draws conclusions about the historical record
of the American fiscal deficit. A general lack of appreciation
of the subtle issues involved in measuring the fiscal deficit has
been a continual source of confusion in the popular discussion.
One simple problem is that the popular way of expressing the
fiscal deficit in current dollars is much less informative than
measurements of the fiscal deficit and other aspects of fiscal
policy relative to the size of the economy.

     Other problems involve interesting conceptual issues.
Should we focus on total government borrowing or on government
borrowing net of government lending? Should we subtract from
current government borrowing the decrease in the real value of
the government's net nominal liabilities resulting from
inflation? Should we consolidate the fiscal deficit of the
Federal government with the fiscal surplus of the state and local
governments? The discussion that follows considers each of these
questions and assesses their quantification significance.

     Some potentially important issues present less tractable
problems of quantification. For example, should we add to the
fiscal deficit the increase in the government's unfunded implicit
liabilities, such as future retirement benefits to government
employees and future social security benefits? The logic behind
this question really suggests that we should look at the present
value of expected future fiscal deficits, an amorphous quantity
at best, rather than just at the current fiscal deficit. As
another example, should we subtract from the fiscal deficit the
increase in the value of the government's tangible assets? If
so, how does one assess the value of the government's tangible
assets? Because of limited time and space, the present
discussion cannot do more than recognize these questions.
                                —5—
     Before turning to the fiscal deficit itself, a review of the
main features of the modern development of the American public
sector will be useful. Table 1 presents various social
accounting measures as shares of Gross National Product for the
first year of the Reagan Adminstration and for the preceding
seven presidential terms. A striking feature of rows 1 through 5
in Table 1 is the constancy of the relative sizes of the major
components of GNP——consumption, gross investment, net exports,
and total federal and state and local government purchases.
Specifically, the share of total government purchases, given by
the sum of rows 4 and 5, was 20.1% during the first Eisenhower
term, grew to 21.8% during Nixon's full term, but declined back
to 20.2% during Carter's term and was the same in 1981.

     One change revealed in row 4 of Table 1 is the steady and
substantial decrease in the share in GNP of federal government
purchases,   which recently have amounted to less than 40%   of total
government purchases. The steady decline in the share in GNP of
defense expenditures, shown in row 4a, which even after
increasing last year was still less than half of what it was
during the first Eisenhower term, more than accounts for this
trend.

     Rows 4 through 9 in Table 1 also show that, even though
total government purchases have grown no faster than GNP, total
government expenditures, net of intergovernmental transactions,
have increased steadily relative to GNP. Specifically, the sum
of total government purchases, total transfer payments, and total
net interest payments increased from 25.8% of GNP during the
first Eisenhower term to 32.1% during the Carter term and reached
33.3% for 1981. This trend largely reflects an increase in
federal government transfer payments, shown in row 6, from 3.5%
to 9.7% of GNP.

     Table 2 presents various measures of the federal government
fiscal deficit relative to GNP for the first year of the Reagan
Administration and for the seven preceding presidential terms.
Row 1 in Table 2 shows a steady increase relative to GNP in the
                                                          TABLE 1
                                     SOCIAL ACCOUNTING MEASURES AS PERCENTAGES OF GNP
                           1953—1956   1957—1960      1961—1964    1965—1968   1969—1972   1973—1976    1977—1980   1981—
                           Eisenhower Eisenhower kennedy-Johnson     Johnson      Nixon    Nixon—Ford     Carter    Reagan
1.   consumption              63.3        63.8        63.0          61.6          62.2        62.4        63.0       63.6

2. gross investment           15.8        15.1        15.0          15.9          15.6        15.3        16.6       15.4

     2a. net investment        7.0         5.8         6.4           7.7           6.8         5.6         6.0        4.4

3. net exports                0.8          0.9         1.3           0.8           0.4         1.1         0.4        0.8

4. federal purchases          12.6        11.2        10.8          10.7           9.3         7.7         7.3        7.8

     4a.defense               10.8         9.5         8.5           8.3           7.0         5.3         4.8        5.2

5.   state and local           7.5         8.9         9.8          10.9          12.5        13.5        12.9       12.4
     purchases
6. federal transfer            3.5         4.5         4.9           5.1           6.5         8.7         9.0        9.7
     payments

7. state and   local           1.0         1.0         1.1           1.1           1.5         1.6         1.5        1.4
     transfer payments

8. federal net                 1.2         1.3         1.2           1.7           1.3         1.5         1.8        2.5
     interest payments

9. state and   local net       0.0         0.0         0.0          —0.1          —0.2        —0.3        —0.4       —0.5
     interest payments
                                                               TABLE 2
                                          MEASURES OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL
                                                                                    DEFICIT
                                                        AS PERCENTAGES OF GNP
                             1953—1956    1957—1960     1961—1964      1965—1968 1969—1972    1973—1976    1977-1980
                             Eisenhower   Eisenhower Kennedy—Johnson                                                   1981—
                                                                         Johnson    Nixon     Nixon—Ford     Carter
1.                                                                                                                     Reagan
     budget deficit,             0.2         0.3          0.5
     national income and                                                  0.7         1.0         2.3        1.7        2.1
     product accounts
2.   monetization of the         0.0         0.1         0.4             0.5
     fiscal deficit                                                                  0.4          0.4        0.3       0.3
3.   net borrowing, flow        o.i          0.3         0.0
     of                                                                  0.2         0.5          1.8
          funds accounts                                                                                     1.4       2.0
4.   gross borrowing, flow      0.3          0.8         0.8
     of funds accounts                                                   1.0         0.9          3.4        3.3       4.0
S.   change in the real        —1.2         —0.8        —0.5            —0.6
     value of net debt, flow                                                        —0.4         0.5         0.1       0.3
     of funds accounts
                              —6—
measured federal budget deficit. This trend becomes even clearer
if we leave out the years 1975 and 1976 when an unusually severe
recession boosted the federal budget deficit. These data show
that the impression of increasing federal budget deficits is not
merely an artifact resulting from expressing the budget deficit
in nominal dollars. The federal budget deficit has grown faster
than the economy.

     Despite this steady growth, the federal budget deficit in
1981 still amounted to only 2.1% of GNP. Although this number
seems small by international comparisons, it looks much larger
when compared to net investment, shown in line 2a of Table 1.
Had the amount of the federal budget deficit been available in
1981 to finance net investment, net investment would have been
almost 50% larger
     The trend of increasing federal budget deficits seem certain
to continue in the near future. The Congressional Budget Office
early in 1982 projected federal budget deficits of 3.2% of GNP in
1982 and 2.9% of GNP in 1983. These projections imply that the
budget deficit for the first three years of the Reagan term will
be 2.7% of GNP. The latest budgetary developments, moreover,
suggest that the budget deficit for 1983 will be even larger than
this projection.

     The budget deficit measures the difference between gross
federal expenditures——mainly, purchases, transfer payments,
interest payments, and grants to state and local governments——and
total explicit federal tax receipts. Financing of the federal
budget deficit can take the form either of borrowing or of an
increase in the monetary liabilities of the Federal Reserve
System.    Row 2 of Table 2 shows that monetization of the
federal budget deficit, measured as the change in the amount of
federal debt held by Federal Reserve Banks, has not increased
relative to GNP since the Kennedy—Johnson term. Increased
borrowing has financed all of the increase in the federal budget
deficit since the Kennedy—Johnson term. These data indicate that
the American political and institutional framework does not
                               —7—
 create any necessary link between the federal fiscal deficit and
 base money creation.

      Row 3 of Table 2 confirms this pattern of change in net
federal borrowing relative to GNP, with a trough in the Kennedy
term and steady increases thereafter. The definition of net
borrowing in row 3 is the change in the total liabilities of the
federal government minus the sum of changes in federal insurance
and retirement reserves, federal debt held by Federal Reserve
Banks, and total financial assets of the federal government. In
principle, row 2 and row 3 should sum to row 1 in Table 2. The
inexactness of this summation results from unexplained
discrepancies between national income and product accounts and
flow of funds accounts, which suggest that, although the trends
are clear, some of these data lack precision.

     In addition to borrowing as measured in row 3 to cover the
difference between expenditures and tax receipts plus base money
creation, the federal government also borrows to finance its
extensive lending activities. Row 4 in Table 2 shows an even
more pronounced upward trend in gross federal borrowing relative
to GNP, reflecting mainly large increases in federal government
borrowing to finance lending beginning in the Nixon—Ford term.
Closely related to federal government lending are federal govern-
ment guarantees of private loans against default. Given problems
of quantification, the present discussion does not attempt to
evaluate these guarantees. The measure of gross federal
borrowing used in row 4 is the change in the total liabilities of
the federal government, including liabilities of federally
sponsored credit agencies, net of life insurance and retirement
reserves and federal debt held by Federal Reserve Banks.

     To the extent that they merely replace direct private
borrowing and lending and private financial intervention,
borrowing and lending activities of the federal government have
no net effect on the economy. Lending by the federal government,
however, usually involves a subsidized interest rate for the
activity being financed. A correct accounting of current federal
                              —8—
government expenditures and the federal fiscal deficit would
include the present value of the subsidies involved in current
lending. Although constructing an estimate of the amount of
these subsidies is beyond the scope of the present paper, it
seems reasonable to suppose that the implied addition to current
federal government expenditures and the federal fiscal deficit
has increased with the volume of current lending by the federal
government. Thus, appropriately corrected measures of the
federal fiscal deficit probably would show even more pronounced
increases beginning in the Nixon—Ford term than indicated by the
measured federal budget deficit.
     Because the federal government has nominal assets and
liabilities, the change in the real values of its net liabilities
depends both on its current net borrowing and on changes in the
price level, which alter the real value of its existing assets
and liabilities. Row 5 of Table 2 shows measurements of the
change relative to real GNP in the real value of net federal
debt, defined as the real value of the difference between net
federal borrowing and the product of the rate of change of the
implicit GNP deflator and the net debt of the federal government.

     These data show that, because the net federal debt is posi-
tive, inflation has caused the increase in the real value of net
federal debt throughout this period to be substantially smaller
than net federal borrowing. In fact, from the first Eisenhower
term through the Nixon term, the real value of the net federal
debt actually declined steadily. Although the inflation rate was
not high by current standards, this decline relative to GNP was
greatest during the Eisenhower terms because net federal
borrowing was small and the net federal debt was large relative
to GNP. In 1981, despite larger net federal borrowing and a
smaller net federal debt relative to GNP, the high inflation rate
meant that the increase in the real value of the net federal debt
relative to real GNP was still only 0.3%.

     Looking over the entire period covered by Table 2, the data
in row 5 indicate that the change in the real value of net
                              —9—
federal debt relative to GNP, although smaller than net federal
borrowing, has increased in a way quite similar to the increases
in the federal budget deficit and in net federal borrowing.
Moreover, the budget deficit projections of the Congressional
Budget Office imply a continuation of this trend, with increases
in the real value of net federal debt relative to real GNP of
1.8% in 1982, assuming an inflation rate of 7.4%, and 1.6% in
1983, assuming an inflation rate of 6.8%.

     In sum, all of the measures of the federal fiscal deficit
presented in Table 2—-the federal budget deficit, net federal
borrowing, gross federal borrowing, and the change in the real
value of net federal debt-—show a substantial increase since the
first Eisenhower term. In addition, further increases in all of
these measures are likely in the near future.

     What about prospects for the more distant future? One view
is that the political process is currently unable to produce a
prudent fiscal policy and that the trend of increasing federal
fiscal deficits is likely to continue. An alternative view is
that the current fiscal situation is a transitory aspect of an
adjustment process that is leading to a reduction in size of the
federal government relative to the economy. This interpretation
is based on the observation that the large current and
prospective federal fiscal deficits result proximately from tax
reductions, the belief that these tax reductions reflect a basic
change in popular preferences, and the hope that the consequences
of the resulting federal fiscal deficits—-for example, higher
real interest rates——will produce effective political pressure to
reduce the federal fiscal deficit by curtailing federal
government expenditures.

     As noted above, the fiscal activities of state and local
governments are an important part of the American economy. Table
3 presents various measures of the combined state and local
government fiscal deficit relative to GNP for the first year of
the Reagan Administration and for the seven preceding
presidential terms. The definition of net borrowing used in
                                                                 TABLE 3
                                  MEASURES OF THE COMBINED STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL DEFICIT
                                                          AS PERCENTAGE OF GNP
                               1953—1956    1957—1960      1961—1964      1965—1968  1969—1972 1973—1976   1977—1980
                              Eisenhower Eisenhower                                                                    1981—
                                                        Kennedy—Johnson    Johnson     Nixon  Nixon—Ford    Carter     Reagan
1.   budget deficit,             0.2          0.2          —0.1            0.0       —0.5        —0.7       —1.2       —1.3
     national income and
     product accounts
2.   net borrowing, flow         0.5          0.4           0.1           —0.0       —0.1        —0.3       —0.8       —0.9
     of funds accounts

3.   change in the real          0.7         0.5            0.0           —0.2       —0.2        —0.3       —0.4       —0.3
     value of net debt,
     flow of funds accounts
                               — 10   —



 row 2 is the negative of the sum of net state and local
 government financial investment and state and local government
 retirement credits to households. The differences between row 1
 and row 2 reflect unexplained discrepancies between national
 income and product accounts and flow of funds accounts. Both of
 these rows show the same trend.

      The main message from Table 3 is that qualitatively the
 trend in the combined state and local fiscal deficit, however
 measured, has been the opposite of the trend in the federal
 fiscal deficit. Moreover, the combined state and local fiscal
 deficit not only has declined steadily, but in recent years has
become substantially negative——that is, a surplus. In addition,
because the net nominal state and local debt is negative,
inflation has caused the increase in the real value of net state
and local debt, given by row 3, to be substantially larger than
net state and local borrowing throughout this period. The
definition of the change in the real value of net debt in row 3
is the real value of the difference between net state and local
borrowing and the product of the rate of change of the implicit
GNP deflator and the net nominal debt of state and local
governments. The net nominal debt is defined as total
liabilities minus the sum of total financial assets and
accumulated state and local government retirement credits to
households.

     Table 4 combines the relevant data from Table 2 and Table 3
to obtain measures of the total government fiscal deficit
relative to GNP. Because the trends in the federal and state and
local fiscal deficits are offsetting, the data in Table 4 show no
noticeable overall trend in any measure of the total government
fiscal deficit. Nevertheless, all of the measures indicate a
relatively large total fiscal deficit for 1981. Moreover, with
regard to prospects for the near future, if forecasts of
increased federal fiscal deficits are correct, the total fiscal
deficit will increase further unless the combined state and local
fiscal surplus grows substantially.
                                                                    TABLE 4
                                           MEASURES OF THE TOTAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL DEFICIT
                                                        AS PERCENTAGES OF GNP
                               1953—1956    1957—1960      1961—1964          1965—1968   1969—1972    1973—1976   1977—1980    1981—
                              Eisenhower   Eisenhower   Kennedy-Johnson       Johnson       Nixon     Nixon—Ford    Carter     Reagan

1.   budget deficit.              0.4          0.5            0.4                 0.7        0.5         1.6          0.5        0.8
     national income and
     product accounts
2.   net borrowing, flow          0.6          0.7            0.1                 0.2        0.4         1.5          0.6        1.1
     of funds accounts

3.   change in the real          —0.5         —0.3           —0.5               —0.8        —0.6        —0.2         —0.3        0.0
     value of net debt,
     flow of funds accounts
                             — 11   —


     This last observation suggests two questions, neither of
which has a readily available answer. First, is there a
connection between the federal fiscal deficit and the combined
state and local fiscal surplus such that increases in the former
causes increases in the latter, or vice versa? Second, is the
combined fiscal deficit the most relevant economic concept or
does the federal fiscal deficit separately have important
economic effects? The analysis that follows touches on both of
these questions.
                              — 12   —



2.   The Irrelevance Hypothesis

     To help focus the subsequent discussion, this section con-
siders the intriguing hypothesis, which some economists think
warrants serious empirical study, that fiscal deficits have no
relevance for major macroeconomic phenomena. The irrelevance
hypothesis claims that if taxes are decreased and government
borrowing increased by an equal amount, private saving increases
by approximately this same amount and both consumption demand and
investment demand are approximately unchanged. If saving
responds in this way, the only effect of an increase in the
fiscal deficit is approximately equal increases in both the
demand and supply of financial assets. These offsetting effects
on financial markets leave interest rates and asset prices, like
consumption demand and investment demand, approximately
unchanged. Accordingly, the choice between taxation and debt
finance of given government expenditures has no important
consequences for either inflation, aggregate economic activity,
or the division of national product between consumption and
inves tment.

     The issue raised by the irrelevance hypothesis is strictly
relevant only if the choice of the level of government expendi-
tures, other than interest payments to service the public debt,
is independent of the choice between taxation and debt finance.
To simplify the analysis, the discussion that follows presumes
that this independence holds. As a matter of logic, this
independence would seem to follow if the irrelevance hypothesis
were true. As a matter of fact, however, this independence
certainly does not characterize state and local fiscal policy and
probably also does not characterize federal fiscal policy.
     At the state and local level, borrowing is usually
associated with specific expenditure projects, typically invest-
ments in social capital, and decisions not to borrow usually mean
deferment of t1ese investments. Thus, in ignoring this
dependence, the analysis that follows is not directly relevant to
state and local fiscal deficits. At the federal level, borrowing
                              — 13 —


and expenditures are not directly connected. Nevertheless, as
mentioned above, the probable effects of fiscal deficits, such as
higher interest rates, may create political pressures for a
reduction in federal government expenditures. Analysis of the
political process underlying fiscal policy and consideration of
this connection is beyond the scope of the present paper.

     The analysis underlying the irrelevance hypothesis relies on
two assumptions relating to private perceptions of the present
value of current and expected future disposable income—-perceived
wealth, for short. The first assumption is that perceived wealth
is independent of current and past choices between taxation and
debt finance. The second assumption is that, given the
invariance of perceived wealth, current and past choices between
taxation and debt finance do not affect aggregate consumption
demand. We consider each of these assumptions in turn.

     The first assumption implies that taxpayers both correctly
anticipate the implications of current and past fiscal decisions
for future taxation and also take anticipated future taxation
fully into account when evaluating the present value of their
future disposable income.  In considering anticipations of future
taxation, it is important to distinguish the immediate effects of
the current choice between taxation and debt finance from the
cumulative effects of past choices between taxation and debt
finance. A current tax cut directly raises current disposable
income, which by itself adds to perceived wealth. The matching
increase in current government borrowing, however, implies an
obligation to increase future taxes to service the resulting
public debt. The present value of the decreases in future dis-
posable income implied by these additional future taxes is
exactly equal to the increase in current disposable income.

     The first assumption implies that taxpayers make this same
calculation and, thus, implies that taxpayers anticipate fully
the effect of current borrowing in adding to future taxation.
This assumption about good taxpayer foresight means that tax-
payers are alert to changes in the current fiscal deficit and
                               — 14   —



also understand its implications for future fiscal policy. Such
behavior does not seem obviously realistic.
     In the postwar period, even when the fiscal deficit has been
relatively large, the quarterly rate of addition to the stock of
public debt has not exc€eded a few percent. Nevertheless, with a
persistent fiscal deficit, the stock of public debt, and with it
the interest payments to service this debt, grow steadily. These
interest payments, reflecting past fiscal deficits, add to
current and future aggregate disposable income. But, of course,
the taxes levied contemporaneously to finance these interest
payments have an exactly offsetting effect on current and future
aggregate disposable income.
     The first assumption also implies that taxpayers appreciate
this offsetting effect. In this regard, good taxpayer foresight
might be plausible. For taxpayers to anticipate fully the future
taxes to be levied to service the currently existing stock of
public debt resulting from past deficits, they have only to
anticipate a continuation of the current level of taxation.

     Even if taxpayers fully anticipate relevant future taxes,
for perceived wealth to be independent of current and past fiscal
deficits requires also that wealth calculations take these future
taxes fully into account. In this regard, it is important to
distinguish between taxes that reduce the net income from labor
services and taxes that reduce the net income from marketable
assets.

     Because there is no market for claims to income from labor
services, the incorporation into perceived wealth of anticipated
future taxes on labor income is subjective and depends on
individual taxpayer planning horizons. If a taxpayer is con-
cerned about changes in the welfare of his descendants, an
attitude that makes his planning horizon effectively infinite,
then his wealth calculation involves all anticipated future taxes
on labor income. Alternatively, if a taxpayer is indifferent to
changes in the welfare of his descendants, an attitude that means
that his planning horizon does not extend beyond his lifetime,
                             — 15   —



then his perceived wealth largely ignores anticipated future
taxes on the labor income of his descendants.
     For taxes on income from marketable assets, in contrast, the
individual planning horizon of taxpayers are unimportant. The
incorporation into perceived wealth of anticipated future taxes
on asset income results from the market valuation of assets. If
current market prices of assets adjust fully for the present
value of all anticipated future taxes on asset income, the
perceived wealth of an asset owner fully reflects such taxes,
even if they are paid beyond his individual planning horizon.
     In sum, to the extent that taxes reduce income from market-
able assets, it seems reasonable to suppose that perceived wealth
does not depend on the stock of public debt resulting from past
fiscal deficits. But, to the extent that taxes reduce income
from labor services, this supposition seems less likely to be
exactly true. Moreover, it also seems reasonable to suppose that
current tax reductions and associated increases in borrowing
produce at least some immediate increase in perceived wealth.
Nevertheless, any effect on perceived wealth requires that tax-
payers either fail to anticipate future taxes or fail to take
full account of anticipated taxes. This implication of the
theoretical analysis suggests that the first assumption that
perceived wealth is independent of current and past choices
between taxation and debt finance may not be a bad first-order
approximation.
     The second essential assumption underlying the irrelevance
hypothesis says that aggregate consumption demand depends on
current disposable income only indirectly through the relation,
if any, between current disposable income and perceived wealth.
This assumption implies that if a tax cut causes an increase in
current disposable income but no change in perceived wealth,
aggregate consumption demand does not change, and saving
increases by the amount of the increase in disposable income.
     The main problem with this second assumption is that it
neglects "liquidity" effects on consumption demand. Recent
                              — 16 —


research, using various strategies to analyze American data,
strongly suggests that liquidity effects are empirically
important. This research indicates that increases in disposable
income have a direct positive effect on aggregate consumption
demand separately from any indirect effect working through
changes in perceived wealth.

     This direct effect apparently results mainly from the
limited ability of households to borrow against the security of
prospective future income from labor services. Because there is
no market for claims to income from labor services, households
who have good prospects for future increases in labor income, but
who do not have financial assets that they can readily liquidate,
typically cannot consume at the level in excess of current income
that their income expectations warrant. The data suggest that
there are always a substantial number of American households in
this situation. These households consume less than they would
either if they were able to dissave through borrowing or if their
current disposable income were larger relative to their future
disposable income. Consequently, reductions in current taxes,
even if accompanied by higher anticipated future taxation that
leaves perceived wealth unchanged, allow these households to
consume more now and, thus, stimulates current aggregate
consumption demand.

     Even though the hypothesis that fiscal deficits are
irrelevant seems not to be true, analysis of this hypothesis is
valuable in explicating the channels through which fiscal
deficits can affect major macroeconomic phenomena. As we have
seen, there is good reason to expect the choice of debt financing
rather than taxation to pay for given public expenditures to
produce an immediately higher level of aggregate consumption
demand. This effect occurs either because perceived wealth
increases or, even more likely, because aggregate consumption
demand depends directly on current disposable income. The
analysis also indicates that cumulative increases in the stock of
public debt resulting from past fiscal deficits possibly cause
                             — 17   —



further steady increases in perceived wealth and in aggregate
consumption demand.
                               — 18   —



3.   Inflation

     The American popular debate has traditionally been pre-
occupied with alleged inflationary effects of fiscal deficits.
As noted above, the recent experience of a substantial decrease
in inflation without any decrease in the fiscal deficit has
brought a sudden suspension of this tradition.

     Notwithstanding its apparent impact on popular opinion, this
recent experience is completely consistent with two lessons that
macroeconomic analysis and historical experience teach. First,
the main and unavoidable effect of fiscal deficits is not on
inflation, but on the division of national product between
consumption and investment. Second, although fiscal deficits and
other factors can affect inflation, monetary policy is the
dominant influence. This section clarifies the relation between
fiscal deficits and inflation. The next section discusses the
relation between fiscal deficits, investment, and economic
growth.
     Although monetary policy has been the most obviously and
consistently important determinant of inflation, fiscal policy,
changes in inflationary expectations, and so—called "supply
shocks"   like exogenous changes in the production of petroleum
probably have also influenced the price level in the recent
past. There are two common ways, which are isomorphic if done
correctly,   of analyzing the effect of these different factors on
the price level. The approach used below treats monetary policy,
fiscal policy, and inflationary expectations as affecting the
total demand for goods and services, treats supply shocks as
affecting the total supply of goods and services, and views the
price level as changing through time to bring total demand into
equality with total supply. The alternative approach treats
fiscal policy, inflationary expectations, and supply shocks as
affecting the demand for real money balances, views monetary
policy as determining the nominal money supply, and views the
price level as changing through time to make the real value of
the nominal money supply equal the demand for real money
                              — 19 —


balances.
     Separating the monetary and fiscal influences on inflation
is especially difficult because fiscal deficits can be an
important influence on monetary policy. Even more confusing is
the fact that the direction of this effect seems recently to have
reversed. To sort out these complexities, it is useful to
distinguish between (a) direct inflationary effects of fiscal
deficits with unchanged monetary policy,
(b) additional inflationary effects that result from induced
monetization of fiscal deficits, and (c) the possibility of an
induced tightening of monetary policy to offset the inflationary
effects of fiscal deficits.

     For simplicity, the following analysis treats the economy as
closed. In fact, the extent, if any, to which increased American
fiscal deficits generate increased capital inflows is not
known. The following analysis, in any event, is qualitatively
correct as long as the elasticity of capital inflows with respect
to the fiscal deficit is not infinite. If, however, this
elasticity is large, the appropriate unit of analysis may be the
world economy.

     The discussion continues to focus on federal fiscal policy
and, specifically, on the choice between taxation and debt
finance of given federal government expenditures. On the basis
of the analysis developed above, it seems likely that an increase
in disposable income resulting from a tax reduction, even if
matched by increased government borrowing, is divided between an
increase in consumption demand and an increase in saving.
Because not all of the increased disposable income is saved, the
demand for financial assets increases by less than the supply of
financial assets. If monetary policy, as measured by the growth
of monetary aggregates, does not change, these shifts in demand
and supply in financial markets put upward pressure on real
interest rates and other measures of the cost of capital. In
addition, the prospect of larger future fiscal deficits creates
expectations of high future real interest rates. Such
                               — 20   —



expectations   put additional upward on current long—term real
interest rates.

     Higher real interest rates discourage investment demand. In
this context, both the response of private investment demand as
well as decisions by state and local governments to borrow to
finance investment in social capital are relevant. However, as
long as higher interest rates also make asset holders want to
shift part of their money balances into financial assets, this
primary increase in real interest rates is not sufficient to
reduce investment demand by as much as consumption demand has
increased. Consequently, the total demand for current output of
goods and services——for private consumption, for private invest-
ment, and for government purchases—-increases relative to the
total supply of goods and services. This increased total demand
causes prices to rise or to rise faster. The inflation, or extra
inflation, continues until the price level has risen high enough
to choke off total demand and to restore the initial relation
between total demand and total supply of current output.

     The process through which this inflation extinguishes itself
works mainly through the market for financial assets.  If

monetary policy remains unchanged, rising prices erode the real
value of existing money balances, forcing savers to reduce their
demands for other financial assets in an attempt to replenish
their money holdings. This continual shifting in asset demands
causes secondary increases in real interest rates, which further
depress investment demand. The adjustment process involving
rising prices and rising real interest rates continues until the
total decline in investment demand, resulting from both primary
arid secondary increases in real interest rates, exactly offsets
the initial increase in consumption demand.

     The important point is that, with monetary policy unchanged,
the tax reduction and increased borrowing alone causes only a
temporary increase in inflation, although the price level and
real interest rates are permanently increased and investment is
permanently reduced. It is also possible, however, that the
                              — 21   —



cumulative growth in the stock of public debt resulting from the
higher level of government borrowing causes further steady
increases in aggregate consumption demand. In this case, after
the intial inflationary surge, inflation remains permanently
above its initial rate producing steady tertiary increases in
real interest rates and decreases in investment demand relative
to what their levels would be otherwise.

     The preceding analysis assumed the growth of monetary
aggregates to be unchanged. Monetary policy, however, can
attempt to counter the upward pressure on real interest rates
resulting from fiscal deficits. By increasing the growth of
monetary aggregates, monetary policy can boost the demand for
financial assets. In particular, as inflation proceeds, an
expansionary monetary policy can offset the effect of rising
prices on the real value of the stock of money balances.
     The main effect of this use of monetary policy to resist the
requisite increase in real interest rates would be to prolong and
to accelerate the initial inflationary surge. The escalation of
inflation and inflationary expectations eventually would force
the imposition of monetary restraint to bring inflation under
control. In this transition, nominal interest rates ironically
would rise higher, because of the build up of inflationary
expectations, than they would have if monetary policy had not
attempted initially to resist higher real interest rates.
Investment, in any event, ends up reduced by just enough to match
the increase in consumption demand.

     Analysis of American financial institutions and historical
experience both reveal that a scenario involving increased
monetary expansion in response to federal fiscal deficits is
neither necessary nor inevitable. Recently, in fact, the Federal
Reserve in an effort to disinflate the economy has decreased
monetary expansion in the face of persistent fiscal deficits.
The reduction in the growth of monetary aggregates actually has
depressed the demand for financial assets more than enough to
bring about the higher real interest rates required to reduce
                             — 22 —


investment demand by as much as the increase in consumption
demand resulting from the tax reduction. Recent monetary policy
thus has more than offset the inflationary pressures coming from
the federal fiscal deficit. Inflation has not had to increase to
bring about the higher real interest rates required by the
federal fiscal deficit. These events demonstrate that, although
tax reductions probably give a potentially inflationary stimulus
to consumption demand, monetary policy can and does have an
independent and dominant effect on inflation.
                              — 23 —


4.   Investment and Economic Growth

     The preceding discussion makes clear that, regardless of
monetary responses and impacts on inflation, federal fiscal
deficits depress investment to the extent that they stimulate
consumption demand. The adjustment in investment results
proximately from increases in the supply of financial assets
relative to the demand for financial assets and the consequent
increases in real interest rates. One way of describing this
process is to say that fiscal deficits cause financial markets to
tighten, thereby crowding out the financing of investment
demands.

     Investment in this context includes both private investment
and debt financed investment in social capital by state and local
governments. Indeed, the effect of the federal fiscal deficit on
interest rates is a possible channel through which an increase in
the federal fiscal deficit could produce in increase in the
combined state and local fiscal surplus, The combined state and
local fiscal surplus, however, does not increase enough through
this channel alone to offset completely the increase in the
federal fiscal deficit unless all other investment demands are
insensitive to the higher real interest rates.

     The reduction in investment, although responding to
financial developments, is not essentially a financial
phenomenon. Rather, it results basically from the constraint
that the existing productive resources of the economy imposes on
the total of private consumption, private investment, and
government purchases. Given that both other government purchases
and total supply of goods and services are unchanged, a stimulus
to private consumption demand implies that the amount of existing
productive resources available for investment declines. The
financial markets serve only as the channel through which this
underlying reality is communicated to households, business firms,
and state and local governments.

     Reduced investment means less accumulation and modernization
of the capital stock. For this reason, fiscal deficits seem to
                               — 24 —


be bad for economic growth. The actual situation, however, is
not so simple, because investment by business firms, households,
and state and local governments takes a variety of forms. We can
distinguish usefully between investment in plant and equipment,
in housing, in automobiles and other consumer durables, and in
social capital.
     Each of these types of investment adds in a different way to
the economy's future potential for producing goods and
services. Specifically, investment in plant and equipment raises
measured productivity by giving labor more and better capital
with which to work, whereas investment in consumer durables and
social capital adds mainly to the economy's ability to produce
services of a form that national product accounts largely
ignore. This observation reflects the pervasive fact that
problems of measuring national product befuddle all discussions
of long—run economic growth.
     These complexities are relevant in the present context
because current federal fiscal deficits are not impacting evenly
on all types of investment. Recent reductions in federal
taxation have involved drastic liberalization of investment tax
credits and depreciation rules. These changes, while
contributing to the federal fiscal deficit, also have given a
stimulus to investment in plant and equipment and, thereby, have
helped to make real interest rates unusually high and to put a
disproportionate share of the burden of adjustment onto other
forms of investment. This shift in the pattern of investment
will mitigate the effect of current federal fiscal deficits on
future productivity and economic growth, at least as these
concepts are usually measured.
     Another important observation is that, to the extent that
the combined state and local government borrowing decreases in
response to a reduction in federal taxation that causes an
increased federal fiscal deficit, investment in social capital
declines. The size of the net contributions, if any, that these
foregone investments in social capital would make to economic
                             — 25 —


welfare is not clear. The main point, however, is that increases
in the federal fiscal deficit can have important effects even if
the increase in the combined federal and state and local fiscal
deficit is much smaller.
                                       — 26   —




5.   Incentives and Economic Growth

      Some of the recent discussion of fiscal policy has
emphasized so—called "supply—side effects", which involve mainly
the claim that high marginal tax rates reduce incentives to work
and to save. It is not clear, however, that the choice between
taxation and debt finance of given government expenditures is the
aspect of fiscal policy that is relevant for supply—side
arguments. There is in this context an important distinction
between lasting changes in incentives to work and to save more
and inducements merely to alter the timing of work and saving
decisions.

     With government expenditures unchanged, a reduction in
current tax rates, putting aside the fanciful idea that such a
change would produce more rather than less tax revenue, causes an
increase in current government borrowing and as stressed above,
an implied obligation to increase future tax rates to service the
added public debt. A reduction in current marginal tax rates on
income   from labor services,        even if it      generates expectations of
higher   future tax rates, could induce people to work more now and
to plan to work less in the future. Similarly, a reduction,
expected to be temporary, in marginal tax rates on income from
capital, could induce people to save more now and to plan to save
less in the future. These examples of changes in timing are
presumably not the major incentive effects that advocates of
supply—side fiscal policies have in mind.

     In order for reductions in marginal tax rates to produce a
lasting stimulus to work and to save, either taxpayers have to
overlook the long—run implications of current fiscal deficits or
tax reductions actually have to be permanent. The first possi-
bility may be realistic, but it depends on taxpayer ignorance
and, thus, would seem to be an unreliable basis for predicting
the effects of fiscal policy. The second possibility requires
that the tax reductions not generate a larger fiscal deficit and
more government borrowing. This outcome, in turn, requires that
matching reductions in government expenditures accompany the tax
                                 — 27   —




reductions.
     This analysis indicates that an adequate discussion of
supply—side effects has to consider not only marginal tax rates,
but also government expenditures and the fiscal deficit. If
adverse tax effects on incentives to work and to save are a
problem,    a reliable solution is not to reduce current marginal
tax rates and to add to the fiscal deficit. Such a policy would
likely have much of its effect only on the timing of work and
saving decisions. In addition, it would stimulate current
consumption, leaving less of the current supply of goods and
services available for investment. A lasting improvement in
incentives requires instead a permanent decrease in marginal tax
rates, a change that is credible only if the government matches
tax reductions with lower expenditures. A reduction in
government  expenditures would also prevent an increase in the
fiscal deficit and would enable aggregate consumption to expand
without    impinging on investment.
                              — 28 —


6.   The Current Recession
     Academic economists have difficulty comprehending the wide-
spread expressions of concern that fiscal deficits are damaging
to prospects for "economic recovery". Two misunderstandings seem
to underlie both the popular discussion and the attendant
confusion about the relation between fiscal policy and the
current economic situation.
        One understanding involves the basic causes and the
effects of the current recession. The popular discussion does
not fully appreciate that the current recession is largely an
unavoidable side effect of a deliberate tightening of monetary
policy aimed at reducing the entrenched inflation that had built
up during the 1970's.
     Both economic analysis and historical experience imply that
to reduce the actual inflation rate below the inflation rate that
people have already come to expect, monetary and fiscal policy
together must become sufficiently restrictive to depress
aggregate demand for goods and services below aggregate supply.
In the current situation, although fiscal policy has been
stimulating aggregate demand, monetary policy has been tight
enough to have a dominant disinflationary effect. Unfortunately,
a net contraction of aggregate demand also produces a recession
in aggregate economic activity. Both the rapidity with which the
inflation rate declines and the amount by which aggregate
economic activity falls below its normal trend depend directly on
the net tightness of monetary and fiscal policy.
      This analysis implies that the recent sharp reduction in the
inflation rate is directly related to the severity of the current
recession. The recession, of course, need only be a transitory
aspect of the disinflation process. If monetary and fiscal
policy together remain consistent with a reduced long—run
inflation rate, as the actual inflation rate declines and
inflationary expectations adjust to this new reality, the
economy's natural processes of recovery work to restore aggregate
demand and to bring aggregate economic activity back to its
                             — 29   —



normal growth path. The length of time that this full sequence
of recession, disinflation, and recovery takes depends on the
structural characteristics of the economy that determine the
responsiveness of inflation to aggregate demand and on the
rapidity with which inflationary expectations decline. These
dynamic factors are neither well understood nor easy to
predict. It is clear, however, that an attempt to speed up the
recovery by shifting back to a more expansionary combination of
monetary and fiscal policy risks generating a resurgence of
inflation.

     The early official projections of the Reagan Administration
envisaged only a gradual and modest reduction in inflation and
only a brief and mild accompanying recession. Both the recent
large decline in inflation and the severity of the current
recession reflect inability to make reliable macroeconomic fore-
casts and to manage aggregate demand with any degree of
precision. As the recession has worsened, however, the Reagan
Administration has welcomed the rapid reduction in inflation and,
in a departure from the behavior of its predecessors, has not
pressured the Federal Reserve to loosen monetary policy in order
to stimulate aggregate demand. The Administration has supported
continued restriction of the growth of monetary aggregates as
necessary to avoid a possible reversal of the gains against
inflation already achieved.
     This discussion suggests three main points. First, even if
the severity of the current recessions was unexpected, its main
cause, tight monetary policy, is no mystery. Second, if the
Reagan Administration and the Federal Reserve were willing to
relax or to abandon the objective of a long—run reduction in
inflation, they could reverse monetary policy and stimulate
aggregate demand enough to produce rapid improvement in aggregate
economic activity. Third, the controlling factor in the current
economic situation is that the Administration and the Federal
Reserve apparently have made a deliberate decision not to follow
this course. Instead, they seem prepared to wait out the painful
                                — 30   —



natural   adjustment process necessary to achieve sustained non-
inflationary economic growth.
     This commitment to keep monetary policy as tight as
necessary to rule out a resurgence of inflation means that other
factors, such as current and prospective fiscal policy, cannot
have more than a minor effect on aggregate demand and economic
activity. The current recession is an essential part of the
process of disinflation and the objective of sustained
disinflation is the true obstacle to rapid economic recovery.
      A second misunderstanding about the relation between fiscal
policy and the current economic situation results from a
difference between popular and academic perceptions of the
current recession. The official arbiters of the NBER define a
recession in terms of measures of aggregate economic activity.
The impact of the current recession across industries, however,
appears to be unusually uneven. The markets for housing and
consumer durables, especially automobiles, are especially
depressed, whereas activity in other sectors, especially,
services, has held up much better.
      Popular concerns about the current recession concentrate on
the weakness of demand in the depressed sectors. Politicians are
understandably more sensitive to distress expressed by con-
stituents whose livelihood come from these sectors than to
abstract measures of aggregate economic activity. Given this
narrowly defined perception of the maladies that the current
recession represents, the claim that fiscal deficits are
inhibiting recovery makes some sense.

     Fiscal deficits put upward pressure on real interest rates
and other measures of the cost of capital and, accordingly, tend
to depress investment demand. The immediate effect of the
current fiscal situation on real interest rates has been
especially pronounced both because monetary policy has tightened
to offset the inflationary effects of the federal fiscal deficit
and because the recent liberalization of investment tax credit
and   depreciation rules has given an offsetting stimulus to demand
                              — 31   —



for investment in plant and equipment. In addition to making
interest rates higher than monetary policy and the size of the
fiscal deficit alone would seem to require, these changes in tax
rules have shifted the bulk of the depressing effect of fiscal
deficit to other forms of investment, like housing and consumer
durables. Thus, it seems correct to say that fiscal policy is
responsible for the unusually uneven inter-industry impact of the
current recession and, specifically, for the especially depressed
state of the housing and consumer durahies sectors.

     The popular discussion recognizes correctly that reductions
in current and prospective fiscal deficits, brought about by a
combination of decreases in government expendi tures and increases
in taxation, would help these depressed sectors. A reversal of
the tax stimuli to investment in plant and equipment would he
especially useful in this regard. What the popular discussion
overlooks is that such changes in fiscal policy themselves would
produce a combination of decreases in government purchases an
decreases in private demands for goods and services and, thus,
only would shift the burden o.f the recession to other sectors.
Even worse, with no change in monetary policy, these decreases in
aggregate demand, associated with higher taxes and reduce3
government expenditures, probably would outweigh the immediate
increase in total investment demand resulting from reduced fiscal
deficit. The net effect on aggregate economic activity would be
negative. The key factor in this outcome is that lower interest
rates would cause asset holders to try to increase their money
balances and, thus, to reduce the velocity of circulation of the
given monetary aggregates.
      To sum up, although a decrease in real interest rates will
be one aspect of the economy's natural processes of recovery from
the recession, and although a reduction in the fiscal deficit
would cause real interest rates to decline, it does not follow
that expenditure decreases or tax increases would cause aggregate
economic activity to revive. An analogy may be instructive. As
a painful wound heals, the pain eases. Sufficient intake of
                               — 32 —


alcoholic   beverages also produces a feeling of no pain. It does
not follow, however, that getting drunk promotes healing.
     It is, of course, possible that the Federal Reserve would
loosen monetary policy somewhat to offset the probably depressing
effect of a tax increase or expenditure reduction on aggregate
economic activity. But, as stressed above, as long as monetary
policy remains committed to tight control of aggregate demand in
the interest of disinflation, aggregate economic activity cannot
increase except through the economy's natural process of
recovery. Although fiscal policy can influence the location of
the pain associated with the current recession, the recession
itself is a result not of fiscal deficits, hut of the apparent
commitment to achieve a long—run reduction in inflation.
