                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         A    FRAMEWORK FOR MONETARY AND BANKING ANALYSIS




                          Stanley Fischer



                       Working Paper No. 936




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge MA 02138


                              July 1982




The research reported here 8 part of      the   NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #936
                                                      July 1982




                                 Abstract



             A   FRAMEWORK FOR MONETARY AND BANKING ANALYSIS

                              Stanley Fischer


     The paper sets   Out and analyzes a simple model of money, banking, and

price level determination. The model is first used to illustrate recent

developments in the theory and analysis of banking, particularly the

distinction between the portfolio nanagement services provided by banks

and their provision of transactions services. The assumptions are then

extended to analyze price level determination in an economy that becomes

an inside money economy as high—powered money goes out of use. The paper

concludes by discussing the major   unresolved   questions about banking,

money, and price level determination.




Stanley Fischer
E52—280A, M.I.T.
Cambridge, Ma. 02139

(617) 253—6666
                                                                June 1982




               A FRAXEWOIK FOR MONETARY AND BANKING ANALYSIS*


                              Stanley Fischer**


     One of the benefits of monetary instability is that it reminds us, both

by inducing change in financial institutions and by bringing out the monetary

cranks, that the monetary arrangements we take for granted are not immutable.

     In this paper I set out and analyze a simple model of money, banking,

and price level determination. The model is first used to illustrate recent

developments in the theory and analysis of banking. The assumptions are then

extended to analyze price level determination in an economy becoming an inside

money economy as high—powered money goes out of use.   The paper concludes

by raising the major unresolved questions about banking, money, and price

level determination.

     The topics I shall discuss have only recently again become popular in

the United States. But they have a long history at the center of monetary

and macro—economics. The contributions of Wicksell (1936, original in 1898),

Patinkin (1965), the Radcliffe Commission (1960), Tobin (1963), and Gurley and

Shaw (1963) are the best known of the classic analyses. More recently, Black




 *This paper was delivered as the Prank Paish Lecture at the April 1982
meetings of the Association of University Teachers of Economics, in
Guildford, Surrey, England.

**Vjsiting Scholar, Hoover Institution, Stanford University, on leave from
M.I.T. I am grateful to Robert Hall, Franco Modigliani. and, much earlier,
Richard Sayers, for discussions and lectures on the topics discussed in this
paper. Olivier Blanchard, Arnold Rung and participants in a seminar at the
University of California, Davis, provided valuable comments on an earlier
draft of the paper. Jeffrey Miron's research assistance and financial support
from the Hoover Institution and the National Science Foundation are acknowledged
with thanks.
(1970), Faina (1980), and others1 haTe returned to the questions of what, if

anything, distinguishes banks froD Dther financial intermediaries, how an

inside money economy would operate, and what monetary arrangements other

than current fiat money systems might be developed.


I.     A Model of Banking and Price Level Determination

       The economy consists of househ1d, banking, and firm sectors. There

is a government in the background, -.hose only role is to make lump—sum

transfer payments to households, thereby augmenting the stock of high-powered

money. Households maximize utility over infinite lifetimes. Firms maximize

profits. So too do banks.2

       The   goods produced by firms are either bought by households or invested
by firms, financed by banks. Purchases of goods by households are not costless.
The purchases can be made either by using currency, together with labor,3 or
by using the services of a bank. The bank charges per unit transaction,, and
uses capital, reserves, and labor in its production process.

The Household: The representative household, infinitely lived but not
growing, has a given amount of labor, L, allocated between    work for pay, and

time   spent making purchases.   Thus4


(1)          Lc+<L

1.     See Hall (1982) for further reference.
2. The model is similar to that in Fischer (1972).
3. The assumption that no capital is used by the household in making
currency transactions is made pirely for simplicity.
4. Time subscripts are omitted wherever possible.
                                             .3


Here Lc is the amount of labor used in making purchases with currency, and

       is work for pay. Work for pay is done either in the banking sector, in

amount LB, or in the production of goods, in amount L.


 (2)
                L=LB+LP
         The households may hold either high—powered money for use as currency,

 in real amount HC/P, or deposits, of real value B. Households do not hold

capital directly. Household wealth, A, is thus:

                            H,,
 (3)


        Households purchase an amount of consumption goods, C. The purchase of a

consumption good requires the use of transactions services in making payment. The

transactions services are provided by the households, and one unit of transactions

services    is needed per unit of the consumption goods purchased.
                              H
 (4)            C =
                      f(Lc,       + g

                H
Here
        f(Lc,   —i)
                       is   the amount of transactions made through the intermediation

of currency, and g the amount made through the intermediation of the bank.5 Thus

the total number of units of transactions services is equal to the number of units

of consumption goods bought. Equation (4) describes the transactions costs for

making purchases; in addition, the household has to give up resources to pay

for    the goods.
        The households flow budget constraint is:


 (5)



The rate of increase in wealth is equal to income minus spending. Income

consists of wages plus real interest on deposits, plus lump—sum transfers



5. The proportional costs of transacting are a special assumption whose
relaxation may account for some special features of the banking industry.
                                            4




(x) from the government. In (5), w is the wage rate and rB the deposit

interest rate. For simplicity, it is assumed that no transactions costs

are incurred in the receipt of income. This assumption can easily be

removed, at the cost of introducing more variables without any compensating

insights. Spending goes to pay the bank for making transactions, where

is the unit cost of a transaction service; for holding possibly depreciating

currency, where TF   is   the rate of inflation; and for the purchase of consumption

goods. Note that there is an implicit assumption that wealth accumulation is

transformed costlessly into either currency or bank deposits. This assumption

is reasonable if payments are received in bank deposits or currency——but there

is an extra assumption that transactions between currency and bank deposits

are costless. These costs too could be modeled, but without providing much

insight.

      The representative household maximizes



                                       dt
(6)        V( )   = : UCte_6t

subject to the above constraints, where U(C) is concave and at least twice

differentiable, and       is the discount rate.

      Setting up the Lagrangean



(7)        =                                                         )-g)

           —                   —   x                    dt,
               X4(A_w_rBB                       +C)}e
optimizing, assuming an interior opzimuri, and rearranging the resulting

necessary first—order conditions, we obtain


            U'(C) =
(8)
                       4(1      + p3)


(9)



(10)        B2 = rB         + iT




(11)               =   3   —
                               rB


From (8) and (11):



           -— = — (r
           U"C                  — ______
(11)                                1+

       The interpretation of (8) through (11)T is straightforward. The

effective cost of a unit of consumption goods is not one (in real terms)

but one plus the transaction cost needed to acquire it——hence (8).

Equations (9) and (10) say that labor and wealth should be efficiently

allocated to the making of transactions using currency, relative to the

alternative of letting the bank do it.

       Equation (11)' is the standard dynamic equation for consumption.

Consumption is increasing so long as the real interest rate measured in
                                                              p
terms of the effective price of consumption goods (rB —
                                                          1   +B ) exceeds
                                                          PB
the rate of time preference. To choose its optimal rate of onsumption,

the household has to form expectations of future interest rates, wages,

and prices of transaction services.
                                         6




Banks: Banks do two things in this economy. First, they act as financial inter-

mediaries. They hold all the non—currency assets of households, using them to

buy claims on the capital used by production firms. Second, they provide

transactions services, making payments as demanded by the households.

       I assume there are constant returns to scale in banking, so that it is

possible to talk of a representative bank.6 The production function for trans-

action services is


(12)        g =    (L_, K_.
                         lYp'_
where KB is the amount of capital used in banking, and HB/P is the amount of

high—powered money held by the bank. Transactions services are produced

using the bank's physical capital—-its building and its computers——along with

labor and high—powered money. I assume for now that high—powered money is

used by the bank in making payments, and that depositors can obtain high-powered

money at a guaranteed price in exchange for deposits. There are no required

reserves: banks hold reserves because that is an efficient way for them to

provide transactions services.

        The bank's balance sheet is



(13)
            B=+%+KB
where       is the amount of capital used in production of good.s, equal to the loans

banks have made to goods—producing firms.

       Bank profits are


                                  H              H
                                            —
(14)              =
                      PB(LB,   KB, _) — wLB     11 - + rK   —
                                                                rBB


6. Given the economies provided by the law of large numbers, constant
returns to scale cannot be expected to hold at all scales. The assumption
is that returns to scale are constant beyond some scale that is small
relative to the market.
                                               7




The bank receives revenue from the sale of transactions services and from

interest on its loans to goods—producing firms, made at the market rate, r.

It makes wage payments, interest payments to depositors, and it suffers

capital losses on its holdings of reserves.

       The individual bank sells transactions services at price B' attracts

deposits at interest cost rB, and chooses its optimal level of loans to

firms. Because returns to scale are constant, the size of the bank is

indeterminate, in two respects. First, the amount of transactions services

sold is indeterminate. Second, so is the size of the portfolio. Competition

and constant returns to scale i1l determine prices and rates of return, and

demand conditions will determine the volume of real deposits and loans.

       Substituting (13) into (14) and maximizing with respect to K, the size

of the bank's holdings of productive assets, yields the first order condition

(15)         rB =   r.
Since the bank does not itself control these rates, we should interpret (15)

as a competitive market equilibrium condition. Equilibrium requires that

the deposit rate be equal to the return on capital.

       In addition, a zero profit condition for the bank is that the price of the

transaction service be equal to its cost:


(16)
             B WiB       +   (+   r)   + rkB



where 9,., hB, k are per—transaction levels of the equivalent uppercase

variables.
                                    8




       The pricing rules (15) and (16) are the right rules for banks to use.

Using these pricing rules will ensure those making more transactions face

the appropriate costs.7 In particular, since reserves are held for making

transactions, depositors should be charged for their indirect use of reserves

by a transactions charge, rather than by a reduction in the interest rate on

deposits. And the pricing rules ensure that factors of production are

efficiently allocated among sectors. Note in particular that the interest

rate on deposits is not reduced by a proportion reflecting holding of

reserves. If on the other hand, there were legal reserve requirements,

competition would reduce the rate on deposits appropriately. Or if there

were costs associated with portfolio management, those would be appropriately

reflected in the deposit rate.

       From (14), we derive the first—order conditions



(17)



                 r
(18)
                 PB


                 rB + 11
(19)




These conditions can only determine factor proportions; scale is determined

by demand.




7. This has been emphasized by Black (1975).
                                   9




     Now the formulation of the pricing rules (15) and (16) throws light on

one of the central tenets of the tnewtI banking theory: There is no necessary

connection here between the portfolio and the transactions aspects of the

bank. The bank could set itself up with two divisions: the portfolio

division and the transactions division. The portfolio division receives

deposits and holds as its assets, capital in goods—producing firms and loans

to the transactions division, for which it charges the market interest rate

r. The transactions division in turn rents capital and high—powered money

to make transactions, and repays the portfolio division out of the proceeds

of its charges.

     The clean separation of the portfolio and transactions divisions in the

model reflects the assumption underlying the production function (12) that

there is no link between the provision of the transactions services and the

individual's bank deposits. Nothing in the set—up of the entire model so

far has tied transactions together with the ownership of bank deposits. It

is of course possible to imagine institutions that make   transactions   without

requiring any corresponding asset holdings. The postal giro system is the

most important example. A company making C.O.D. deliveries is another.

And, to go a little further, credit card companies make transactions while

providing credit, rather than requiring the user of their services to main-

tain an asset balance. Overdraft banking, not a common American institution,

operates similarly.
                                        10




       It is not obvious what advantages there are to particular bundlings of

financial transactions, nor why national practices appear to differ. The bank

that manages its transactions customers' assets presumably is better informed

about the ability of the customer to pay than is a credit card company; this

may be the reason that banks have traditionally combined the transactions

and asset management functions. Or it may be that the transactions costs

for banks of transferring claims are lower when one of the claims to be

transferred is       deposit with the bank.


Production Firms: There are again constant returns to scale. Firms

maximize profits


(20)           =
                   F(L,   ) - wL    —
                                        r5
where F(L K) is a neoclassical production function. Maximization leads

of course to


(21)        F1 = w


(22)        F2=r

       The firm's total output goes either to consumption or investment:8


(23)                      =k+   c
            F(L, 5)




8.  Note that the firm's transactions costs have been omitted. It is
relatively straightforward to include them.
                                                  11


Instantaneous   Equilibrium: Given the rate of consumption, C, equilibrium

is determined by



                         B                                                     rE
(24)
                                  rB+ + i(w,r)F(                 )   +               rB+] = L
            L4--                                                         B[p
                                           r          r +r
            k(w,r)F( ) +                         '               ]g = K
(25)
                                  ['                       PB



(26)           —
            Hc w         rB rB.
                         —
                                   B
                                         +—hB
                                                 1'

                                                                rB ______
                                                                —    rB+Tr     = H
                                                                                 P


                     H
(27)
             f(Lc,
                     )+       g(L I(3 ---)
                                                      =   C



(28)        F(L, 1(r) =
                              C   + k


(29)        r=rB
                                           + r)
(30)        B ZBW + kBr +

Lowercase letters are per unit—output demand functions of corresponding
uppercase letters.
       Equations (24)        through    (26)   are,        respectively, equilibrium conditions ifl
the    markets for labor, capital, and high-powered money. Equation (27) ensures
that sufficient transactions services are provided to purchase the given
quantity of consumption goods; (28) accounts for the disposition of output;
and (29) and (30) are banking industry equilibrium conditions. The seven
equations,    together with (9)—(lO), (17)—(l9), (21)—(22), and given C, B'

and x, the rate of monetary transfers, are sufficient                          to determine all
variables of interest.9

9.     These are: r, rB, w, B' f( ),                  g,      K, Lc,       LB 5' I<B   HB/P and HcIP.
                                     12




     One question to be considered is whether the solution allows for positive

quantities of both real currency and bank deposits. In particular, it is

possible that the banking technology dominates the private technology for

making transactions, and that only banks are used for that purpose.    Whether

this is so is a technical matter, depending on the marginal cost of making the

first transaction through the home (currency) technology compared with the

cost of making that transaction using the bank. In this section I assume

there is an interior solution; in section III I assume the banking technology

may eventually dominate.

     It remains to discuss the determinants of the rate of consumption, C, and

and the rate of inflation, iT.   For any given expected paths of the real

interest rate, rB(t), rate of change of B' and inflation rate ir(t), the rate

of consumption is obtained from the consumer's optimization problem and

conditions (8)—(11)'. In a full perfect foresight equilibrium, the rate of

consumption and the resulting rates of inflation and interest will be

consistent with the expectations under which the consumption path was chosen.

It is well known that convergence of such paths in a monetary economy is a

difficult issue, but it is not one on which I wish to focus.

     I shall instead assume that the economy converges to a steady state,

the characteristics of which we now examine. All relative prices are

constant, as are all quantities. The real interest rate is determined by

the rate of time preference, and is equal to .     The inflation rate is

determined by the rate of growth of the money stock, denoted U and concealed

hitherto in x, the rate of transfer payments. The aggregate capital stock

is such that the marginal product of capital in both banking and production

of goods is equal to 5. The real value of high—powered money is determined

by demand, as in equation (26).
                                        13



Price   Level Determination

     Price level determination in this economy is entirely conventional. The

nominal quantity of high—powered money is fixed exogenously; the real quantity

and therefore the price level is endogenous, given the inflation rate.

     But we have also to recognize that the issue of price level determination

is put here in a very specific way. We have implicitly defined the price

level as the exchange rate between consumption goods and high—powered money.

That appears to suggest high—powered money is the numeraire. However,

nothing in the model ensures that it is the numeraire. Indeed, most variables

in the analysis are defined in real terms, suggesting that perhaps the

consumption good is the numeraire. In any event, it is necessary to note

that there is nothing in this analysis, or in most monetary analyses, that

determines the choice of nulneraire. Yet in talking about price level deter—

minacy, long a major concern of monetary analysis, we are typically asking

what determines prices in terms of the numeraire.

     High—powered money is neutral in that changes in its stock, with the

growth rate of money given, result in proportional changes in the price

level. High—powered money is not superneutral in that changes in the growth

rate of money affect real balances, thereby change the amounts of labor and

capital devoted to making transactions, and affect the steady—state level

of consumption. The presumption is that an increase in the steady—state

inflation rate reduces the steady—state.rate of consumption. More of the

capital   stock is drawn into   the banking industry and the aggregate physical

capital   stock   may either rise or fall.
                                          14




II. Money as Medium     of Transactions
       In this section I comment on the role of money in the above analysis,

and on topics on which the model throws some light.

       There is no real need in the above analysis to define the stock of money.

Indeed, there is nothing that suggests the concept is one we need think about.

The price level is determined by the stock of high—powered nney, given real

variables including the inflation rate. But real variables do affect the

price level and there is no exact sense in which inflation could be described

as a purely (high-powered) monetary phenomenon. It may, however, be useful

to focus on high—powered money as the most likely source of major inflations,

in that    the real variables in   the system do not ordinarily vary enough to

generate    large—scale aggregate price movements.
       The implied institutional arrangements in which all non—currency
household assets are deposits leave little room for definitions of the money

stock other than all possible combinations of household and bank holdings

of currency, and deposits. If the transactions technology were modeled in

more   detail, it   might turn   Out to be   efficient for the banking system to

get depositors who plan to make frequent transfers to signal their intentions

by segregating certain assets into a particular account. In such a situation

it begins to be possible to identify as money a collection of assets that

are held for transactions purposes, and that are close substitutes for each

other.

       Whether a particular definition is useful depends on its use. The

definition may be useful for understanding price level or income determination.

Or it may be useful for formulating monetary policy         rules. But the logical
procedure    is not to formulate a monetary policy rule in terms of the      stock of
                                          15



money and then cast around for the best definition, but rather to formulate

a rule in terms of existing and potential categories of assets and then see

whether that can sensibly be interpreted as a money rule.

       In this model, the stock of high—powered money is the exogenous nominal

variable, the quantity of which ultimately determines the price level. But

that analytical fact has no direct policy consequencs. If other classes of

assets were close substitutes for high—powered money, and if the composition

of the aggregate of those assets and high—powered money fluctuated, it would

be more stabilizing for the price level to target the aggregate than the

stock of high-powered money. Such a monetary ruAe is an efficient way of

adjusting the nominal supply of high-powered money for shifts in the real

demand.


Money and Consumption Loans: The model outlined above imposes the view that

currency     is used for naking transactions, and that it is different from
bonds. Transactions do not happen costlessly and require the intermediation
of currency and labor, or of a resource—using bank. This view differs from
that   implicit in the frequent use of the consumption loans model as the basic

monetary model.

       In   the   conventional consumption loans overlapping generations model,

there   is no inefficience in the nontnonetary equilibrium if individuals are
effectively infinitely lived. Thus the usual demonstration of the usefulness
of   money in the finite horizon versions of the model is a result of the role

of money in making possible previously inpossible intergenerational transfers.

This is a restrictive view of the intermediation role of money, and one that

is avoided in the present setup by requiring the use of transactions services
                                                    16



in transactions between households and firms. But there would be no diffi-

culty in requiring the use of transactions services in the making of current

transactions in the overlapping generations model——and doing so might

help distinguish the roles of nney and bonds in such models)0


The Optimum Quantity of Money: In the model of Section I, in which taxes are

nondistorting and the government determines the inflation rate by the rate of

its monetary transfers, the optimal rate of inflation is equal to the negative

of the real interest rate. This result assumes that both real currency

holdings and real reserves are productive at the margin in enabling households

and banks to economize on other transactions-producing resources.

      As is well known, there are two potential difficulties with the optimum

quantity of money prescription. First, there may be no nondistorting taxes

available. In that case, the taxes that are levied to reduce the money

stock will be distorting, and it will probably be advisable to stop short

of the optimum. Second, the menu costs of changing absolute prices may be

higher at a negative than at a zero inflation rate.

       Other   considerations also give cause for thought before action is
taken to provide the optimum quantity of money by deflating.              One is that

we know very little about how a system would work with capital and real

money holdings earning approximately the same real return. In models in

which the real interest rate is not tied down by the rate of time preference——

for instance in overlapping generations models with both money and capital——


10. Wallace (1981) has attempted to differentiate between the roles of money
and bonds in a simple form of the consumption loans model. It may be useful
to add that some criticisms of the consumption loans model as a basis for
monetary theory take the model too literally. The two—period setup is a
convenient simplification, not an assumption that all contracts are made for
25 years. Most of the results of interest go through if there are 50 periods
per person, rather than two.

11. Drazen (1979), Weiss (198 )
                                     17




the increasing attractiveness of money may displace capital accumulation as

the inflation rate falls. This suggests that the optimum may be short of

full liquidity. Second, there may be other ways of achieving the same

goals. If interest could be paid on currency and on reserves, the optimum

quantity of money can be achieved without deflating. There is certainly

no technical difficulty in paying interest on reserves——which leaves only

currency as the source of the inefficiency that the optimum quantity of

money literature seeks to correct.


Fiat and Commodity Monies: The creation of high—powered money in the model

of Section I uses no real resources. There is no economic case for using

a commodity that is costly to produce as the medium of transactions, so long

as the monetary authority is well behaved. The case for using a commodity

money turns entirely on the propensity of monetary authorities to misuse fiat

money systems. But if it is possible to impose by law a commodity money

system, then it should be possible by law to impose a fiat money system that

achieves the same behavior of the monetary base as would a commodity money

system.

     By a commodity money system I mean one in which the commodity itself

is used as currency or as high—powered money. I do not mean a system in

which all prices are in effect indexed to the price of some commodity or

commodity basket, while the monetary system continues to operate with a

costlessly produced medium of exchange.


The Currency Monopoly: It has been assumed so far that there is a single

asset, issued by the government, that serves as both hand—to-hand currency
                                          18



and reserves. Reserves are kept bo:h to facilitate transactions the bank
makes and because it is assumed that depositors have a claim on high-powered
                                                                     States
money, and not because reserves are required. Reserves in the United
are no doubt much higher than they would be without reserve requirements,

but they would not disappear     if   the requirements were removed.

        While   currency is used for some transactions, the model is consistent
with    payment through banks being made by the transfer of claims on capital.

A deposit holder in one bank who makes payment to a depositor in another

bank does not care how his bank settles the debt——and if claims on capital

are easily transferable, they are one possible medium for doing so.

       I defer to later the question of whether there are better monetary

arrangements, possibly not built around the premise that currency continues

to be   used and is an obligation of the government.     In the next section I

allow   the systen to operate as a purely inside money economy, and discuss
issues of monetary efficiency in that context.

III. Technical Progress in 3ankin&
                                                                   that the
        Assume now that there is technical progress in banking, so

production function becomes


(12)         g(t) =    1(t)(t),    2(t)(t), p3(t)         (t))



with pjt) increasing through time for t > 0.         Assume that the economy was


in steady state at time zero, with oons:ant stock of high—powered money and

no technical progress takThg place or expected.       The price level was constant.
                                      19




       Once techni:al progress gets under way, the price level likely begins

to rise,12 as the dernand for both reserves and currency falls. The demand

forreserves is likely to fall for cne nain reason that is not explicitly
modeled: the proportion of transactions carried out with currency is falling,
and the call for banks to provide hgb—powered money to their depositors in
exchange for deposits is likely to fall.       Banks!   desired reserve ratio will
fall.
        The declining demand for real high-powered money will generate ongoing

inflation, so long as    the money sup?l' is kept constant. Because      real high—

powered money is productive, the prDs?ect of continuing inflation need not

necessarily cause an imnediate flight out of the currency. There is instead

a continuing decline in   the   real value   of currency and a continuing increase
in    the proportion of transactions carried out using bank deposits.

        Such a process need not cause nilation. The monetary fiscal authority

canlevy taxes that reduce the noney su:ply at just the rate that will
maintain the orce level constant. Now, what is the limiting behavior of
the real stock of high—powered nonei during this process, in which monetary!
fiscal policy maintains the price level (in terms of units of high—powered
money) constant?
        That is entirely a technical question, dependent on the details of the
transactions technologies represented by (12)' and the function f(        )




describing the household's use of     currency   and labor for making transactions.



12. The qualifier is included ecase unbalanced technical progress could
increase the banks' demand for reserves as the demand for bank transactions
services rises.
                                       20



It   is possible that the banking transactions technology becomes so efficient

that no transactions are made through currency. Currency is no longer used

and nor therefore are reserves.

      The system ends up in this case as a purely inside money system.

Payment is made entirely through the banking system, which transfers claims

on capital to settle claims among depositors. These claims on capital are

of course serving as the mediun of transactions.


Price   Level Determination: How is the price level determined in this inside
money economy? We have first to clarify the question, which is rather two
questions. First, in what      units will prices   be quoted, or   what is the

numeraire? And    second,   given the nuineraire, what determines the level at

which prices settle in terms of the numeraire?

      There is nothing in the analysis that provides an answer to the first

question, of what is the numeraire. The natural question we asked in

Section I was what was the exchange rate between high—powered money and

consumption goods. But now there is no high—powered money, and there are

no transactions taking place that enable us to answer the question.

        It is possible that the memory of the stable price level that existed

when currency was a medium of exchange is powerful enough to leave the
                                                                                 13
currency as the unit of account, like the famous ghost monies of Europe.

As Patinkin (1965) has emphasized, the unit of account need not exist. An

alternative is that one good in the system could be adopted as the unit of

account. Or a basket of goods could become the unit of account. Most



13. Cipolla (1967)
                                  21




likely bank deposits, which are serving as medium of transactions, would

become the numeraire. Bank deposits might be denominated in terms of claims

on capital.

     Given the numeraire, it is possible to discuss the determination of

the price level. Going back to the model of Section I, which previously

had fourteen equations in fourteen variables, we no longer have any high—

powered money in the system, and there are therefore thirteen equations.

We cannot any longer determine P, the exchange rate between high—powered

money and consumption goods. But all other prices and quantities of

interest are determinate. If bank deposits, denominated in units of claims

on capital, are the numeraire, then all prices can be stated in terms of

that numeraire. The price level is completely determinate in terms of

that variable. There is no obvious difficulty, indeterminacy or instability,

in the operation of the economy described in Section III, beyond the

indeterminacy of the numeraire.

     But that does not appear to be a serious difficulty. The medium of

exchange for that economy is, by assumption, bank deposits. The question

of how economic agents write their price tags does not appear to have

important consequences. And of course, economic agents in such an economy

would find themselves using some numeraire. The failure of the model to

discover what that nuineraire is reflects on the model, not on the working

of the real world.

     This is not to deny that it is possible to imagine price level indeter—

minacy in an inside money economy, given the numeraire. Wicksell (1936)

invented one such economy. The basic source of price level indeterminacy
                                     22



in    that economy is the rule for money   creation——that the stock of money
increases when the bank loan rate is below the natural interest rate. But

that indeterminacy has nothing necessarily to do with an inside money

economy. The same problem would occur with that money supply rule in an

outside money economy.

       Price level indeterminacy is possible in an inside money economy——but

it is also possible ,in an outside noney economy. And, given the numeraire,

price level determinacy is possible in both inside and outside money

economies as well.


IV.    Further Considerations
Will Currency    Disappear? Currency/income ratios have fallen in most of

the developed economies in the last thirty years, but not much in Germany

and Japan. The striking feature of the classic hyperinflations was that

currency continued to be used in those economies despite the costs of

holding    currency. Currency is a convenient way of making small trans-
actions that appears unlikely to disappear soon.
       I do not believe that the shift to a complete inside money pure
banking method of transacting is close. Rather currency will likely con—
tinue to decline in importance as alternative means of making payments
become cheaper. This raises     several issues.


Competitive   Provision of Currency: Eistorically, monetary systems have
developed    to the point where the state is a monopoly issuer of currency.

Recent research on competitive provision of money (Klein, 1974, Hayek,

1978, Taub, 1982) has discussed the cuestion of whether competition alone
                                  23




is sufficient to ensure efficiency in the provision of fiat monies.

     There are two questions. First, if the supplier has to guarantee con-

vertibility of his currency into a commodity or dominant currency, will

efficienty ensue? Second, can purely unregulated issuers of currency

without convertibility guarantees emerge, and usefully so? The insights

of Auerheimer (1974) and Calvo (1978) that governments maximizing inflation

tax revenue have an incentive to be dynamically inconsistent appear to carry

over to private profit-maximizing currency issuers who provide no conver-

tibility guarantee. But this means such institutions will not get off the

ground.

     It is entirely possible, though, that with a requirement of conver-

tibility into a dominant currency, competition among private currency issuers

will not be harmful. If the monetary authority were well behaved there would

be little to gain from private issues of currency, for proliferation of

private currencies would inevitably require increased attention to the

credit standing of the issuer, and to possible forgeries. If, however,

monetary authorities continue to keep the cost of using government currency

high, private provision of currency with some mechanism for ensuring a

slower depreciation rate than that of government currency, would be beneficial.


Alternative Monetary Systems and Indexation:   A variety of monetary reforms

are described in Hall (1982). The schemes are based on Fisher's (1934) plan

for stabilizing the dollar by adjusting its value in terms of a price index.

All contracts would be made in tertis of dollars, but the value of the dollar

would be specified in terms of goods. In essence these come down to schemes

for compulsory indexation.
                                    24




     Since the economy has not been prevented from indexing itself, the

question arises why compulsory indexatiort is desirable. The answer is that

a partially indexed system triay be worse than a nonindexed system. But a

fully indexed system may perform better than a nonindexed system.

     The reason a simultaneous compulsory move to indexation may be needed

is that many institutions and individuals will only want to switch if both

assets and liabilities become indexed at the same time. Financial inter-

mediaries prefer to hedge by holding assets of similar risks to their

liabilities. Households will only be willing to borrow indexed if their

income streams are indexed. Of course, such a switch would in a modern

economy require major governmental action, including indexing of the

national debt and the tax system.

     The question of determinacy of the price level in a fully indexed system

is similar to that of the determinacy of the price level in the inside money

economy of Section III. To know the price level, it is necessary to know

the numeraire. In a fully indexed system the numeraire might well be a

consumption basket. In that case, the fully indexed economy would have a

determinate price level.

     But it is more likely that indexation introduced in the near future

would still leave currency as a nominal asset. Control over the quantity

of currency would then still keep the price level, in terms of dollars per

consumption good, determinate. If technical change in banking were to

continue, the demand for currency would fall over time. A question of some

interest is whether control over the price level is reduced as the currency!

income ratio falls. There seems to be no a priori answer to this, beyond a
                                      25




skepticism   that little tails can wag big dogs. But it would be true in such

a system that the smaller the currency/income ratio, the less important was

the inflation rate as a real economic variable. Indexation might well make

the price level IrDre unstable, but instability with indexation would on

average be preferable to re price level stability with less indexation.


International Aspects: A svsten in wnich all domestic prices were indexed

and   there were no outside money appears difficult to operate at the
international level. But there is no great difficulty. Banks would be
transferring claims on different assets-—in the setup of Section III an
American wishing to purchase British goods would instruct his bank to
transfer ownership over his deposits -orth the appropriate amount to the

account of the 3ritish exporter. The exchange rate, instead of being one

between currencies, would be between ?articular assets.


Residual   Doubts: Descriptions of alternative monetary systems, indexed
economies, ghost monies, and the like are at a minimum entertaining and
mind—stretching.    But they   do leave doubts. The doubts arise from the
difficulty   of explaining the apparent advantages of using nominal prices

and the question of what economic ftiriction inflation serves in current

economies. We quote prices in the currency of circulation, and this is

not an isolated phenomenon—it is premisely because the exceptions are

rare that the guinea and other ghos: monies are so celebrated. And we do not

have a good explanation yet of why noninal prices appear to be sticky.

Possibly the use of the currency an± nominal pricing provide some information

or other service that we ha7e as ye: not    identified.
                                   26




     Residual doubts about our understanding of monetary systems are a good

thing, but they are not an excuse for regarding each irtonetary system as the

best of all possible worlds until it evolves, by accident or design, into

the next one.14 Better to think about the design beforehand, taking into

account the likelihood that piecemeal improvement may be less effective

than system-wide changes.




14. A contrary view is contained in the warning of Sir Robert Giffen (1892,
p. 471), "I hardly think that of late years the enormous practical dangers of
meddling with a settled monetary system, which hardly any theoretical gain
would compensate, have been sufficiently realized by our younger economists,
fresh from the universities and but little acquainted with the conditions of
money and business, and I trust that what has been said here will be of some
use as a caution.'1 Giffen was objecting at the time to a proposal that paper
pounds be issued, redeeble into bullion of fixed real value. This idea is
essentially that adopted later by Irving Fisher.
                                      27



                                  References



Auerheimer, Leonardo (1974). "The cnest     Government's     Guide to the Revenue

     from the Creation of Money." Jcirna1 of Political Economy vol. 82

     (May/June), pp. 593-605.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto (1981). "Aspects     of   Monetary and Banking Theory and

    Moral Hazard." Uritublished, Stanford.

Black, Fischer (1970). "Banking arc! Interest Rates in a World Without

    Money." Journal of Bank Research. vol. 1 (Auturiwi), pp. 8—20.

Black, Fischer (1975). "Bank Finds anagement in an Efficient Market." Journal

    of Financial Econonics, vol. 2 (Der.), pp. 323—39.

Black, Fischer (1981). "A Cold Standard with Double Feedback and Near Zero

     Reserves." Unpublished, M.I.T.

Bryant, John (1981). "The Competitii.-e ?rovision of Fiat Money," Journal of

     Banking and Finance1 vol. 5, pp. 537—593.

Calvo, Guillermo (1978). "On the ie Consistency of Optimal Policy in a

     Monetary Economy." Econoretrica. vol. 6 (Nov.), pp. 1411—1428.

Cipolla, Carlo (1967) .   Money, Prices and Civilization in the Mediterranean

     World. Gordian Press, Ne York.

Committee on the Working of the Monetary System (1960), "Radcliffe Report."

     Her Majesty's Stationary Office, London.

Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig (19El). "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance,

     and Liquidity." Working Paper 6L, Graduate School of Business,

     University of Chicago.

Drazen, Allan (1979). "The Optiuz ate of Inflation Revisited."           Journal

     of Monetary Econonics. vol. 5 (pril), pp. 231—248.

Fatna, Eugene (1980). 'Banking in the Theory      of   Finance." Journal of Monetary

     Economics. vol. 6 (Nov.), pp. 35—57.
                                 28




Fischer, Stanley (1972). "Money, Income and Welfare." Journal of Econom.c

     Theory.. vol. 4 (April), PP. 289—311.

Fisher, Irving (1934). Stable Money. Adeiphi Company, New York.

Giffen, Robert (1892). "Fancy Monetary Standards." Economic Journal.

     vol. 2, pp. 463—471.

Gurley, J. G. and E. S. Shaw (1963). Money in a Theory of Finance.

    Washington, D.C.

Hall, Robert (1982). "Monetary Trends inthel.Jnited States and the United

     Kingdom: A Review from the Perspective of New Developments in

    Monetary Economics." Unpublished, Stanford.

Hayek, F. A. (1978). Denationalisation of Moy. Institute of Economic

     Affairs, London.

Klein, Benjamin (1974). "The Competitive Supply of Money." Journal of

     Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 6 (Nov.), pp. 423—453.

Patinkin, Don (1965). Money, Interest and Prices. Harper and Row, New York.

Sargent, Thomas and Neil Wallace (1981). "The Real Bills Doctrine vs. the

     Quantity Theory: A Reconsideration." Staff Report #64, Federal

     Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Taub, Bart (1982). "Private Competitive Fiat Money." Discussion Paper #120,

     University of Virginia.

Tobin, James (1963). "Commercial Banks as Creators of Money." In Dean

     Carson, ed., Banking and Monetary Studies (Irwin, Homewood, IL), pp. 408—419.

Wallace, Neil (1981). "A Modigliani—Miller Theorem for Open—Market Operations."

     American Economic Review, vol. 71       (June), pp. 267—274.

Weiss, Laurence (1980). "The Role for Active Monetary Policy in a Rational

     Expectations Model." Econometrica, vol. 48 (April), pp. 565—576.

Wicksell, K. (1936), Interest and Prices (London).
