NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TORTS IN WHICH VICTIM AND INJURER ACT SEQUENTIALLY

Steven Shavell

Working Paper No. 939

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

July 1982

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Law and Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #939
July 1982

Torts in Which Victim and Injurer
Act Sequentially
ABSTRACT

The effect of liability rules on accident avoidance is

studied in two types of situations in which potential

victims and potential injurers act sequentially: those
where victims act first and injurers second; and those where

the reverse is true. What is of special interest about the
working of liability rules in such sequential situations is
that the party who acts second behaves in response to the

party who acts first, and that the party who acts first

takes this into account. The major result shown is that
liability rules induce optimal behavior provided that they

lead the party who acts second to act optimally if and only

if the first party did so. In an important extension of the
basic model considered, however, this result may not hold.

Steven Shavell
Harvard University Law
Langdell 260
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 495—7920

School

7/82

Torts in Which

Victim

and Injurer Act Sequentially

S. Shavell*

I.

Introduction

This article will study the effect of liability rules
on accident avoidance in situations where potential victims

and potential injurers act sequentiaiiyJ Two types of
these sequential situations are possible: those where
victims act first and injurers2 second; and those where the

reverse is true. The cases of Davies v. Mann3 and Topping
v. Oshawa Railway,4 for instance, provide illustrations of
both types of situations, as in the former case the victim
Davies left his donkey fettered on a road and Mann later
came along the road and ran the animal down; while in the
latter case a truck halted on streetcar tracks and then the
"victim" streetcar traveling down the tracks failed to avoid
a collision that resulted in injury to its passengers.
Other examples of situations where the victim and the injurer
acted sequentially are easily adduced;5'6 on reflection,
such situations do not seem to be at all infrequent.

In the analysis below of sequential situations, a simple

model of accidents will be considered.7 In this model,
parties are assumed to have full knowledge of accident

2

risks and to take the actions that are in their financial

self-interest given the applicable liability rule. Four
liability rules are studied: the negligence rule with the
defense of contributory negligence; this rule without the
defense; the comparative negligence rule; and strict liability
with a defense of contributory negligence.

What will be of special interest about the working of
liability rules in the model is two-fold--that the party who
acts second behaves in response to the party who acts first,
and that the party who acts first will take the response of
the party who acts second into account.8

This can be illustrated, and the main points of the

article indicated, by a brief discussion of Davies. The
decision in the case was that despite Davies' contributory
negligence in leaving his donkey on the road, he should
succeed in his action for negligence against Mann because,

in now familiar terms, Mann had the "last clear chance" to

prevent harm yet did not try to do so. Use of this doctrine
to defeat a defense of contributory negligence is often

noted to have two opposing effects on accident avoidance:
parties like Mann will be induced to avoid running down
fettered animals;9 but because parties like Davies would be
expected to anticipate such behavior, they will not be
properly motivated to fetter their animals safely in the

first place)0 The suggestion, therefore, is that the
relative strengths of these two opposing effects will determine

3

whether it is desirable to make the defense of contributory
negligence unavailable.

In the model, however, availability of the defense of
contributory negligence in cases where the victim acts first

is generally desirable. To see why, notice that given
the availability of the defense, victims like Davies would
realize that if they acted in a contributorily negligent way
and exposed their animals to risk, injurers like Mann would
not fear liability for negligence and would therefore have

no motive to avoid running the animals down. In consequence, victims like Davies would find it best to take
appropriate care; and given their non-negligent behavior,
injurers like Mann would be liable for harm negligently done
and would therefore have a motive not to run down such

animals as were still exposed to risk. In other words, both
victims and injurers would be induced to act appropriately
if a defense of contributory negligence were available.

(The more general point is that optimal behavior will result
under a liability rule provided that it leads the second

party to take care if and only if the first party took
care.)

Yet it is plain that the argument leading to this

conclusion could not necessarily be made if for some reason
such as failure to perceive risk certain victims might not

take care whatever the liability rule. Specifically, availability of the defense of contributory negligence might then
induce certain injurers too not to take care; for whenever

4

victims would not take care, injurers would decide not to

take care. Thus, availability of the defense of contributory
negligence might turn out to be undesirable. (The more
general point here is that a liability rule which induces
the second party to take care regardless of whether the

first party took care might turn out to be desirable.) This
possibility is briefly examined in an extension of the
model.

Before proceeding, it should be remarked that although
the analysis in the next section will be informal and will
rely primarily on numerical examples, the claims made will

be proved in general in the subsequent section.11

II. Informal Analysis of the Model

A.

Description of the model
As Figure 1 shows, in one case of the model, the victim

first decIdes whether to take care so as to reduce the
likelihood of occurrence of a dangerous condition; and if
such a condition arises, the injurer then decides whether to
take care in order to reduce the risk of an accident)2
(The case of the model where the injurer acts first is
analogous and will not be separately described.)

The victim will take care if the cost of doing so plus
the probability-discounted or "expected" losses13 he would

then bear is less than the expected losses he would bear If

he does not take care. To make this comparison, the victim
must determine whether, given the liability rule, the

L4,

DCLL(

'v' C4,M.

. 4tf5%L$

SercL o f\ccrrts

(

4cfG'La. 4,LhWL4)

c.&se WltL7LQ

4y I

5

injurer will take care if a dangerous condition arises, for
this would affect the likelihood of loss and, possibly,
liability for loss.

The injurer will take care when a dangerous condition
arises if his cost of care plus his expected liability given
the liability rule is less than his expected liability if he

does not take care. In making this decision, the injurer is
assumed to be aware of whether or not the victim took care)-4

B.

Ideal solution to the accident problem
It will be assumed that the ideal solution to the

accident problem is to minimize total costs, that is, to
minimize the expected sum of accident losses and the victim's

and injurer's costs of care. The actions of the victim and
of the injurer that minimize total costs will be referred to
as

"optimal."
Let us now

consider the determination of the parties'

optimal actions using as an example the situation shown in

Table i) In doing this it will be convenient to refer also
to the derived Table 2, the first row which is explained as

follows. Since both parties take care, .10 is the probability
of a dangerous condition, 0 is the probability of an accident,

given occurrence of a dangerous condition, .10 x 0 = 0 is
the likelihood of an accident, and 0 x 1000 = 0 are expected
losses; the victim's cost of care is 10 and the injurer's
expected cost of care is .10 x 200 = 20 (the injurer takes
care only when a dangerous condition arises), so the sum of

Probability of dangerous condition
Victim does not take care

.20

Victim takes care

.10

Probability of accident given occurrence
of dangerous condition
Injurer does not take care
Injurer takes care

.50
0

Cost of care

Victim

io

Injurer

200

Victim's loss if there is an accident 1000

Table 1

Probability
rictimis Injurerts of dangerous
condition
action
Lction

Probability
of accident

Probability

given dangerous of
condition

accident

Expected Expected
Expected costs of total
losses

care

costs

are

care

.10

0

0

0

30

30

are

no care

.10

.50

.05

50

10

60

to care

care

.20

0

0

0

40

40

to care

no care

.20

.50

.10

100

0

100

Table 2

6

their expected costs of care is 30; hence expected total

costs are 30. The other rows are explained similarly.
Given the tabulation of expected total costs in Table 2,
we can see that what minimizes these costs is for both the

victim and the injurer to take care.'6 To understand why
this should be so, observe first that it is best for the
injurer to take care if a dangerous condition arises, since

the cost of care of 200 is less than the associated reduction
in expected accident costs given occurrence of the dangerous
condition of .50 x 1000 = 500.

And to see why it is best

for the victim to take care, notice that the cost of creating
a dangerous condition given that the injurer responds optimally
by taking care is the injurer's cost of care, namely, 200.

Hence, by taking care and incurring a cost of 10, the victim
reduces the injurer's expected costs of care from .20 x 200
= 40 to .10 x 200 = 20, and thus lowers expected total costs
by 20.

This numerical example may also be used to illustrate

the case where injurers act first, by reversing the roles of
injurer and of victim (so the victim's cost of care if a
dangerous condition arises becomes 200, etc.).

C.

Solution to the accident problem under liability rules

1.

case where victims act first

Let us now determine how the victim and the injurer

will act under the various liability rules. This will be
done using the numerical example that was just discussed.

7

First, let us consider the negligence rule with a

defense of contributory negligence. According to this rule,
the injurer is liable for losses if and only if he failed to
take care (i.e., was negligent) and the victim took care

(i.e., was not negligent). We wish to demonstrate that
under this rule an optimal outcome will result; both the

victim and the injurer will take care. To do this, observe
that if the victim does not take care, then the injurer will
escape liability for an accident whether or not he takes
care, so he will clearly decide against taking care if a

dangerous condition arises. However, if the victim takes
care, then if a dangerous condition arises and the injurer
fails to take care, he will face expected liability of .50 x
1000 = 500.

Thus, as the cost of care to him is only 200,

the injurer will choose to escape liability by taking care.
With this in mind, the victim's decision may be determined.
If the victim does not take care, he will bear his losses,

and since he knows that the injurer will not take care if a
dangerous condition arises, the victim's expected losses

will be .20 x .50 x 1000 = 100.

But since the injurer will

take care if the victim takes care, his costs will be only
his costs of care, 10. Hence the victim will take care,
which completes the argument.
The reasoning used in this demonstration, it should be
noted, was indeed that indicated in the introduction.
Namely, the victim is induced to take care for fear of the
losses he would bear if he were negligent-—since then the

8

injurer would not take care; and as the victim decides to
take care, the injurer will in fact be induced to take care
if a dangerous condition arises.

Let us next consider the negligence rule without a

defense of contributory negligence. Under this rule, according
to which the injurer is liable if and only if he failed to
take care, an optimal outcome will not occur; the victim
will not take care, although the injurer will take care if a

dangerous condition arises.17'18 To show this, note that if
a dangerous condition arises and the injurer does not take
care, he will be liable for losses, independent of whether

the victim took care. Accordingly, the injurer's expected
liability will be .50 x 1000 = 500.

As this exceeds his

cost of care of 200, the injurer will decide to take care.
With regard to the victim's situation, observe that he
knows by the above reasoning that the injurer will take care
if a dangerous condition arises and thus that the possibility

of an accident will be eliminated. Hence the victim will
have no reason to incur costs of care of 10 and will not do
so.

19

The victim's negligence may be explained slightly
differently by noting the difference between his private
problem--minimizing his own costs under the liability rule-and his problem from the social viewpoint--minimizing expected

total costs. From the victim's private perspective, the
occurrence of dangerous conditions is costless and thus need

not be prevented, whereas from the social perspective they

9

are costly,

as

they result in the injurer's exercise of

care, and hence should be prevented.20
Let us now summarize the situation in respect to the

other two liability rules. According to the comparative
negligence rule the injurer pays full damages for losses if
he alone failed to take care, but pays only a fraction f of

damages if the victim too did not take care. Under this
rule an optimal outcome may not result. The reason is that
if f is not small, the injurer might find it worthwhile to
take care if a dangerous condition arises whether or not the

victim took care. And if this is the case, then the victim
might decide not to take care.21
Finally, under strict liability with a defense of
contributory negligence, the injurer is liable unless the

victim did not take care. Under this rule an optimal outcome
will occur, and for essentially the reasons applying under
the negligence rule with a defense of contributory negligence.
In particular, the victim will take care, since if he
did not, the injurer would fail to take care; and as the
victim takes care, the injurer is also motivated to take
care if a dangerous condition arises so as to avoid liability.22

In conclusion, let us state what may be taken to be the
general principle underlying the results that have been

presented: a liability rule results in optimal behavior
provided that it induces the party who acts second to take
care when a dangerous condition arises if and only if the

10

first party took care; for this will induce the first and,
therefore, the second party to take care.

2. case where injurers act first
Here it will be seen that although the conclusions
about the liability rules are different, they are nevertheless consistent with the general principle just mentioned.
Consider for instance the first result to be shown,

that under the negligence rule without the defense of contributory

negligence, an optimal outcome will result. This result is
indeed consistent with the general principle, for not allowing
the defense of contributory negligence will mean that the
victim--now the party who acts second--will take care if and
only if the injurer took care.

Let us demonstrate the result using the numerical
example (with the roles of injurer and of victim reversed).
To do this, consider first the victim's position when a

dangerous condition arises. If the injurer took care, then
if the victim fails to take care, he will bear his own
expected losses of .50 x 1000 = 500, whereas if he takes

care, he bears only his costs of care of 200. Thus, the
victim will take care. On the other hand, if the injurer
did not take care, then the victim will.have no motive to
take care, there being no defense of contributory negligence

available to the injurer. In consequence, the injurer (and
thus the victim) will choose to take care: if the injurer
does not take care, his expected liability will be .20 x .50

11

x 1000 = 100 since the victim will not take care; and if the
injurer does take care, he will not be liable and thus bear
only his costs of care of 10.
Let us now briefly explain the conclusions about the

other liability rules. Under the negligence rule with a
defense of contributory negligence, an optimal outcome will

not result. This is true because, when dangerous conditions
arise, victims will always be induced to take care so as to

avoid bearing losses. And since the injurer knows this to
be true, he will find it worthwhile not to take care.23
For similar reasons, under the comparative negligence
rule, an optimal outcome might not be achieved; and under
strict liability with a defense of contributory negligence,
an optimal outcome will not be achieved.

D.

An Extension of the Model
We now wish to consider a modification of the model

towards greater realism. As indicated in the introduction,
this may reverse the general conclusion of the last subsection
that it is best to employ liability rules which give the

party who acts second a motive to take care if and only if
the first party exercised care.

The modification concerns the possibility that the
party who acts first might be "inevitably" negligent--fail
to take care regardless of the liability rule--because he

overlooks the risk of an accident. It will be sufficient
for us to examine the possibility of such inevitable negligence

12

only in the case where the victim acts first and only in
relation to the negligence rule (our analysis will carry
over in an- obvious way to the other case and in relation to

the other liability rules).

To understand the importance of possible inevitable
negligence in this case, recall that the advantage in the
basic model of allowing the defense of contributory negligence was to give victims a motive to take care.

If, however,

a number of victims will inevitably act negligently, then in
respect to affecting the behavior of these victims, allowing
the defense of contributory negligence will by assumption

fail to secure an advantage. Moreover, because these victims
will act negligently, allowing the defense will lead injurers
to fail to take care (a problem which, note, did not exist
in the basic model simply because there were no negligent

victims). Therefore, it may turn out to be desirable not to
allow the defense of contributory negligence.24
To illustrate this, let us reexamine the numerical
example assuming, say, .2 of victims mistakenly ignore all
chance of loss and thus will fail to take care whatever the

liability rule. Then, from Table 3 and Table 2 it can be
seen that if there is a defense of contributory negligence,
the total expected costs will be .2 x 100 + .8 x 30 = 44
(taking the average over situations involving both types of

victim); and from Table 4 and Table 2 it is clear that these

costs will be 40 if there is not a defense. Hence, it is
better that there not be a defense of contributory negligence.25

Behavior Under The Negligence Rule With a
Defense of Contributory Negligence*

Victim's action
Victim ignores risk
Victim understands risk

no care

care

*case where victim acts first

Table 3

Injurer's action
no care
care

I2b

Behavior Under The Negligence Rule Without a
Defense of Contributory Negligence*

Victim's Action

Injurer's Action

Victim ignores risk

no care

care

Victim understands risk

no care

care

*

case where victims act first

Table 4

13

Notice, as expected, that the figures show that the result
came about because when victims ignore the risk, the defense
of contributory negligence results in higher costs (100)
than does absence of the defense (40).

Finally, let us remark that this example did not allow
for the possibility that injurers too might inevitably act
negligently, a possibility which would lead to a qualifica-

tion of the point of the present subsection. The main
reason for the qualification is of course that the advantage

of not employing the defense of contributory negligence--inducing
injurers to take care when victims have not--can hardly be
enjoyed when injurers will inevitably act negligently.26
But the qualification will not be very important if the
probability of inevitable negligence on the part of injurers

is much less than it is on the part of victims. And this
might be thought the case, for the nature of the situation
facing the party who acts second is typically such that the
danger is obvious and thus not likely to be overlooked,

whereas the situation facing the party who acts first is
often such that the danger is not clear or is remote.

III. Formal Analysis of the Model27

A.

Description of the model

As the model has been discussed informally, we can be

brief here. There are two types of risk-neutral parties,
victims and injurers. In one of the cases that is examined,

14

the victim first decides whether to take care; if a dangerous
condition then arises, the injurer decides whether to take

care, and an accident either occurs or fails to occur. (See
Figure 1.) In the other case, the injurer acts before the
victim. In each case, the first-best or expected total cost
minimizing levels of care of the parties are determined; and
the effects of liability rules on parties' behavior are also
determined, assuming that the party who acts second can
observe whether the first party took care.

A.

Case where victims act first
Define the following notation.

x = cost
=

of care for a victim; x>O;

probability

of a dangerous condition if victim

takes care;

p probability of a dangerous condition if victim
does not take care; p >
0;
PC

y = cost
—

of care for an injurer; y>0;

probability

of an accident given that there is a

dangerous condition if the injurer takes Care;

q = probability

of an accident given that there is a
dangerous condition if the injurer does not take

care; q>qO.

£ = loss

if an accident occurs; 2 >

0.

The variables x, y, and £ are assumed to be monetary. The
measure of social welfare is (the negative of) expected
total costs--the expected costs of care plus expected accident

losses. Thus, if both parties take care, total costs are

(1) x +

+ fl;

15

if the victim alone takes care, total costs are

(2) X

+ P'a;

if the injurer alone takes care, total costs are
(3)

and if neither party takes care, total costs are
(4)

We will be interested mainly in the situation where it is
strictly optimal for both parties to take care (i.e., where
(1) is the unique minimum among (l)-(4)) but we will also

consider the situations where it is strictly optimal for the
injurer alone to take care (where (3) is the unique minimum)
and where it is strictly optimal for the victim alone to

take care (where (2) is the unique minimum). (Henceforth,
by "optimal", we shall mean strictly optimal.)
Let us now define the liability rules using (as is
customary) so called due care levels for victims and for

injurers. specifically, define the rules as follows.

Under

the negligence rule with the defense of contributory negligence,
an injurer is liable for loss if and only if he took less

than due care and the victim took at least due care. Under
the negligence rule without the defense of contributory

negligence, an injurer is liable for loss if and only if he

took less than due care. Under the comparative negligence
rule, an injurer is liable for (the entire) loss if and only
if he took less than due care and the victim took at least
due care; and an injurer is partially liable--for a fraction
f where O<f<1 of loss--if and only if both he

and

the victim

16

took less than due care. (This is the only rule under which
the injurer is partially liable.) And, under strict liability
with a defense of contributory negligence, an injurer is
liable for loss if and only if the victim took at least due
care.

Let us now assume that it is optimal for victims and
for injurers to take care and that what constitutes due care

for each is to take care. We then have

Proposition 1. Under the negligence rule with a defense of
contributory negligence, an optimal outcome will be achieved;
both the victim and the injurer will take care.

Proof: If the victim does not take care and a dangerous
condition arises, the injurer will not take care because he

will never be liable. Thus the victim's expected cost will

be pq2.
If the victim does take care and a dangerous condition
arises, the injurer will take care in order to avoid liability:
if the injurer takes care, his costs will be y; if he does

not, they will be q; and since it is optimal for both to
take care, we know in particular that x +

which implies that y +

q,

p(y+q2)

<

x

+

which implies that

As the injurer will take care, the victim's expected

costs will be x+pq.
Thus the victim will decide to take care: since it is
optimal for both to take care, we know in particular that x
+

P(Y+.)

<

so certainly x +

<

17

This completes the demonstration, since we showed that if
the victim takes care, so will the injurer should a danger-

ous condition arise. QE.D.

Proposition 2. Under the negligence rule without the defense
of contributory negligence, an optimal result may not be
achieved; the victim might fail to take care although the
injurer will take care if a dangerous condition arises.28

Proof: If the victim does not take care and a dangerous
condition arises, then the injurer will take care and avoid

liability: if the injurer takes care, his costs will be y;

if he does not, they will be q; but y <

(as was shown

in the proof to Proposition 1). Thus the victim's expected
costs will be

If the victim does take care and a dangerous condition
arises, the injurer will by the same logic take care so as

to avoid liability. Hence the victim's expected costs will

be
It is possible that x +

p(y+q2)

> pq

even though x +

minimizes total costs; this was true in the numerical

example of the previous section, and, indeed, will always be

true if

Thus, the victim might not take care, although

the injurer will do so if a dangerous condition arises.
Q.E.D.

Proposition 3. Under the comparative negligence rule, an
optimal result may not be achieved; the victim alone or

18

the victim and the injurer both may fail to take care,

although the injurer alone will never fail to take care if a
dangerous condition arises.

Proof: The numerical example of the last section with f.5
is such that the injurer will take care but the victim will

not. (See in particular note 21 supra).
An example where neither party takes care is the following:

x35; 2; c•1 y190; q.4;

lOOO; f.4. To

verify this, note that if the victim does not take care, the
injurer will not (for 190>(.4)(.4)(l000)), so the victim's

expected costs will be (.2)(.4)(600)=48. And if the victim
does take care, the injurer will as well (for l90<(.4)(1000)),
so that the victim's expected costs will be 35+(.1)(.2)(l000)=55,
which exceeds 48.
Finally, if the victim takes care, so will the injurer,

since y<q. (as was shown in the proof to Proposition 1).
Q.E.D.

Proposition 4. Under strict liability with a defense of
contributory negligence, an optimal outcome will be achieved;
both the victim and the injurer will take care.

Proof. If the victim does not take care and a dangerous
condition arises, the injurer will not take care since he

will not be liable. Hence the victim's expected costs will

be
If the victim does take care and a dangerous condition
arises, the injurer will take care; since he will be liable

19

for losses, his costs will be y+q. if he takes care and

if not; but y+q1 <

(as was shown in the proof to Proposition 1).

Hence the victim?s costs will be x.

Since it is optimal for both the injurer and the victim
to take care, we know that x +
certainly x <

p(y+q94

<

pq;

thus

Hence the victim will take care, and

if a dangerous condition arises, so will the injurer.
Q.E.D.

Let us now briefly consider the situation where it is

optimal for only one of the parties to take care. If it is
optimal for the injurer alone to take care, let us assume
that what constitutes due care for him is to take care, but

that due care for the victim is zero. Hence both versions
of the negligence rule and the comparative negligence rule

will all be identical: the injurer will be liable for
losses if and only if he fails to take care. Also, under
the strict liability rule with the defense of contributory

negligence, the injurer will always be liable. Similarly,
if it is optimal for the victim alone to take care and we
assume that due care levels reflect this, then all versions
of the negligence rule will be identical--the victim will

always be liable. With this in mind let us state

Remark 5.

In the situations where it is optimal for the

injurer alone to take care or for the victim alone to take
care, an optimal outcome will result under any of the liability
rules.

20

Proof: Consider first the situation where it is optimal for
injurers alone to take care. Then under (any of the three
versions of) the negligence rule, if a dangerous condition
arises, the injurer will avoid liability and take care:

since P(Y+fl minimizes total costs, P(Y÷q2) <

p1g2

so

that y<q2. Thus, if the victim does not take care, his

expected costs will be P2; if he does take care, they
will be x +
>

c'

Pa;

we have

and since Pn(Y+%2) < x
<

x+pq.

+

P(Y+fl

and

Hence the victim will not

take care.

Under strict liability with the defense of contributory
negligence, as the injurer will always be liable, he will

take care if a dangerous condition arises: since we know

that P(Y+) <

pq

we have y+q2 <

q2.

And, clearly,

the victim will not take care.

Now consider the situation where it is optimal for the

victim alone to take care. Then under (any of the three
versions of) the negligence rule, the injurer will never be

liable and so will not take care. Hence, if the victim does
not take care, his expected costs will be pq; if he does,

they will be x+pq.; but the latter is less than the former

since x+pg2 minimizes total costs.
Under strict liability with the defense of contributory
negligence, if the victim fails to take care, he will be

liable, so the injurer will not take care. Hence the victim's
expected costs will be

If the victim takes care,

then the injurer will be liable, so the victim's expected

21

costs will be x. And as we know that x+pq. minimizes
total costs,

<

so x <

pq•

Thus the victim

will take care. But the injurer will not do so if a dangerous

condition arises: since x+pq2 minimizes total costs,

X+PC%2 <

B.

x+p(y+qfl#

implying that g11 <

Q.E.D.

Case where injurers act first
In this case the notation will be defined as in the

last case, but the formulas for total costs will be different:
If both parties take care, then total costs are

(5) y +

if the injurer alone takes care, they are
(6) y +

qp2;

if the victim alone takes care, they are
(7)

and if neither party takes care they are
(8)

Let us now consider the liability rules assuming that it is

optimal for injurers and for victims to take care and that
what constitutes due care for each is the exercise of care.
(Since the proofs are analogous to those of Propositions 1-4
and Remark 5, we will supply as a pattern for the reader the
proof to the next Proposition only).

Proposition 6. Under the negligence rule with a defense of
contributory negligence, an optimal outcome may not be
achieved; the injurer might fail to take care although the
victim will take care if a dangerous condition arises.

22

Proof: If the injurer does not take care and a dangerous
condition arises, then the victim will take care to avoid

bearing his losses: if the victim takes care, his costs

will be x; if he does not, they will be P; and since it is
optimal for both parties to take care, we know that y +

<y
x <

p1.

+

p,

implying that x +

so that

Thus the injurer's expected costs will be

If the injurer does take care and a dangerous condition

arises, then the victim will again take care: if he takes

care, his expected costs will be x+p2; if he does not, they
will be

and as shown above, x+p < p12.

The injurer's

costs in this case will be y.
It is possible that y >

minimizes total costs; indeed, y >

even though y +

q(x+p2)

will necessarily be

true if
Hence, we have shown that the injurer might not take
care but that the victim will if a dangerous condition

arises. Q.E.D.
(The proof was analogous to that of Proposition 2).

Proposition 7. Under the negligence rule without a defense
of contributory negligence, an optimal outcome will be
achieved; both the injurer and the victim will take care.
(The proof is analogous to that of Proposition 1).

Proposition 8. Under the comparative negligence rule, an
optimal result may not be achieved; the injurer alone or the

23

injurer and the victim both may not take care, although the
victim will do so if the injurer takes care and a dangerous
condition arises.
(The proof is analogous to that of Proposition 3).

Proposition 9. Under strict liability with a defense of
contributory

negligence, an optimal outcome may not be

achieved; the injurer may fail to take care, although the
victim

will do so if a dangerous condition arises.

(The proof is similar to that of Proposition 2).

Remark 10. In the situations where it is optimal for the
injurer alone or for the victim alone to take care, an
optimal outcome will result under any of the liability
rules.

(The proof is analogous to that of Remark 5).

C.

Extension of the model
As explained in Section II, the extension of the model

to be considered concerns the possibility that parties would

ignore the risk of an accident. It will suffice to examine
the effect of overlooking risk in only one case; this case
will supply the necessary insight for analysis of the other

cases, which would be tedious. The case of interest is that
where victims act first; where it is optimal for both parties
to take care; and where in the absence of ignorance of risk,

the negligence rule with the defense of contributory negligence

24

would be superior to the negligence rule without the defense,

because under the latter rule victims would fail to take

care (see Propositions 1 and 2). We wish now to determine
which of these two rules is superior as a function of a and

,

where
a

fraction of victims who ignore risk, believing it
to be zero; 0
=

fraction

a

1;

of injurers who ignore risk, believing it

to be zero; 0

1.

We will assume that the events that a victim ignores risk
and that an injurer who finds a victim in a dangerous situation
ignores risk are probabilistically independent.

Let us observe first that Tables 5 and 6 below describe
the behavior of parties under the two rules, and independent

of the values of a and 3. Let us explain several of the
entries in Table 5, leaving the verification of the remainder

of the entries in the tables to the reader. As a party who
thinks the risk of a dangerous condition or an accident is
zero will not take care, many of the entries in the tables

are immediately explained. Thus, the first row of Table 5
is explained, as is the first entry in the second row of

Table 5. The second entry in the second row is then clear:
as the victim does not take care, he will bear his losses,
so the injurer will not take care.

The first entries in the third and fourth rows of Table

5 are explained as follows: If a victim takes care and a
dangerous condition arises, then the injurer will not take

Behavior Under the Negligence Rule With A

Defense of

Contributory Negligence*
Victimvs
action

Injurer's
action

Victim and injurer
ignore risk

no care

no care

Victim alone
ignores risk

no care

no care

Injurer alone
ignores risk

care

no care

Neither party
ignores risk

care

care

*

case where victim acts first

Table 5

c1L)

Behavior Under The Negligence Rule Without a Defense of
Contributory Negligence*

Victim's action

Injurer's action

Victim and injurer
ignore risk

no care

no care

Victim alone
ignores risk

no care

care

Injurer alone
ignores risk

no care

no care

Neither party
ignores risk

no care

care

*case where victim acts first

Table 6

25

care (and will bear liability) if he ignores the risk, but
he will take care if he perceives it (as was demonstrated in

the proof to Proposition 1). Hence the victim's expected
On the other hand, if the

position will be x +

victim does not take care and a dangerous condition arises,
then the injurer will not take care if he correctly perceives

the risk (as was shown in the proof to Proposition 1) or if

he ignores it. Hence the victim's expected position will be

pq• But x + p(l_13)q<x

÷

so that the

victim will take care.

Using the tables, we may write the formulas for expected

total costs. Under the negligence rule with the defense of
contributory negligence, the expected total costs are

(9) aPP2 +

a(l-)pq2

+

(l—x)(l- )(x+p(Y+q2))
(l_cY)(l—)pg)

+

(l_ci)(x+pq2)

+

+

=

(l_a)x+(l—a)(l—I3)py.

Under the negligence rule without the defense, expected
total costs are

(10) cpq2 +

c(l_)p(y+q2)

(l_a)(l_)p(y+q.Q)

÷ (l—a)pq2 +

=

+

Hence, the negligence rule with the defense of contributory
negligence will be superior or inferior to the rule without
the defense according as (9) is less than or greater than
(10), or as

(11) £((a—)pq + (l_cY)Pca +
+

(l-c)x

+

((l-a)(l-)p -

(l_a)(l_I3)pq

(l-))

>

0.

—

(l—)P)

26

It follows from this formula that for any <l, there exists
an

sufficiently high that the negligence rule without the

defense of contributory negligence is superior to the rule

with the defense. (The sense behind this result was explained
in the previous section.) To see this, observe that if
<l and a=l, the left-hand-side of (11) is

(12) £((l-)pq -

(l-)P) (l—)
—

>

for
care.

0,

since it is optimal for the injurer to take

27

Appendix

The model analyzed above will be reconsidered here
assuming that victims and injurers choose continuously

variable levels of care. This version of the model is of
interest for two reasons: it sometimes provides a better
description of reality, as many aspects of care do seem
continuously variable (e.g., in Davies, the distance between
the fettered donkey and the shoulder of the road); and it is
in conformity with most of the literature studying microeconomic

models of accidents and liability.29 It will be seen that
although the analysis of the continuous version of the model
is more complicated than that of the model considered above,30
the results will be essentially unaltered.

A.

Case where victims act first
Let the variables £,x, and y be defined as before (but

now x and y are continuously variable)31 and let
p(x)

=

probability
1 >

q(y,x) =

p

>

of a dangerous condition;

0; p' < 0; p" > o;32

probability

of an accident given that a

dangerous condition has arisen and given y
and x; 1 >

q

>

0;

<

q,

yy >0;

0;

The measure of social welfare will be (the negative of)
expected total costs,
(13) T(x,y) = x +

p(x)(y

+

q(y,x)fl.

28

Let x* and y* denote the values of x and y which minimize T,
and let y*(x) denote the value of y that minimizes
(14) y +

q(y,x)2.

(Note, therefore, that y*=y(x*).) These optimal values will
be assumed to be positive and unique. Additionally, we will
assume in certain of the proofs that various functions are
convex, although somewhat weaker assumptions would suffice.
Let us now determine the behavior of parties under

liability rules. In doing so, let us define
y(x) =

injurer's

choice of y given the victim's

choice of x and the liability rule;

in other words, y(x) minimizes the injurer's cost of care y
plus his expected liability given x (which, recall, the

injurer observes) and given the liability rule. With y(x),
the victim's choice of x can be determined; he minimizes his
cost of care x plus his expected losses given the injurer's
response y(x) and the liability rule.34
Let us assume that the due care levels are the optimal

levels of care: the due care level for victims is x*, and
for injurers it is y*(x). We may now consider the liability
rules. (The definitions of the rules given in Section III
will serve here.)

Proposition 11. Under the negligence rule with the defense
of contributory negligence, an optimal outcome will be
achieved; both the victim and the injurer will choose optimal
levels of care.

29

Proof. We wish to show that xx and y=y. Let us first
determine y(x) under the liabi'.ity rule. To do this, note on
the one hand that x <

x implies y(x) = 0,

x,

for if x <

the injurer will not be liable. On the other hand, x
implies y(x) =

y*(x).

x'

This may be shown by a standard

y*(x),

argument. Namely, if the injurer chooses y

as he

will not be liable, his costs will be y; thus he will certainly
choose y =

y*(x).

And if he chooses y <

y*(x),

be liable, his problem will be to minimize y +
y <

y*(x);

as he will

q(y,x)2

over

but, by definition of y*(x),

(15) y +

q(y,x)2

>

y*(x)

q(y*(x),x)2

+

for y y*(x), and in particular for y <

>

y*(x)

y*(x).

Hence the

injurer will choose y*(x).

Let us now prove that the victim will choose x. Since
y(x) =

y*(x)

for x x*, the victim will always bear his

losses. Thus his problem is

(16) mm x +
x

mm x +

p(x)q(y(x),x)

=

inin(min x +
x<x*

p(x)q(0,x),

p(x)q(y*(x),x)fl.

x x *

However,
(17) mm x +
x<x*
>

mm

p(x)q(O,x)

x +

x,y
>

p(x)(y

=

x +
x<x*
mm

+q(y,x)) =

x + p(x*)q(y*,x*) = x

? mm x +

xx*

p(x)q(y*(x),x).

+

p(x)(0

+

q(O,x)fl

x + p(x*)(y* +
p(x*)q(y*(x*),x*)2

30

Hence the x that solves (16) must be greater than or equal

to x. Thus, to prove that the solution is x, it will clearly
suffice to show that the derivative of x +

p(x)q(y*(x),x)2

is positive for xx*. But this will be seen to follow from
an assumption that the problem of minimizing T(x,y*(x)) = x
+

p(x)(y*(x)

+

q(y*(x),x)fl

is strictly convex in x.36 Now

the optiinality of x and the assumption of strict convexity
imply

0 at x*

(18) dT(x,y*(x))
dx

>0 forx> x*.
But
(19) T(x,y*(x)) _(x+p(x)q(y*(x),x)2) =

p(x)y*(x),

37
and

(20) d(p(x)y*(x)) <

0.

dx
Thus, the derivative of x +

p(x)q(y*(x),x)

exceeds that of

T(x,y*(x)), and this fact and (18) give the result. Q.E.D.

Proposition 12. Under the negligence rule without the
defense of contributory negligence, an optimal result will
not be achieved; the victim will take too little care,
although if a dangerous condition arises, the injurer will
act optimally given the victim's behavior.

Proof: We wish to show that x <
first note that y(x) =

y*(x)

x* and y y*(x). Let us

for all x. This can be proved

in exactly the way the same fact was shown for x x in the
proof to the previous proposition.

31

Since the injurer will always act non-negligently, the
victim will bear his losses and thus will choose x to minimize

x +

p(x)g(y*(x),x)2.

But it was shown at the end of the

last proof that this expression has a positive derivative

for x x', so that it must be minimized at an x less than

x*. Q.E.D.

Proposition 13. Under the comparative negligence rule, an
optimal result may not be achieved.

(This is obvious from the discrete version of the
model.)

Proposition 14. Under strict liability with the defense of
contributory negligence, an optimal outcome will be achieved;
both the victim and the injurer will choose optimal levels
of care.

Proof. We wish to show that x =

x and y = y*.

to y(x), it is clear that if x <

x*,

In regard first

then y(x) = 0.

On the

other hand, if x x, then since the injurer will be liable,
his problem is to minimize y +

q(y,x)2.

Hence y(x) =

y*(x)

for x x.
The victim's problem is accordingly
(21) min(min x +

x<x

p(x)q(O,x),

mm x),

xx*

and from (17), it is clear that the solution to this problem
is

x. Q.E.D.

32

B.

Case where injurers act first
In this case, q(y) and p(x,y) will be defined analoçously

to p(x) and q(y,x). Moreover, expected total costs will now

be
(22) T(x,y)

y +

q(y)(x

+

p(x,y)fl;

and x*(y) will be the optimal x given y; it will minimize
(23) x +

p(x,y).

Let us now briefly reexamine the functioning of the liability
rules.

Proposition 15. Under the negligence rule with the defense
of contributory negligence, an optimal outcome may not be
achieved; the injurer may take too little care, although the
victim will act optimally given the injurer's behavior.

Proof. We wish to show that y <

y is possible and that

x*(y). The latter is true since by now familiar
x(y) = x*(y). Hence, the injurer's problem is
(24) min(min y + q(y)p(x*(y),y)z, mm y),
x =

y<y*

logic,

yy*

and it is clear that the solution to this problem might be y
<

y*

(This would be so if p(x*(y),y) were sufficiently

low.) Otherwise, of course, the solution is y*, in which
case an optimal outcome results. Q.E.D.

Proposition 16. Under the negligence rule without the
defense of contributory negligence, an optimal outcome will

be achieved; both the injurer and the victim will choose
optimal levels of care.

33

Proof: We wish to show that y =

y and x = x.

Now if y <

y,

then x(y) = 0; and if y y*, the victim will choose x to

minimize x +

p(x,y)2,

so that x(y) =

x*(y).

Hence, the

injurer's problem is
(25) min(min y +
y<y*

g(y)p(0,y)2, mm y*).
yy*

By an argument analogous to that used in respect to the

problem (21), the solution to (25) is seen to be y. Thus,
the victim will choose x*(y*) =

x.

Q.E.D.

Proposition 17. Under the comparative negligence rule, an
optimal outcome may not be achieved.

(As before, this is obvious from the discrete version
of the model.)

Proposition 18. Under strict liability with the defense of
contributory negligence, an optimal outcome will not be
achieved; the injurer will take too little care, although
the victim will act optimally given the injurer's behavior.

Proof. We wish to show that y <

y*

and x

is true since by familiar logic, x(y) =

x*(y). The latter

x*(y).

Hence the

injurer's problem is

(26) mm y +
y

q(y)p(x*(y),y)2..

But the derivative of this expression exceeds that of T(x*(y),y)

by the argument used in respect to (19) and (20). Thus,

34

assuming T(x*(y),y) to be strictly convex in y, the y that

solves (26) must be less than y. Q.E.D.

We omit discussion of the extension of the model in the
continuous version.

35

Footnotes

*

Professor

of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School.

I

wish to thank Lucian Bebchuk, Mark Klamer, William
Landes, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Richard Posner, David
Rosenberg, Hal Scott, and Donald Wittman for comments
and the National Science Foundation (Grant No. SES-8014208)
for financial support.
1.

Attention will be limited to the issue of accident
avoidance--in particular, no consideration will be
given to sharing of risk or to notions of fairness--and
conclusions reached about the comparison of liability
rules should be interpreted accordingly.

2.

The words "victim" and "injurer" will be used in place
of the more cumbersome "potential victim" and "potential
injurer" hereafter.

3.

10 M. & W. 546 (1842).

4.

66 Ont. L. R. 618 (App. Div. 1931).

5.

In cases involving "last clear chance," it is frequently
true that the victim acted first; consider Tuff V. Warman,

5 C.B. (N.S.) 573 (1858), involving a collision of
ships, where defendant vessel saw but still ran down
plaintiff vessel, which failed to post a lookout;
Radley v. London & Northwestern Railway, 1 App. Cas.
754 (1876), where plaintiff colliery placed one coalcarrying container on top of another on defendant
railroad's flat-bed car and where defendant's locomotive
engineer, noticing resistance when attempting to pass

36

under plaintiff's bridge, failed to investigate and
increased his power, doing damage to the bridge; Clark v.
Boston & Maine R.R., 87 N.H. 434, 182 A. 175 (1935),

where plaintiff standing on a railway crossing was
struck by defendant's train coming from a direction in
which he was not looking; Wall v. King, 280 Mass. 577,
182 N.E. 855 (1932), where plaintiff driver attempted
to pass in the middle lane of a three lane road when it
was difficult for him to then pull back to the right
and where defendant coming in the opposite direction
thereafter also entered the middle lane despite plaintiff's
sounding his horn and collided with plaintiff.
6.

In some situations involving last clear chance, and in

many involving "assumption of risk," the injurer acted
first; suppose that defendant failed to clear ice from
his sidewalk and plaintiff, observing the condition of
the sidewalk, nevertheless proceeded to walk on it,

fell, and suffered injury; that defendant failed to
keep his stone wall in good repair and plaintiff still
chose to park his car by the wall, from which several
stones were dislodged, fell, and damaged the car.
7.

The only other articles of which I am aware which consider
sequential situations using the approach of micro-economics
are Donald Wittrnan, Optimal Pricing of Sequential Inputs:

Last Clear Chance, Mitigation of Damages, and Related

Doctrines in the Law, 10 J. Legal Stud. 65 (1981) and

37

(in a section) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner,
The Positive Economic Theory of Tort Law, 15 Georgia L.

Rev. 851 (1981), at 889-891. Reference to these two
articles, to which the reader is encouraged to turn,

will be made below (see notes 16, 20, 24, 27). These
articles, however, do not contain the principle results
shown here (as illustrated by the next two paragraphs
on Davies and as precisely stated in the Propositions),

do not examine situations where the injurer acts first
and the victim second, and do not formally analyze a

general model where parties act sequentially. (But see
note 27 infra, on Wittman, and see also William M. Landes
and Richard A. Posner, Joint and Multiple Tortfeasors,

9 J. Legal Stud. 517 (1980), at 543-547, which discusses and formally analyzes a particular (and complicated) type of sequential situation where an injurer
acts first, harms a victim, and then another injurer
harms the victim.)
8.

Herein lies the analytically distinguishing feature of

the sequential context. In the simultaneous context,
by contrast, each type of party takes as given the
actions of the other; each victim assumes that his own
action will not affect the actions of injurers, and

conversely. See also notes 17 and 28 infra on the
difference between the sequential and the simultaneous
contexts.

38

9.

In Davies the court said that were Mann not bound to

take care, "a man might justify the driving over goods
left on a public highway, or even over a man lying
asleep there, or the purposely running against a carriage
going on the wrong side of the road."

10. This is a point of emphasis in Wittman note 7 supra, it
is well recognized in Landes and Posner note 7 supra,
and it is the implication of remarks in William L.

Prosser, Comparative Negligence, 51 Mich.L.Rev. 465
(1958), at 468.

11. There is also a brief Appendix analyzing formally a
version of the model in which care is assumed to be
continuously variable rather than (as in the body of
the article) discrete.

12. The cost of care and possible accident losses are
assumed to be monetary or to have monetary equivalents.

13. If for example the likelihood of a loss of 1000 is .10,

then expected losses are 100. The assumption that
parties evaluate uncertain amounts in terms of expected
values (the technical assumption of risk neutrality) is

made for simplicity; it will be clear that nothing of
substance will turn on the assumption.

14. This assumption seems the reasonable one to make even
though there will often be a measure of uncertainty in
the injurer's mind about the negligence of the victim.

(Could a party like Mann have wondered whether a party
like Davies had been forced to leave his donkey fettered
on the road owing to some emergency?)

39

15. The reduction to zero of the probability of an accident
accomplished by the injurer's exercise of care is an
aspect of the example that will simplify calculations
and explanations of results but is not necessary to the

results; see Section III.
16. This aspect of the example should be thought typical if
one believes that it will generally be true that both
the victim and the injurer ought to take some degree of

care. However, for an alternative viewpoint, see
Landes and Posner, note 7 supra. They suggest that in
many situations of interest, it is optimal for the
injurer alone to take care.

17. In the simultaneous context, however, the negligence
rule will lead to an optimal outcome when there is no
defense of contributory negligence (as it will if the

defense is allowed). See note 28 infra.
18. In the general case of the model studied in the next
section, an optimal outcome might occur under this rule
if the probability of an accident is not reduced to

zero by the injurer's taking care. See Proposition 2.
In the version of the model with care continuously
variable, however, an optimal outcome would never
occur; the victim will always take too little care.

See Proposition 12 of the Appendix. (Comments similar
to this will apply to other results of this section
where a party fails to take care, but we will not
bother to make them.)

40

19.

In the general case, it is not that the victim will

have no incentive to take care--he may after all suffer

a loss despite the injurer's taking due care. Rather,
it is that he will have an inadequate incentive to take
care.

20. This observation leads Wittman, note 7 supra, to examine
a family of liability rules according to some of which
the victim would pay the injurer his cost of care--thereby
apparently giving the victim an appropriate incentive
to reduce the risk of dangerous conditions.

21. Suppose that under a comparative negligence rule the
injurer would be liable for half the victim's losses if

both failed to take care. Then if a dangerous condition
arose and the victim did not take care, the injurer

would prefer to spend 200 on care than to fail to take
care and bear an expected liability of .50 x 500 = 250.

Knowing

this,

the victim would decide not to take care.

On the other hand, it is also possible that the
injurer would decide against taking care if the victim

did not and that an optimal outcome would result. This
would be the case, for instance, if the injurer would
be liable for only one fifth the victim's losses if
both did not take care, for then the injurer's expected
liability if he and the victim failed to take care
would be only .50 x 200 = 100.

Hence, if the victim

does not take care, his expected losses will be .20 x
.50 x 800 = 80; and if he takes care, his only costs

41

will be his cost of care of 10, as the injurer will
then be induced to take care if a dangerous condition

arises. Thus, both the victim and the injurer will be
led to take care.

22. In the numerical example, the injurer will not take
care if a dangerous condition arises and the victim did

not take care. But the injurer will take care if the
victim did take care; for in that event, the injurer
would be liable and would prefer to spend 200 on care
than to bear expected liability of .5 x 1000 = 500.
Consequently, if the victim does not take care, his

expected losses will be .20 x .50 x 1000 = 100; and if
he does take care at a cost of 10, he will not bear any

losses. Thus, the victim will take care, and so then
will the injurer.

23. In the example, if a dangerous condition arises, the
victim will always spend 200 on care to avoid an expected

loss of 500. Hence the injurer will have no reason to
take care.

24. Thus, the modification might be seen as rationalizing
such doctrines as last clear chance. However, Landes
and Posner notes 7 and 16, supra, suggest a different

rationalization of last clear chance: that it is
employed to defeat a defense of contributory negligence
precisely when such a defense would have been inappropriate ab initlo--when it would not have been optimal
for the victim to have taken any care to avoid creating

42

a dangerous condition on account of the ease with which
potential injurers could subsequently prevent accidents.

25. More generally, let a be the probability that victims
will ignore the risk in the example. Then it will be
desirable not to apply the defense of contributory

negligence when l00 +
when

>

1/7.

(l-x)30

>

40, which is to say,

See Section III.

26. See (11) of Section III for a general formula showing
how the chance that a victim or that an injurer would

be inevitably negligent will determine the desirability
of use of the defense of contributory negligence.

27. This section presents the first formal analysis of the
usual rules of liability in the sequential context.

(Although Wittman, note 7 supra, contains formal analysis
of the usual liability rules in the simultaneous context,

the only rule that Wittman formally analyzes in the
sequential context (at 69-71) is a special one (but
with interesting and desirable properties) that he
calls "marginal cost liability.")

28. In the simultaneous context, this rule can be shown to
lead to an optimal outcome. The reason, in essence, is
that the victim and the injurer are envisioned each to
take care with probability one; thus the victim's level
of care does not affect the probability that injurers

will take care. By contrast, in the sequential context,
the victim's level of care does of course affect whether
the injurer will take care, and the victim does not

take this into account under the negligence rule without

43

the defense of contributory negligence. (Similar
remarks explain why comparative negligence leads to an
optimal outcome in the simultaneous context but may not
in the sequential context.)

29. See for example John P. Brown, Toward an Economic
Theory of Liability, 2 J. Legal Stud. 323 (1973); Peter
A. Diamond, Single Activity Accidents, 3 J. Legal Stud.

107 (1974); and Steven Shavell, Strict Liability versus
Negligence, 9 J. Legal Stud. 1 (1980).

30. This is primarily because the behavior of the second
party may depend on the particular level of care exercised
by the first party.

31. Although £ is taken to be fixed, the results to be
shown do not depend on this assumption; and the proofs
would remain virtually the same were the loss instead
variable, determined by a probability distribution
(dependent on x and y).

32. Here and occasionally elsewhere, functions or their
derivatives are for convenience written without their
arguments.

33. The interpretation of

is that if the victim

increases his level of care, then, if a dangerous
condition arises, the effect of an increase in the
injurer's care on the likelihood of loss is unchanged

or reduced. This corresponds to the notion that the
nature of the dangerous condition (as opposed to its
probability) is either unaffected by the victim's care
or, if affected, becomes less serious.

44

34. It will be assumed that the minimization problems of
the injurer and of the victim have unique solutions.

35. The proof of this result will be seen to be different
from and more complicated than the proof of the same
result in the simultaneous context; for the latter, see
John P. Brown, note 29 supra.
36.

I know of no simple assumption about T(x,y) that guarantees
convexity.

37.

*

*

To establish (20), note that d(p(x)y (x))/dx=p'(x)y (x)+

p(x)y*'(x)

*

and that p'(x)y (x) is negative. Thus, we

need only show that y*I(x)

0. But y*(x) is implicitly

determined by the first-order condition from (14),

namely l+qy(y*(x),x)2 = 0.

Differentiating this with

respect to x we get y* (x) =

yx

(y*(x),x) /

q(y*(x),x)

