                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              MINIMUM HOURS CONTRAINTS AND RETIREMENT BEHAVIOR



                              Alan L. Gustman

                            Thomas L. Steinrneier




                           Working Paper No. 940




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge MA 02138


                                 July 1 982




 The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. This material results in part from tax—supported
research (u.s. Department of Labor Contract No. J—9-P—1—O077). It
may be freely reprinted with the customary crediting of the source.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research or the Department of
Labor. We would like to thank Gary Fields, Roger Gordon, Daniel
Hamermesh, Olivia Mitchell and Robert Plotnick for their helpful
coxtiments.
                                          NBER Working Paper #940
                                                 July 1982



                 Minimum Hours Constraints and

                       Retirement Behavior


                        Alan L. Gustman

                      Thomas L. Steinmeier



    This paper presents statistics which confirm the existence

of minimum hours constraints for jobs held by a majority of prime

aged male workers who are not self emoloyed. It then considers

the implications of these constraints for studies of retirement

behavior and related policy analyses. Potential biases associated

with conventional analyses, which either ignore the existence of

minimum hours constraints or assume they are pervasive, are dis-

cussed in the context of structural life cycle retirement models.

A more realistic but still imperfect specification, which can be

estimated given available data, assumes minimum hours constraints

on the main job and variable hours elsewhere.



                                                 Alan L. Gustman and
                                                 Thomas L. Steinmeier
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Dartmouth College
                                                 Hanover, NH 03755

                                                 (603) 646—2641
                                                 (603) 646—2531
     Economists have devoted a great deal of effort to studying the

basic retirement model and to analyzing the roles of public and private

pensions in influencing retirement decisions. Unraveling the complex

set of incentives created by the Social Security System and by a variety

of private pension programs has proved to be a very difficult task.1

Analyses of the budget line facing the potential retiree have been conducted in

the context of retirement models with specifications that have become

increasingly sophisticated over time.

     Developments in specifying retirement models reflect progress that

has been made along a number of lines. Most importantly, it has been

learned that because both the budget constraint and the indifference

map affecting behavior in any year are themselves affected by decisions

made in other years, the retirement decision must be analyzed in a life

cycle context rather than in a labor—leisure choice framework set

within a particular year.2 Moreover, despite the fact that most

empirical retirement studies are of the reduced form variety [e.g. see

Clark and Johnson (1981) and Boskin and Hurd (1978)], it has become

apparent that the underlying structural equations, and especially the

parameters of the utility function, must be estimated if we are to

determine the effects of a number of proposed policy changes such as

raising the early and normal ages for receipt of social security benefits
to 65 and 68, or rais.inq the minimum leqil iqe for mandatory retirement

to 70. Reduced form equations are unable to provide accurate estimates

of the impact of such changes both because of the difficulty of capturing

all the twists and turns in the budget line and because the proposed

changes take us outside the range of oast experience. Recently, a first

attempt was made to estimate a retirement model that is both structural

and is formulated in a life—cycle context. This is the important contri-

bution of Gordon and Blinder (1980).

     Now that we have reached a point where the technical approach is on the

right track, it is appropriate to consider the specification of the

retirement model, and in particular the assumption as to the constraints

facing the potential retiree. Embedded in models used to estimate

utility function parameters are various assumptions regarding available

employment opportunities. One possibility is that individuals decide

each year whether to continue to work full-time or to retire completely


that year.4 Such an all-or-nothing work decision may be ascribed to

the interdependence of inputs in the production process, as noted by

Deardorf and Stafford (1976). Another approach assumes that individuals

choose their level of work effort in a particular job on a year by year

basis, and hence that individuals are free to retire by gradually

reducing their work effort over time. This kind of model was used by

Gordon and Blinder (1980). Combinations of the above two models are

also possible. An example of such a hybrid would posit that the

individual is constrained to work full-time or not at all in his main

job, but can work part-time in a partial retirement job at the penalty

of receiving a lower wage rate. As we shall see in this paper, this
                                  3




type of hybrid appears particularly attractive in view of the available

evidence.

     Our earlier work (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1981) suggests, but only

indirectly, that constraints which force an individual to work at

least a minimum number of hours on the main job may play an important

role in the retirement process.5 Empirical evidence presented there

documents the importance of partial retirement in jobs other than

the primary job. Partial retirement is found to be a fairly common

phenomenon, with at least one third of those in our sample of older

workers having retired partially at one time or anotheL For workers

over 65, partial retirement was found to be as common as nonretirement.

But what is most consistent with a view that minimum hours con-

straints affect retirement behavior is the finding that those who

partially retire usually do not do so on jobs they held full-

time at age 55, despite the fact that these "main jobs" carry   higher

wage offers than do the newly acquired jobs held by the partially

retired.6 While these findings are consistent with a view that minimum

hours constraints on the main job influence retirement behavior, and

the magnitudes involved suggest that potentially this influence is

important, they of course do not provide direct evidence on either

(1) the pervasiveness of lower limit constraints on hours of work, or

(2) the impact of ignoring these constraints. In Section I below, we

attempt to document more directly that these constraints are a common

phenomenon.

     Minimum hours constraints have important implications for studies of

retirement behavior because ignoring these constraints may lead to biased
                                   4




estimates of the parameters of the utility function. On the one hand,

since most people do not partially retire, they are observed o shift

their labor supply discontinuously from full-time work to full

retirement. Any analysis which does not incorporate a minimum hours

constraint must assume that this behavior is voluntary and attribute

it to some characteristic of the utility function. On the other hand,

a substantial fraction of older workers partially retire in jobs which

have reduced wages compared to the wages paid in the main job. An

analysis which ignores minimum hours constraints is likely to consider

the drop in wages as exogenous and will attribute partial retirement

to a change in the budget constraint rather than to a shift in the

utility function over time. Section II considers the nature

of the bias in the estimated parameters of the utility function that

arises if there are minimum hours constraints and they are ignored, or

if partial retirement is mistakenly viewed as a result of an exogenous

drop in the wage rate rather than as an endogenous choice brought on by

minimum hours constraints in the main job.

       If minimum hours constraints are ignored and utility function para-

meters   are biased as a result, projections based on the estimates may lead
to   incorrect predictions as to the course of retirement and to mistaken

analysis of the effects of changes in pension or social security policy.

Further, if the model treats partial retirement at reduced wages as a

response to an exogenous change in wage rate rather than as an endogenous

choice of a job with lower wages, it cannot be used to determine whether

those who postpone retirement as a result of some policy change remain in

main jobs, earning high incomes while competing with prime age workers
                                   5




or with those attempting to secure a job with training opportunities and

the potential of a fruitful long term relationship, or whether they are

putting in a limited number of hours on part—time jobs, competing with

secondary workers.

     Such considerations underline the importance of obtaining accurate

estimates of utility function parameters based on properly specified

opportunity sets. In order to obtain such estimates, we are in the process

of analyzing a full structural model which incorporates a minimum hours

constraint. Some of the questions pertaining to the magnitude and direction

of the biases to be discussed in Section II can only be analyzed in the

context of that model. To set the stage for later empirical analysis,

Section III of this paper discusses the information available in three major

longitudinal data sets, each of which appears to have shortcomings for

use in an appropriately specified life cycle model.
                                 6




          I. The Prevalence of Minimum Hours Constraints

     In this section we will look at evidence pertaining to minimum

hours constraints. These are constraints which limit the opportunities

for an individual to work fewer hours than full—time in his current job.

Perhaps the best data source for examining the extent of these con-

straints in the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The

PSID contained the following question: "Could you have worked less

if you had wanted to?" Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 tabulate the answers

to this question for several groups of males who were working, but

not self-employed. Unfortunately, a significant percentage of the

sample was not asked this question due to the routing pattern of the

questionaire; these people are included in the third column. The people

who were routed around this question had previously indicated that they

would have liked to work more on their present job but couldn't.

Column 4 calculates the number of employees who faced a minimum hours

constraint as a fraction of those for whom an answer could be deter-

mined.7

     The overall impression gained from Table 1 is that minimum hours

constraints are a very common phenomenon. Line 1 of the table indicates

that 41 percent of prime—age males reported that they could not reduce

their hours of work. Of those for whom a response could be determined,

over half (56%) said that they do face such a constraint.

     It should be recognized that these figures might understate the
number of individuals subject to a minimum hours constraint due to the

nature of the question. For one thing, individuals may indicate that

there is downward flexibility in their hours of work even if they can

reduce hours only transitorily rather than permanently. For another,

individuals who work some amount of voluntary overtime might respond

that they could reduce their present work week

even   though they would ultimately face a minirium hours
constraint. Line 2 of the table attempts to shed light
on the   latter   source of downward bias in the   indicated   number of con-
strained individuals    by including only individuals who usually worked

42 hours or less per week, and who presumably were less likely to be

working overtime than people working longer hours. With this sub-sample,

61% of those for whom a response could be determined reported that they

faced a minimum hours constraint, although the overall percentage

reporting a constraint remained the same as before, at 41%.

       The implication of minimum hours constraints of concern here is

that they may affect retirement decisions by forcing an individual to

choose between full—time work on the main job, part-time work in another

job at lower wages, or complete retirement, rather than allowing some

intermediate amount of work effort in the same job at unchanged wages.

For this reason it is of interest to know how many people in an older

age range report that they are facing this kind of constraint.          Line 3

of Table 1 reports this information for individuals aged 55 to 65, which

is the age range in our society when many people begin to consider

retirement. These figures do not show great differences from the

analogous figures for the younger age groups. The same is true for
line 4 of the table, which reports the percentages facing minimum hours

constraints among individuals who are covered by pensions. Line 5 does

the same for union members and suggests that union members are somewhat

less likely to face these constraints than are non—union employees.

     Table 2 breaks the responses down by occupation and industry,

again reporting results for prime—age males.8 These figures are largely

in accord with our expectations. Laborers (62% of those who responded to the

question) and operatives (59%) were most likely to be constrained,

and managers (at 49%) least likely. By industry, those most likely

to report a constraint are in the medical profession or in the army,

with 70% or more of the individuals responding to the question

reporting a constraint. There are eight other industries in which

60% or more of the responding individuals report a constraint.

Those least likely to report a constraint are in mining, paper,

transportation and communication, but even in these industries,

more than 40% of the responding individuals report a constraint.

     A second data source with information on the extent of r.iinirnura

hours constraints is a 1979 survey with 267 responding organizations

by the American Society for Personnel Administration and the Bureau of

National Affairs (ASPA-BNA).9 Approximately one-half of the respond-

ing establishments are manufacturing companies, one—third non-

manufacturing business and   about   one—fifth nonbusiness organizations

(hospitals, universities, government organizations, etc.). According

to the survey, while over half of the firms make arrangements for some

employees to stay on as consultants, and sometimes recall retirees

for temporary assignment, only 15% of the responding firms, and only
10% of the manufacturing firms, have a "tapering off" program in which

at least some employees can reduce their work time as they approach

retirement. Only 7% have such programs covering all employees. The

percentages are similar among large firms (more than 1000 employees)

and small firms (fewer than 1000 employees).

     This survey thus gives the impression that the percentage of

individuals who are free to reduce hours immediately prior to

retirement is on the order of 10%, whereas the stdtistics from the

PSID suggest a substantially higher number. In the PSID survey,

it may be reasonably argued for individuals in the "not ascertained"

category that if a person cannot increase his work week, it is likely

that he also cannot reduce it, i.e., that most of these individuals

should be counted as facing a minimum hours constraint. Even so,

the PSID data would still indicate that a quarter to a third of

the individuals are free to reduce their hours of work. However,

the PSID question is sufficiently vague that it is difficult to be

sure that most of those who report no constraint can in fact reduce

their work time much, even if the sample is confined only to those who

normally work 42 hours or less per week. People might be able to take

a little more sick leave, or take a week or two without pay, or even to

reduce their work effort on the job a little, but there may nevertheless

be fairly strong limits to the extent to which work effort can be sub-

stantially reduced by these means.
                                    10



             II. Implications for the Estimation of

                      Utility Function Parameters

     In order to estimate the effects of changes in pension rules or

social security rules on retirement behavior, especially for large

changes in these programs, it is necessary to obtain estimates of the

parameters of the utility function which underlies retirement behavior.

Such parameters may be estimated in the context of a model which

hypothesizes that individuals maximize utility subject to a particular

opportunity set. The opportunity set is very much affected by whether

there is a minimum hours constraint. Accordingly, so are the utility

function parameter estimates. In this section we will illustrate how

inappropriate assumptions regarding a minimum hours constraint may

result in biased estimates of utility function parameters.



A.   Biases From Ignoring a Minimum Hours Constraint.

     First, suppose that most people are subject to a minimum hours

constraint, but that the investigator ignores it and instead assumes

that hours may be freely varied between full-time work and full-time

leisure. A common model which reflects the investigator's assumption

involves a lifetime utility function


(1) u =     u[C(t),   L(t), t] dt

which is maximized to subject to the budget constraint


(2) 4 e_rt   C(t) dt = A    +   4 e_rt   w(t) [1 -   L(t)]   dt

where C(t) is consumption at time t, L(t) is leisure at time t
                                       11




 [measured in units so that L(t) is in a ranqe from 0 to 1], A is
                                                             0
initial   wealth, and W(t) is the wage rate at time t. The explicit

inclusion of time in the utility function reflects both any discount

factors that may be appropriate and any changes in the relative

valuations of leisure and goods which arise because the marginal

disutility of work increases with age.

       To estimate such a model, it is necessarJ first to specify

a functional form for the utility function and to introduce a

stochastic structure. With the present model, a straightforward way to

do this is to write the utility function as


(3)    u[C(T),   L(t), ti   = {[C(t)]_+e + E] [L(t)]}P
This   is a CES utility function with elasticity G =     l/(l   +   p),   and

degree of homogeneity V. The relative valuations of consumption and

leisure depend on a set of exogenous variables in the vector X, and an

error term presumed to come from some specific distribution, e.g.

normal. Time (or age) is also incorporated in the vector X. For any

specific values of the parameters 13, V arid p, and for the set of exogenous

variables X for an individual in the sample, there is some value of £

for   which the model predicts a value of labor supply just equal to the

amount which the individual does in fact supply. The probability

density of this value of C     is   the individual likelihood for this person.

Note that the required value of C, and hence the individual likelihood,

will be different for different values of the parameters 13, V and p.

The maximum likelihood values of these parameters are simply the values

which maximize the product of the individual likelihoods for all the
                                   2




individuals in the sample, or in other words, the parameter values from

which the sample is most likely to have come. This is a relatively

easy procedure to outline, but it is a computationally burdensome pro-

cedure to implement. In practice, investigators frequently introduce

simplifications and assumptions to make the problem computationally more

tractable.

     If the path of wages over time is reasonably stable, the model

specified above, a model with no constraints on hours worked, implies

a more or less gradual transition from full—time work to complete retire-

ment. If individuals are in fact subject to a minimum hours constraint,

however, we instead will observe a very rapid transition from full-time

work to retirement. The estimation procedure adjusts the estimates of

  and p to maximize the likelihood function in view of these observa-

tions, and in the process of doing so it may produce biased estimates

of the parameters. To see the source of the bias, consider the labor

supply decision of an individual for a small time period around the

time of retirement, as Illustrated in Figure 1.10 Heuristically, the

estimation procedure may account in one of two ways for the rapid

transition from full—time work to complete retirement.

     One possibility - a theoretical possibility that without firmer

behavioral grounding is not very plausible -   is   that the indifference

curves exhibit a low or moderate elasticity of substitution between

earnings and leisure, but that the curves are rotated rapidly between

the time just before the individual retires and the time after he retires.

This is illustrated in the left panel of the figure. The substance of

this explanation is that something happens around the time of retirement
                                 13




that suddenly and greatly increases the individual's marginal disutility

of work. In an estimation procedure, the algorithm would associate

this behavior either with age or with some variable which changes rapidly

and uniformly across people and which could therefore account for this

kind of behavior. However, it cannot be attributed strictly to age,

since people retire at a variety of ages in the late fifties and

sixties, and there are unlikely to be explanatory variables which always

undergo a dramatic shift around the time of retirement. Hence, the

maximization algorithm is likely to focus on a second explanation,

namely that the elasticity of substitution is rather high, so that a

slight tilt of the indifference curves is enough to cause the sudden

shift of the point of tangency between the indifference curves and the

budget line. This situation is illustrated in the right panel of the

figure.

     Ignoring a minimum hours constraint, then, is likely to produce a

rather high estimate for the within—period elasticity of substitution

between earnings and leisure. However, the estimation procedure must

find the general slope of the indifference curves to be close to the wage

rates for all individuals; otherwise for some individuals a small shift

in the slope of the indifference curves would be insufficient to make them

retire. Hence, the estimation procedure would tend to assign coefficients

to the explanatory variables so that the general slope of the indifference

curves in the right panel of the figure is close to the wage rate for as

many individuals as possible, and it would use the error term      to

resolve any remaining discrepencies between the wage rate and the slope

of the indifference curves. This would bias the coefficients of the
                                 14




utility function toward values which are in fact appropriate more for

the wage equation.

     A somewhat different bias can arise if the estimation procedure

utilizes only information about whether or not the individual has stopped

working, as in Gordon and Blinder (1980). In the absence of a minimum

hours constraint, the reservation wage is tangent to the indifference

curve at the point of no income and no work, as illustrated by the dotted

line which is tangent to the indifference curve at point A in Figure 2.

With a minimum hours constraint, the reservation wage is steeper than

the indifference curve at A. In the figure, point B corresponds to

the minimum hours of work if the individual chooses to work, and the

dashed line corresponds to the associated reservation wage. If the

actual wage were higher, then the individual could reach some point above

and to the left of B which is preferred to A, while if the wage were

less, point A would be preferred.

     If the estimation procedure ignores the minimum hours constraint

when it is in fact present, the reservation wage represented by the

dashed line will be inferred to be the slope of the indifference curves

at A. Hence, the indifference curves will be estimated to be too steep.

If all jobs in a sample involve a minimum hours constraint, or if the

explanatory variables X in the utility function of equation (3) are

uncorrelated with the presence or absence of a minimum hours constraint,

then the only bias may be that the constant term in the linear form X

is estimated too high. If some of the explanatory variables are

correlated with the presence or absence of the constraint, however, then

estimates of other parameters may also be biased. Suppose, for example,
                                 15




that people with high education are more likely to be in jobs without

a minimum hours constraint. That means that such people are more

likely than average to have a budget line represented by the dotted

line in Figure 2. The estimation procedure will infer that high educa-

tion tends to be associated with flatter indifference curves, all other

things equal, and this will bias the coefficient of education in X in

Equation (3) downward.



B.   Biases From Treating the Wage Decline Associated with Partial

     Retirement Jobs as Exogenous

     The descriptive statistics presented in the previous section should

lead one to question the plausibility of any assumption that individuals

are free to reduce gradually their working hours at unchanged wages as

they approach retirement. Just the opposite assumption might seem to be

more defensible on the basis of the evidence. The fraction of indivi-

duals who are free to reduce their working hours appears to be no more

than 40% and perhaps as little as one-tenth. Particularly if this latter

figure is closer to the truth, it can be argued that an empirical investi-

gation based on a model which assumes that everyone is constrained would
                 11
be acceptable.

     However, our earlier work casts doubt on a model which assumes that

everyone works in a job with fixed working hours until a certain age,

and then retires completely. That work, based on the Retirement

History Survey, found that almost a quarter to a third of the individuals

in the sample spent at least some time in partial retirement, usually

in a job other than the one at which they had worked for most of their
                                 1.6




lives. Such a finding suggests that an older person nearing retirement

age does not face a simple dichotomous choice between complete retire-

ment and a full—time job. Rather, he faces a three—way choice between

complete retirement, full—time work in his primary job, and part—time

work, probably at a lower wage, in a different "partial retirement" job.

     In such a setting, public and private pensions aside, the wage rate

in the full-time job is not a true measure of the opportunity cost of

leaving that job. If the individual quits the full—time job and works

in the partial retirement job, the opportunity cost is the difference

in utility levels between the full—time work,high wage package available

on the main job and the part—time work, lower wage option available if

partial retirement is elected.'2 One would suspect that failure to

allow for the partial retirement option would bias estimates of the

parameters of the utility function. The nature of such a bias can be

demonstrated. To begin, Figure 3 compares the hypothetical labor

supplies of the same individual for two different environments, one in

which the individual has the opportunity to work at reduced hours in

a second job and one where this opportunity is lacking. Time B is the

time when the individual retires from the job if he has no alternatives

to the full-time job. If an alternative job is available, time A is

the time when the individual leaves the full-time job, and time C is

the time when the individual leaves the partial retirement job. It is

also possible that if the wage on the partial retirement job is low

enough in comparison to the wage on the full-time job, the job is so

unattractive as to be irrelevant. In this case, the individual would

continue to retire at time B whether or not the alternative job were
                                     17




available.

      The figure is drawn so that time A occurs before time B, and

time B before time C.      It can be shown that this is indeed the case

for a wide variety of commonly—used utility functions. In particular,

for a utility function that is homogeneous in consumption and leisure,

a sufficient condition for this result is that 1 —     (1/a)   < v < 1,

where G is the elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure,

and V is the degree of homogeneity. Note that this relation will be

satisfied by any utility function, such as the Cobb-Douglas or the

C.E.S. function, that is homogeneous of degree one, or by any function

where both the elasticity of substitution and V are less than one.

      To sketch how this result arises, suppose that the two paths were

such that time A occurred after time B. Let MU be the marginal

utility of discounted lifetime income along the solid path (i.e., with

no partial retirement), and consider the implications of this same MU

along the dashed path (with partial retirement). With the condition

1 —   (1/a) < v <   1, the MTJ for which lifetime consumption just equals

lifetime income (properly discounted) along the solid path must cause
                                                                            13
lifetime income to exceed lifetime consumption along the dashed path.

This means that MU1 the marginal utility of lifetime income, must be

lower along the dashed path than along the solid path. Between time B

and time A, the individual would be working and earning income along

the dashed path but not along the solid path, in spite of the fact that

the marginal utility of income is lower along the former than along the

latter path.14 This inconsistency contradicts the hypothesis that time

B precedes time A and establishes that the termination of full-time work
                                    18



occurs   earlier if a partial retirement job is available. A symmetric

argument establishes that time B does indeed precede time C, that

is, that the person completely retires later if a partial retirement

job is available and taken.

    Now suppose that X. is a variable which does not influence the prefer-

ences of individuals but which is positively correlated to wage differentials

between full-time and partial retirement jobs. For example, an accountant

(X.=l) may have skills which are reasonably transferrable to typical part-

time jobs in the service industry, but a production worker on a specific

assembly line (X. = 0) may   not.   In this situation, a person who has a low

value of X. and hence a low wage in the partial retirement job may find

such a job irrelevant and will work in the full-time job up until complete

retirement. A person with a high value of X., and hence a higher wage in

the partial retirement job, is more likely to find that job attractive

enough to work at it for some period of time.

     To see the source of bias from an estimation procedure that imposes

a minimum hours constraint but ignores partial retirement, turn to

Figure 4. Notice first that this figure is drawn consistent with the

assumption by the investigator that hours are fixed at full time, and

therefore that leisure can be affected only by adjusting the date of

retirement. That is, this figure illustrates how the indifference curves

which assume full—time work appear to the investigator when, contrary

to his assumption, the partial retirement option is available;

it should not be interpreted as the appropriate diagram for analyzing

the labor supply decision when hours are in fact variable.

     Consider now two individuals who have identical wages in their full—
                                    19



time jobs andwho are otherwise identica1 save that one hasa low value of X.

and does not work in a partial retirement job while the other has a high value of

X. and does partially retire. Figure 4 illustrates how the estimation

algorithm views these two individuals, who will be denoted as I and II,

respectively. For individual I, the budget constraint has a slope

equal to the wage rate in the full-time job until the time of retirement

B, and the unobserved budget constraint past that point is assumed

to continue at more or less the same slope. In fitting utility

function parameters, an estimation procedure will infer that the

indifference curves of individual I are tangent to his budget constraint

at time B. This indifference curve is labelled as I in the figure.

For individual II, the observed budget constraint consists of one

segment with a slope equal to the full-time wage until time A, when he

leaves the full-time job, and another segment between time A and time

C which has a slope equal to the wage in the partial retirement job.

The unobserved budget constraint past that point is usually assumed

to have a slope similar to the slope in the last observed job, resulting

in a complete budget constraint for this individual which is indicated

by the dashed line in Figure 3 and labelled II. If time C is taken as

the date of retirement for this individual, a procedure which attempts

to estimate utility function parameters will infer that the indifference

curves are tangent to budget line II at that point. Hence, the

indifference curves will be presumed to look something like the curve

labelled as II in the figure.

     Many utility functions commonly used in estimation (e.g., Cobb-

Douglas, C.E.S.) are homothetic, that is, they have the same slope along
                                       20



any ray from the origin. If such functions are used the estimation

algorithm will observe that the slope of the indifference curve I

along the ray labelled M is steeper than the indifference curve II

along the ray labelled N. If ray N is steeper than ray M, this can

occur for convex indifference curves only if the curves for individual

I are rotated relative to the curves for II in such a way that the first

set of curves display a higher relative preference for leisure. Since

this is observed to be correlated with X. and since the two individuals
                                        1
are in all other respects identical, the estimation procedure will
impute a negative effect of X. on the relative preference for leisure

in the utility function, even though X. does not enter the utility

function at all. Hence, a failure to consider an alternative partial

retirement job in the estimation procedure can produce biased estimates

of the parameters of the utility function. An analogous argument for bias

can be made if X. is a variable which, for other reasons, truely

belongs in the   utility   function.

C. A Model With Partial Retirement.

     Since many individuals appear to face fixed hours constraints

on their full-time jobs but are able to work part—time by taking partial

retirement jobs at lower wages, some blend of the previous two

models is necessary to avoid the biases which either alone would

produce. In this hybrid model, there are two jobs. One has a

constraint on the number of hours worked, and the other has a

lower wage rate than the first, but does not have any constraints

on hours worked. An optimizing individual in this model would

maximize the lifetime discounted utility function
            T
     u =   4, u[C(t),   L(t), t] dt

subject to the following constraints
                                              21


     1 -   L(t)   =
                      H1(t)
                               +   H(t)
     1T ert C(t) dt =          A      + 1T e_rt [w(t) 1i1(t) +
                                                               W2(t) 112(t)J dt
                         0
     H1(t) H2(t) =
     H1(t) [1 -                 = 0
                      H1(t)}
where H.(t) and W(t) are hours worked and wages in the 1th job, and

where all other variables are the same as defined previously. The

first constraint says that time not spent at leisure is split between

the two jobs, and the third constraint says that the time is allocated

entirely to one or the other job. The second constraint is the

familiar budget constraint, and the last equation limits any time

spent in the first job to full—time work or none at all. An

estimation procedure built around the (non-trivial) solution to this

problem will avoid the problems of bias which would arise if the

possibility of individuals working in partial retirement jobs is

ignored.

            III. Considerations of Available Data

     Ideally, an estimation procedure should consider, for each

individual, the opportunity set that individual is facing. This

includes the wage history in the individual's full—time job, whether

or not he can reduce hours in that job, and potential wages in any

relevant partial retirement jobs. For each person, the individual

likelihood would be calculated based on the model appropriate to

that individual, and the likelihoods would then be multiplied to

yield an overall likelihood function which could be maximized with

respect to the parameters of the utility function. Unfortunately,

this procedure makes considerable demands on the data, and no data

source is currently available which would enable this procedure to

implemented in a completely satisfactory manner. In this section, we
                                         22




will discuss the relative advantages and disadvantages of three

of the major microeconomic data sets which might be used in the

estimation process. These three data sets are the Retirement History

Survey (RHS), the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID),

and the National Longitudinal Study of Mature Men (NLS) .        Six

aspects of these surveys are particularly relevant to researchers

trying to estimate parameters relevant to retirement behavior.

       1. Hours Limitations.       The PSID has by far the   best   information

on hours limitations in current jobs. On two of Its surveys the NLS

asked whether the individual wished to reduce hours but couldn't.

The answers to this question indicate that. only a relatively small

number of individuals felt such a constraint to be binding (13% in 1971

and 7% in 1976), but it must be noted that this question asked whether

an individual wished to reduce hours, whereas the PSID question cited

earlier asked whether an individual could reduce hours if he wanted to.

No information on hours constraints is available from the PITS.

       2.               Retirement. Both the NLS and the RHS attempt        to


find   out if   the   individual is subject to mandatory retirement
provisions.      The NLS   questions   always pertain to the current job.

In the first year of the RHS, if the individual already considered

himself to be retired or partially retired, the survey inquired

about mandatory retirement provisions on the last job on which the

individual worked full-time, which is closer to the information

that is really being sought. No information on mandatory retirement

is available from the PSID.

       3. Pension Coverg. All three surveys inquire about pension
                                   23



coverage. The RIIS and the NLS do :0    every   year, whereas the PS.LD

asks about such coverage only in one of the later years. The RHS

additionally   asks each year the ages that individuals will be eligible

for normal and early retirement in their current jobs. The NLS

inquires about early retirement only in two years, but in those
years it asks the expected pension amounts both for normal retirement
and for early retirement. These are the kinds of figures which
are necessary to calculate the increment of pension wealth due to

working between these dates [the DELTA used by Burkhauser and

Quinn (1981)]. Unfortunately, these questions are only sporadically

answered, and the quality of the answers is open to considerable

doubt.

     4.   Wage History. All three surveys ask about the wage rate

each year in the current job. The RHS additionally provides several

pieces of information relevant to constructing a wage history.

One piece of information is a matched Social Security record which

gives on a year by year basis the amount of Social Security covered

earnings. The RHS also asks about wages in the first and immediately

previous jobs, and it inquires about the ages at which the respondent

earned one-third and one-half of his 1971 salary.

     5•    partial Retirement Jobs. The PHS each year

contains a question whether the individual considers himself to be

completely retired, partially retired, or not retired at all. This

question can be useful in distinguishing a movement from a full—

time job into a partial retirement job as opposed to a movement from

one full-time job into another full—time job. In the other surveys,

the distinction between these two movements must be made on the

basis of a drop either in usual hours worked per year or in the wage
                                      24


rate (A lower wage rate may indicate an easier partial retirement job).

The distinction will therefore contain a degree of arbitrariness

and may be subject to a considerable margin of error.

       6. Sample size. The RHS contains about 11,000 individuals

initially aged 58-63, and it surveys them bianually starting in

1969. This survey clearly provides the most observations in the

relevant age range (the early and mid 60's) for studies of retirement

behavior. The NLS surveys about 5,000 individuals initially aged

45—59 for a period of 10 years from 1966 to 1976, which means that

it includes several thousand individuals during their early and mid

60's. The PSID covers more than 5,000 hoursholds, but with no particu-

lar restrictions on the ages of the individuals. As a result, it has

considerably fewer observations of people in the relevant age range

than do the other two surveys.

       None   of these data sets allows for a complete specification
of the budget constraint. The PSID provides some information about
the   presence or absence of a minimum hours constraint but contains

no information on mandatory retirement. The RHS and the NLS indicate

whether or not the individual faces mandatory retirement, but of

these two only the NLS contains any information on minimum hours

constraints, and very fragmentary evidence at that. Hence it is

not possible to ascribe to each individual the correct budget

constraint, and some other method must be used to obtain estimated

parameters.

      If one believes that the percentage of individuals who do

face minimum hours constraints is as high as 90 percent, as may be implied

by the ASPR-BNA study, a reasonable approximation may be to treat

everyone as though they were subject to this constraint in their
                                    25


primary job unless there is obviou:; evidcncc to the contrary, such

as an individual who actually reduces work effort without changing

jobs. This procedure would mistreat some individuals who are not

subject to the constraint, but if the number of individuals so

mistreated is fairly small, one may use surveys such as the RHS

and NLS and hope that the impact of these individuals on parameter

estimates is not large.

     A more sophisticated but more complicated procedure would be

to use the information from one survey on the relative percentages

of individuals subject to fixed hours constraints as a priori

information in an estimation based on data from another survey.

For instance, let fC(3, x.) be the individual likelihood for individual

I using a model where he faces the constraint, and fC(13, X.) be the

likelihood for the same individual using a model where he does not

face the constraint. Now suppose that from the PSID is determined

the fraction PC of the individuals from a particular industry-

occupation classification who are subject to a minimum hours constraint.

Then, when forming the likelihood for an individual in the BUS or

NLS, the likelihood could be written as

             X,) + (1 —   p)   fC(3 x.)

where the likelihood with each model is weighted by the probability

that the model is correct. This procedure is probably necessary if

the number of individuals who are not subject to the constraint is

closer to the forty percent figure rather than the one—tenth.

(In the latter case, the improvement in estimates from using the more

complicated estimation procedure may be relatively small.) It also

improves if one can find some exogenous variables which are strongly
                                  26




correlated with the probability PC and hence which can be used to establish

which individuals have a PC close to one and which individuals have a

probability close to zero.



                       IV. Concluding Remarks

     Considerable progress has been made in our efforts to understand

retirement behavior, and the impact on this behavior of pensions, social

security and other features of the labor market which affect the rewards

to work. To predict the course of retirement behavior under unchanging

pension and social security programs, or to predict the effects of con-

templated changes in pension and social security systems, an appropriately

specified structural model is required. This discussion has pointed out

fundamental deficiencies in the structure of currently available supply

side models of retirement behavior.

     A principal finding of the descriptive statistics of this paper is

that any model which supposes that people are free to reduce hours on

their main job as they near retirement age is very substantially at odds

with the facts. However, the opposite assumption, that all jobs have

minimum hours constraints, is not completely tenable either in view of

the fact that around one-third of individuals partially retire at one

time or another during their lives. For individuals who do face minimum

hours constraints in their main jobs, another route is open to reduce

work effort, namely, to take another job, probably at a lower wage, which

does not entail this constraint. We have shown that parameter estimates

which are made in the context of a complete structural model under the

assumption that hours in the main job are freely variable may overstate
                                  27




the elasticity of substitution and/or create biases in the estimates of

other parameters in the utility, function. An upward bias in estimates

of the elasticity of substitution may lead to an overstatement of the

sensitivity of hours of work to changes in the parameters of pension

and social security programs)6 Parameter estimates made in the con-

text of a model which ignores the possibilities for partial retirement

are also subject to error, but the direction of this error depends on

the correlation of the omitted hours constraints with elements shifting

the utility function.

     More exact answers as to the size of biases involved must await the

estImation of a structural model which incorporates explicitly a minimum

hours constraint in the main job, at least for a substantial fraction

of the population. To estimate such a model, the data problems noted

above must be overcome.   As noted at the outset, such a model, once

estimated, can help to answer .a number of important policy related ques-

tions about the future course of retirement, the impact of changes in

pension and social security programs on retirement behavior, and the

substitution of older workers for groups such as women and youth whose

labor market opportunities have been of special concern to policy makers.
                                  28


                               FOOTNOTES



     1.   For a recent survey of the relevant literature, see Mitchell

and Fields (1982).

     2.   Pellechjo (1981), Burkhauser and Quinn (1981) and others discuss

interdependence over time in the budget equation. MaCurdy (1981) dis-

cusses relevant aspects of the life cycle utility function.

     3.   The Gordon—Blinder analysis does not quite provide structural

estimated for a complete life-cycle model. They consider a three—period

model in which the three periods are "past," "present," and "future."

Assuming full-time work in the past, they derive two formulae for the

reservation wage in the present, depending on whether or not the individual

works in the future. Whether or not the individual works in the future,

however, depends on the very parameters they are trying to estimate.

Hence, Gordon and Blinder face a bit of the chicken-and—egg problem:

the proper reservation wage equation to use for a particular individual

depends on the parameter values, but in order to estimate the parameter

values, they must already know which equation applies to each individual.

In their empirical estimation, Gordon and Blinder sidestep this problem

by using a reservation wage equation which is a compromise of the two

derived reservation equatiqns, without trying to decide which one is right

for particular person. This compromise permits them to derive parameter

estimates much more easily than would otherwise be possible, but at an

unknown cost in terms of the reliability of those estimates.

     4.   For a related theoretical analysis, see Burbidge and Robb

(1980).
     5.   It should be recognized throughout this   discussion   that pension

rules, mandatory retirement provisions and even provisions of social

security benefits are not exogenous to retirement behavior, although

they may be exogenous to the discussions of any particular individual.

Early retirement benefits and mandatory retirement provisions have been

viewed as outcomes of an employment contract, rather than as exogenous

influences on the contractual relation (Lazear, 1979, 1981). The Social

Security program is increasingly being influenced by retirement behavior

of the growing number of older workers. Moreover, the literature on

unions and compensation laws traditionally treated pensions as an outcome

of the wage and employment process (Gustman and Segal, 1972 and 1977).

     6.   One might argue that this observation simply reflects mandatory

retirement rules and pension regulations which limit collection of

benefits to those who have left the covered job. However, we found that

the relative frequency of partial retirement outside of the main job

remains high even for those who are not subject to mandatory retirement

on their main job, who have no pension in their main job, and who have

no health problem. An alternative, but not mutually exclusive explanation

for the prevalence of partial retirement outside the main job is that

jobs taken outside the main job are much less difficult to perform than

are the main jobs and this lower work effort requirement is much more

highly valued by older workers.

     7.   Later waves of the surveys, unavailable to us at the time this

paper was written, corrected this defect in the routine pattern of the

questionnaire.
     0.     A similar table for 55—65 ycar—olds, not        reported   lierc,

indicated a relation between the two age groups in the disaggregated

data comparable to the relation between lines 2 and 3 in Table 1.

     9.     Survey No. 39, entitled Retirement Policies and Programs.

    10.     The location of the indifference curves in this diagram depends

on the marginal utility of income during the period, which in turn

depends on the amount of income earned in other periods, and through

that on wage rates and labor supply decisions in other periods. This

dependence of the indifference curves on the individual's marginal

utility of income is the factor that renders this income—leisure diagram

invalid as the sole tool for the analysis of retirement behavior.

    11.     The fixed hours model simply adds the additional cdnstraint

L(t)[1 —   L(t)]   = 0 to the previous modeL An alternative way to formu-

late this model is to hypothesize that the individual maximizes

U   u(Y, R) subject to the budget constraint Y =
                                                       A0
                                                            +      W(t)dt
where Y is income, R is year of retirement, N is the lifetime, and other

variables are as defined before.

    12.     For a discussion of the variation over the life cycle in

wages for work in the primary job and for work while partially retired,

see Gustman and Steinmeier (1982). Implications of partial retirement

for wage profiles as conventionally estimated are also discussed in

that paper.

    13.     At each point in time, consumption along an optimal path must
                                                       rt
satisfy the relationship u[C(t),     L(t),   tj = ke        where u is the

partial derivative or u with respect to consumption and k is a constant

which may be interpreted as the marginal utility of discounted lifetime
income. With the condition given in the text, it may             be   shown   that for
a constant k, the value of C(t) which          satisfies   this equation at any point

in time is positively related to L(t). Thus for a given value of k

(Mu)1 work (and therefore income) would be greater along the dashed
path   under   the hypothesis that time B precedes time A, and consumption

would be lower.

       14. The fact that the individual chooses leisure along the solid

path between time B and time A implies that u[C1(t), 1, tI — ke                tc(t)
>
    u[C(t),    0, tJ +   kert[W(t)   —
                                         C0(t)],   where C1 is the amount consumed

when leisure is chosen and C0 is consumption when full—time work is chosen,

and where C1(t) satisfies the equationin the previous footnote for the

given t. Using the condition given in the text, it can be shown that

this relationship continues to hold for lower values of k. Hence, between

time B and time A, a lower value of k along the dashed path cannot induce

the individual to switch from complete retirement to full—time work.

       15. Remember that, according to the model being analyzed, indif—

ference curve II is assumed by the investigator to he associated with

full—time work.


       16Errors in measuring the wage offer variable, errors which are

traceable to misspecification of the opportunity set from ignoring partial

retirement1 may create a bias in the opposite direction. For a discussion,

see Gustman and Steinmeier (1982).
                                      32



                                REFERENCES



Boskin, Michael J, and Hurd, Michael D., "The Effect of Social Security

    on Early Retirement," Journal of Public Economics, 1978, 10, 361—377.

Burbidge, John B., and Robb, A. Leslie, "Pensions and Retirement Behavior,"

    Canadian Journal of Economics, August 1980, 13, 421-437.

Burkhauser, Richard and Quinn, Joseph, "The Effect of Changes in Mandatory

     Retirement Rules on the Labor Supply of Older Workers," mimeo, 1980.

Clark, Robert L. and Johnson, Thomas, "Retirement In Dual Career Families."

    Mimeographed, North Carolina State University, June 1980.

Deardorff, Alan V. and Stafford, Frank P., "Compensation of Cooperating

     Factors," Econometrica, July 1976, 44, 671—684.

Gordon, Roger H., and Blinder, Alan S., "Market Wages, Reservation Wages

     and Retirement," Journal of Public Economics, 1980, 14, 277—308.

GustBlan, Alan L. and Segal, riartin, "Interstate Variations in Teachers'

     Pensions," Industrial Relations, October, 1977, 16, 335—344.

_____________________      "Wages, Wage Supplements and the Interaction of

     Union Bargains in the Construction Industry," Industrial and Labor

     Relations Review, January, 1972, 25, 179—185.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L., "Partial Retirement and the

     Analysis of Retirement Behavior," National Bureau of Economic Research,

     Working Paper Number 763, September, 1981.

                                           "Partial Retirement and Wage Profiles,"

     mimeo, June   1982.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and    Fields,   Gary S., "The Effects of Pensions and

     Earnings   on Retirement in Review Essay," in R. Ehrenberg, editor,
                                     3H




    Research In Labor   Economics,   1982, 5, (forthcoming).

Pellechio, Anthony J., "Social Security and the Decision to Retire," mimeo

    University of Rochester, June '1981.
                                                          Table 1
                               Probability That Time at Work Cannot Be Reduceda
                                                                         (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)
                                                                       Cannot      Can Reduce       Not
                                                                                                              (l)/t(l)+(2)]
                                                                    Reduce Hours     Hours      Ascertained
25—55   year—olds                                                        .41          .32           .27             .56
25-55 year-olds usually working       <   42 hours/week                  .41          .26           .34             .61
55-65   year-olds   usually working   <   42 hours/week                  .45          .27           .29             .63
25-55 year—olds covered by a pension                                     .42          .32           .26             .57
25—55 year—olds     who are union members                                .34          .33           .34             .51
aData are from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1971-1975.           Sample includes males who were not self-
 employed.
                                               35


                Table   2: Probability that T:ime at Work Cannot Be Reduced,
                                 by Occupation and Industrya


                                                      (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)
                                                  Cannot       Can Reduce       Not         (1)
                                               Reduce Hours       Hours     Ascertained   (l)+(2)


By Occupation

   Professional, Technical, and Kindred             .47           .40           .12         .54

   Managers, Oficials, Proprietors                  .46           .48           .06         .49

   Clerical and Sales                               .42           .31           .26        .58

   Craftsmen, Foremen, and Kindred                  .35          .35            .29        .50

   Operatives                                       .38          .26            .37        .59

  Laborers                                          .37          .23            .39        .62
   Total (including NEC)                            .41          .32           .27         .56


By Industry
  Agriculture                                       .40          .25           .35         .62

  Mining                                            .31          .42           .27         .42

  Metals                                            .32          .33           .35         .49

  Machinery, mci. Elec.                             .40          .37           .23         .52

  Motor Vehicles                                    .36          .29           .35         .55

  Other Durables                                    .37          .33           .30         .53

  Food                                              .43          .22           .34         .66

  Tobacco                                           .44          .26           .30         .63

  Textiles, Apparel and Shoes                       .43          .23           .33         .65
                                      36




Paper                                      .29   .39   .31   .43

Chemicals, Petroleum, Rubber

    and Plastic                            .41   .29   .28   .59


Other Nondurables                          .44   .26   .29   .63


Construction                               .32   .29   .38   .52


Transportation                             .33   .39   .27   .46


Communication                              .37   .41   .22   .47


Other Public Utilities                     .43   .31   .26   .58


Retail                                     .43   .36   .21   .54


Wholesale                                  .38   .39   .23   .49

Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate        .47   .35   .17   .57


Repair Services                            .34   .37   .28   .48


Business Services                          .45   .22   .33   .67


Personal Services                          .31   .35   .35   .47


Amusement                                  .39   .37   .23   .51

                                           .46   .29   .25   .61
Printing

Medical                                    .54   .23   .23   .70


Education                                  .44   .38   .18   .54


Professional Other than Medical or

    Education                              .42   .40   .18   .51


                                           .60   .25   .16   .71
Army

Government                                 .48   .28   .23   .63


Total mci. NEC.                            .41   .32   .27   .56




a
 See footnote to Table 1.
                                                    37




           Figure 1. Alternative Explanations for a Sudden Transition
                      Between Full—Time Work and Retirement.




    Earnings                                         Earnings
During                                           During



                        I                                       \
                                                                    \
                              'I




                  (a)                                                   (b)



               Legend: Indifference Curves in Period Before Retirement__________
                            Indifference Curves in Period After Retirement________ ________
                                     33




Figure 2. Reservation Wages with and without Flinimun Hours Constraint




          Income
       During      iod




                         B


                              N
                                     N
                                          S.'

                                                  N
                                                        A
                                                                      Leisure




      Legend:                Reservation Wage with no minimum Hours Constraint

                — — Reservation                 Wage with a Minimum Hours Constraint
                                3q




Figure 3. Labor Supply with and without a Second Job Lacking
          a Fixed Hours Constraint




Labor
Supply




                                                       Time




Legend: Labor Supply with Single Job with Fixed Hours__________

         Labor Supply with Two Jobs, One with Fixed Hours______ _______
                                40




Figure 4. Potential Bias Arising From the Failure to Consider a Partial
                   Retirement Job




 Income




                                     ,M




                                          I




                                                            Years of
                      C       B A                           Leisure
