                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PENSIONS AS SEVERANCE PAY




                         Edward P. Lazear




                      Working Paper No. 91




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MPL 02138


                            July 1982




This paper was presented at the conference on Financial Aspects of
the U.S. Pension System, Amelia Island, Florida, March 25—26, 1982.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in Labor Studies and in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #944
                                                  July 1982




                               Abs   tract

                      "Pensions as Severance Pay"



     Earlier claims that pensions serve as severance pay are cor-

roborated by a new data set drawn from the 1980 Banker's Trust

corporate pension plan study. A model is developed that shows how

pension values which vary with the age of retirement make both

workers and firms better off by moving the equilibrium in the

direction of a perfect-information, first-best optimum. This

requires that pension values decline with the age of retirement

beyond a certain point. Evidence from the 1975 and 1980 data sets

supports this claim. To the extent that any significant change has

occurred between 1975 and 1980, most important is that the ratio

of early retirement pension value to normal retirement pension value

has increased.



                                  Edward P. Lazear
                                  Graduate School of Business
                                  University of Chicago
                                  1101 East 58th Street
                                  Chicago, IL 60637

                                  (312) 962—7464
     When wages equal marginal product and workers are risk—neutral, severance

pay is not merely superfluous——it is harmful. However, when either of these

conditions is violated severance pay becomes an important part of an optimal

compensation scheme. For example, if the contemporaneous wage exceeds

marginal product then workers prefer to remain with the firm even when it is

inefficient to do so. Severance pay causes the worker to leave the job more

frequently and a judiciously chosen combination of wage and severance pay can

induce efficient quitting behavior.

     Pensions which vary with the date of retirement can be thought of as a

form of severance pay. If the expected present value of the pension declines

with later retirement, then the worker sacrifices some benefits to remain on

the job. Stated conversely, firms appear to be willing to pay a larger

pension value (stock, not flow, of course) to workers who retire early. These

larger pensions can be interpreted as severance pay since they induce the

worker to leave the job more frequently than he would in the absence of such a

structure.

     This view of pensions is quite different from the one that holds that

pensions are a way to save at before—tax rather than after—tax rates of

interest. Although there must be some truth to the notion that pensions

function as a tax—free savings account, this view alone is inconsistent with

the finding (presented below) that the expected value of the pension stream

declines with increased age of retirement. Since nothing is withdrawn

explicitly from the account until retirement, the value of pension benefits

should be strictly increasing in age of retirement under the savings account

interpretation of pensions. The widespread existence of pensions which

decline with age of retirement is evidence for the notion that pensions act as

a form of severance pay to insure efficient labor mobility.
                                          2




       Below, a theory of severance pay is presented and specific implications

of that theory to pensions are derived. The theory is tested using data which

I generated using the 1980 Bankers' Trust Corporate Pensions Plans Study. The

results are then compared to those obtained using a similar data set for 1975

which was analyzed in a previous study (Lazear (1981)).

       The major findings are:

       (1) Although severance pay does not always guarantee efficient labor

mobility, approximately chosen severance pay moves the economy in the

direction of the perfect information optimum under almost all circumstances.

       (2) Most major pension plans in both 1975 and 1980 pay a larger expected

present value of pension benefits for early retirement. This is consistent

with the view that pensions act as severance pay, but inconsistent with the

notion that pensions are merely a tax—deferred savings account.

       (3) The structure of pensions between 1975 and 1980 does not appear to

have changed dramatically. Either ERISA'S (1974) effect was almost fully

captured by the 1975 data or it did not have a significant effect on pension

values.

       (4) There was about a 50% increase in the average nominal value of

pensions across the board between 1975 and 1980. Additionally, there was over

a 100% increase in the value of pensions taken ten—years before the date of

normal retirement for pattern skews. This may have been a reaction to changes

in   the Age   Discrimination in flnployment Act which restricted mandatory

retirement     clauses.
                                         3




The Model

       The first task is to derive a simple model of severance pay.1 To begin,

consider a two—period world in which workers are risk neutral. The terms of

trade between the worker and firm are set in period zero and work, if it

occurs at all, takes place during period one. For the moment, we do not

elaborate the reasons for setting up a contractual arrangement when a spot

market might appear to perform as well or better. Simply take the two—period

construct as given.

       Define the wage at which trade occurs in period one as W ,    the   worker's

value to the firm as V and the value of his alternative use of time as A.

If work takes place, the worker receives W ,    but   work does not occur in the

event of a "quit" or "layoff," each of which is determined unilaterally. A

worker quits if and only if A > W and the firm lays the worker off if and

only if V < W

       Work is efficient whenever A < V •    Under these circumstances,

appropriate transfers could make all parties better off if work occurs. But

if    W equals neither A    nor V , work will not always occur when it      is
efficient.     To see this, consider figure 1. Work is efficient whenever the
realization of V,A lies to the southeast of      the A = V   line.   Suppose that
the   wage which is negotiated is W •   The worker quits whenever A > W or

whenever the realization of A is above the horizontal line at W • Some of

these quits are efficient since the worker quits when A > W > V and when

A > V > W ,   both of which imply that A > V so that the separation should
occur. But some of those quits are inefficient since the worker also quits

when V > A > w •     These points are shown in the triangle labeled "inefficient

quits." The problem is that the worker can unilaterally determine a

separation    and he has no incentive to take into account the fact that although
A

                                                   A=V




                                 '   Inefficient
                                       Quits




    ______ Layoffs   -




                         w                               V



                Figure       1
                                                   4


his    alternatives are relatively good, he is worth even more to society at his

current job.

       The converse is also true. The firm unilaterally determines that a

layoff occurs whenever V <          W   •   In   the diagram, layoffs occur whenever the

realization of V is to the left of the vertical line at V =                       W   •   Some of

these layoffs are efficient because the firm lays the worker off when

W > A > V and when A > W > V , both of which imply that A > V •                           So that a

separation should occur. But some are inefficient because the firm also lays

workers off when W > V > A , shown in the triangle labeled "inefficient

layoffs." The problem here is that the firm can unilaterally determine a

separation and it has no incentive to take into account the fact that although

the worker is worth little to the firm, his alternative use of time is even

lower.

       Labor market situations seem to resemble this simple set—up. Workers

have better information about their alternatives than firms and firms have

better information about the worker's worth to the firm than the worker.

Wages or wage profiles are somewhat rigidly fixed in advance so that the

bilateral monopoly situation which arises after the values of A and V are

known does not lead to costly negotiation about how rent is to be split.

       Now consider the role of severance pay. Suppose that the argreement

which is negotiated at time zero includes the provision that work takes place

at   wage W , but    that a payment S is made from firm to worker if a

serpartion    occurs • 2   The   worker quits if f A +           S > W   or if f A > W -   S   •   The

firm   lays the worker off if f W —         V > S       or iff V > W —      S

       If   both W   and S are       free   to vary, severance pay adds nothing to the
analysis.     We can simply define W =            W    -   S   and the previous discussion

carries over perfectly to this case as well.
                                                 5




       Severance pay is interesting when W or S is not free to vary so that

the wage that minimizes the loss due to inefficient separation either is

infeasible or is undesireable by some other criterion. In the static context,

the division of rent provides a motivation for a separate wage and severance

pay. Since V > A automatically implies that rent is generated as the result

of trade, that rent must be split up. It is desireable that the way in whic

rent is shared should not affect the allocation of resources. A two—part wage

is sufficient to bring this about. The worker receives S even if no work

occurs so W - S     is the marginal payment for work and it is this value that

affects behavior.

       For example, suppose that V V were known with certainty by all

parties. Then if g(A) is the density of A ,                 the   expected rent associated

with the activity is


                                             V
                                       V -   f   A g(A)dA




if no inefficient separation occurs. This value can be realized only if work

occurs whenever A < V •          If   the marginal payment to work is set equal to

 V ,    a layoff never occurs and quits occur iff A > V .                 Thus,   W — S m V

is efficient. The split of the rent is a bargaining problem, but it is clear

that any level of S chosen is consistent with W — S                   V since W is free
to vary •   Thus, the   rent sharing arrangement pays S            and   the additional
degree of   freedom provided by W insures separation efficiency.

       A pension can be though of as this most simple fons of severance pay.

After signing the contract (becoming vested, perhaps), the worker can quit and

receive the pension S ,     or   he can continue to work in which case he
                                       6



receives W —   S   for work plus a pension of S upon retirement. Below, we

enrich the definition of severance pay to encompass the more elaborate forms

that pensions take, but the simple notion that a pension may function as a

form of severance pay remains.

     In this static context, the timing of S is inconsequential. It can be

paid during period zero or after period one so that the term "severance pay"

may be somewhat misleading. In the dynamic context, the timing of the payment

may be crucial. The fact that contracts are not costlessly enforced seems to

be a major part of the story and it is this aspect of the problem that makes

it necessary that the lump sum part of payment, the severance pay, be paid

after employment ceases.

     One situation in which it is important that severance pay follow

employment arises when effort cannot be monitored costlessly. As has been

argued elsewhere (Becker and Stigler (1974 and Lazear (1979, 1981)), deferred

compensation can act as an incentive device to bring about an efficient amount

of effort on the job. A pension given upon retirement may be regarded as a

reward for service well done and the existence of such a reward induces

workers to avoid shirking over their worklives. But a pension awarded only

upon retirement is not, in general, the best way to produce this result. I

have shown that under a number of circumstances, it is preferable to combine

some pension upon retirement with an age—earnings profile which rises more

rapidly than worker productivity.

     The difficulty associated with steeply rising age—earnings profiles is

that they distort the labor supply/separation decision. Mandatory retirement

is one institutional adaptation which has arisen to alleviate the harmful

effects of that distortion. But the problem is one which affects the worker

and firm in all periods of their partnership and is not specific to
V,A,W




                                   A




        _____________   _______________ t
                             T



            Figure 2
                                              7




retirement. In the vocabulary of the earlier discussion, if W exceeds V

then the worker will not leave the job when it is efficient for him to do

so. The firm, on the other hand, is too anxious to rid itself of the

worker. If V is known to both worker and firm,           then   it is easy to set up an

arrangement that will guarantee both optimal effort and efficient

separation. That scheme involves the use of an upward—sloping age—earnings

profile with some pension after retirement at the normal age. All separations

are initiated by workers except in the case of effort below the required

level. Under that circumstance, the worker is fired and loses the right to

draw high future salary and perhaps some pension device since the expected

present value of the pension, and therefore of the severance pay, varies with

age of retirement. Let us formalize the approach.

       We broaden our model to consider a situation in which workers remain with

a particular firm    for   a number of periods. Define T as the period of

"normal"   retirement. (As will be        argued below, "normal" retirement is nothing

more   than   the modal age of retirement because with efficient severance pay,

workers leave the firm appropriately.) A typical profile with wage not equal

to marginal product is shown in figure 2. Here, wage, labeled W ,            starts   out

below worker's marginal product, V , and then rises above it. The distortion

occurs because the worker reacts to the relationship between his

alternative, A , and       W ,   rather   than to the relationship between his

alternative, A , and marginal product, V •            Severance pay can eliminate the

distortion.

       Utility maximization implies that a worker quits and accepts severance

pay if two conditions hold: (1) the present value of severance pay plus the

alternative stream exceeds the present value of the wage stream in the current
                                                   8



firm and   (2) the worker cannot do even better by delaying his retirement to

some time in the future.3 In period T —                 1   ,   the     worker retires if


                     K+1                                                           K
                                                                                                1
(1)    AT_i + ST_i
                     T0
                         E
                             (1 +   r)   t
                                             >   W1 +           i -i   r     )sT
                                                                                    E
                                                                                   r=O       (1 +   r)

where K is the number of years beyond normal                     retirement        age that the

individual lives, S is the annual pension payment received from t until

death, if the worker retires at t and r is the discount rate.

      To induce efficient quitting behavior, it is necessary that the 1.h.s. of

(1) exceeds the r.h.s. of (1) if f AT_i >                              If


                     K+i
                                1
                                                                       K
      T—1 ST1         E
                                                 and T ST               E
                                                                                         T
                                                                                              then
                     T=O     (1 +   r)                                 r=O     (1 + r)

choose T and PT-i so that



(2) T—1         i    r        WT_i - VT_i



Substitution of (2) into (1) yields the necessary and sufficient condition

that the worker quits if




      AT_i + WT1 -   VT1 > WT1
(3)   or

      AT_i > VT1



Since this is the efficiency condition, the severance pay arrangement results

in efficient turnover.
                                                            9



        Now consider the decision at P - 2                           •   The worker resigns at T — 2       if

and only if two conditions hold: First, the present value of retiring at

T — 2     and receiving severance pay must exceed the present value of continuing

to work    until       T —   1    and retiring then, taking the T - I                      severance pay.

Second, the present value of retiring at I - 2                                  with severance pay must

exceed the present value of working until T and taking the normal pension.

If we make the assumption that At > Vt implies At, >                                        for

t'   > t then the second condition becomes redundant (demonstrated below).

        Consider the first condition: A worker retires at T - 2                                   rather than

at T— 1 iff

                                                    K+2
                   E12(A,)                                       1                     E1_2(A1_1)
         AT2+           1+r +S12                     E
                                                    t=O (1+r)                             1+r
                   S             K+1
                       T-1                  1
              +
                   1+r           t=O   (1 + r)
                                                     T




where ETI(AT_l) is the expectation of the alternative wage offer at I —                                         1


given the information at T - 2

        For efficiency, it is necessary that the l.h.s. of (4) exceed the r.h.s.

iff —2 < VT_2 (which, by assumption, implies A,_1 < VT_i). An efficient

pension plan sets


              -                        =             —
                   (1 +      r) Tl         WT_2           VT_2

         or
                  K+2                           S            K+1
                                  1    T         t-1                        1      1
         ST21=0E 1+r 1+r                                      E 1+r =WT_2 VT_2
                                                             1=0



     see this, substitute (5) into (4). The worker opts to leave if f
                                                                    10




                         + WT2 -             > WT2
          -   AT2                     VT_2

(6)           or if


              AT2 > VT2


which is the efficiency condition.

          Note also that if AT_2 > VT_2 ,                           the   worker chooses retirement at
T — 2          over retirement at T •                  The second condition is redundant. Since

AT_2 > V.._2 implies AT1 > VT1 , the efficient pension plan already

insures that inequality (3) holds as well. Since the efficient pension at
T —   1        induced retirement at T —                    1   whenever      A,,,_.1 > VT_i ,   it   is clear that

retirement at T — 2                    dominates retirement at I —                  1



          This provides a general statement of the efficient pension:



 7)                       T-i+1_                  -
              PT-i           1 + r —       WTi        VT_i


or


                          K-f-i                                              1(1-i—i
                                       1                                                  1
(7'                                                     1
               s
                   T—i
                          t=0
                                  (
                                  1+r 1+r T—i+i                 S               z
                                                                               T0       1+r T—i —VT—i
so




(8) T-i =                  E                                                    T
                          1=1
                                  (WTT -     VT]       1        r )i-t +
                                                                             (l+r)

The terminal value, P1 ,                     is   exogenous to this problem. It might be the

optimal pension to prevent shirking in the final,                               period   before retirement or

simply a rent-sharing parameter.
                                                     11




       It is through equations (7) and (8) that we derive our results. If the

wages of old workers exceed their marginal products, then the present value of

the pension falls as the age of retirement rises (eq.(7)). Similarly, eq. (7)

provides us with an estimate of the difference between W and V at each

point in time because PT-i and Ti +                        1
                                                                   are observed.

       The case of postponed retirement is equivalent. Normal retirement is not

special once we allow pension benefits to vary with the date of retirement.

The date of "normal retirement" is likely to be the date of modal

retirement. In almost all cases that age is 65 and corresponds to the start

of social security payments. Since the social security earnings test causes

the A(t) function to take a discrete jump upwards at age 65. Except for

this detail, the analysis of postponed retirement is similar. The worker's

choice is still reflected by (1) so all holds as above with a replacement of

subscripts. If            j is the number of years after "normal retirement" then

retirement occurs if f:



                              K—j     1                            ST+i+,     K—(j+1)     1
(1')     A
          T+j
                +   S
                        T+j         1 +   r   )t >
                                                     T+j
                                                               +
                                                                    1 +   r             1 +   r

Eqs. (7), (7') and (8) follow correspondingly so that an estimate of W - V

can be obtained for those years after T as well by examining the way in

which pension benefits decline in late retirement.

       Let us summarize this section. The pension which acts as severance pay

reduces the true wage to V when we take into account the way that the

pension value falls with experience. Since the pension is not paid if the

separation is punishment for too little effort, incentives are maintained

while efficient turnover is produced. nployers are willing to buy out of a

long term contract if the wage rate exceeds VMP. The amount that employers
                                                12




are willing to pay reveals something about the difference between W and

V. Pensions may act as a buyout. If the value              of   the pension declines with

the age of retirement, this suggests that the pension plays the role of

severance pay.



Less than Perfect Separation Efficiency

          The model discussed earlier allowed V to be random and unknown by both

parties. Under these circumstances, one instrument, in this dase the pension

stream P(t) ,      is   not sufficient to eliminate all inefficient separation. The

reason is that when the firm uniquely knows the value of the worker to the

firm, the only way to make that information useful is to give the firm some

discretion over when work occurs. But to do this imineidately creates a

problem. Since the firm is anxious to sever the worker whenever V < W — S.

This leads to situations where A < V < W — S               so that a layoff occurs when a

separation is inefficient.

      The introduction of a second instrument can alleviate some of this

difficulty. If different amounts of severance pay are paid depending upon who

initiates the separation, some inefficient layoffs and quits can be

eliminated. This raises two difficulties. First, it creates a situation

where each side tries to induce the other to initiate the separation. Second,

it generates inefficient retention as a bi—product. This occurs when

W -   L   < V < A < W -   Q   ,   where   Q is what is paid to the worker as severance

pay if the worker initiates the separation and L is what is paid to the

worker if the firm initiates the separation. If L =               Q   this condition can

never hold, but for L > Q ,           inefficient    retention occurs. This is discussed

in depth in Hall and Lazear (1982). It is also shown that it is never optimal

to select L < Q since this results in needless inefficient separations.
                                       13




Perhaps because of these difficulties and those associated with determining

who actually initiated the separation, pensions rarely vary with the identity

of the initiating party.



Vesting

     Vesting is an issue that always arises when pensions are discussed. This

seems especially relevant when one of the arguments for incorporating a

pension into the generalized compensation plan relates to incentives for

increased effort or reduced turnover. It is sometimes suggested that non—

vested pensions can reduce worker turnover whereas vested pensions cannot.

The model in the previous section should make clear the point   that   "vesting"

in and of itself has little meaning.

     What vesting guarantees is that a worker is entitled to receive the

currently accured benefits. But currently accrued benefits may be small

indeed until the last few years before retirement. There are a number of

reasons which all derive from the large number of degrees of freedom inherent

in setting up a benefit formula. First, many benefit formulas d epend upon

final salary or an average of salaries earned in the last few years before

retirement. Since salary grows with age, and in an inflationary period, with

chronological time, the benefits received by a worker who leaves the firm at

age 30 may be much smaller than that received by the same worker who leaves at

age 65. Second, since length of service affects benefits, formulas can be

specified to make the accrual rate a convex function of years of service,

placing a premiiuu on long tenure. Third, as Bulow points out, a worker who is

vested, but below the age at which early retirement benefits can be received,

earns a promise of a pension at normal retirement age, not the benefits

themselves. Because of the higher value of pensions taken upon early
                                         14




 retirement, remaining with the firm at least until the age of early retirement

 election is generally lucrative.

      In the same vein, the tendency of many plans to gear pension benefits to

 final salary is evidence for the incentive role of pensions. Most other

 rationalizations for pensions (discussed below) at best gear pensions to a

 lifetime average rather than to an average of final salaries. Since final

 salary can be adjusted to reflect worker effort, hours worked, and

productivity, the multiplier effect on the pension value may provide

 significant incentives for workers to maintain effort and a high level of

hours worked during those final years.



The pirical Analysis:

     Data

     The data for this analysis were constructed using two sources; the

Bankers' Trust Study of Corporate Pension Plans, 1975 and the Bankers' Trust

1980 Corporate Pension Plan Study. Each of these studies consists of a

detailed verbal description of the pension plans of over 200 of the nation's

largest corporations. The data sets apply to approximately 8 to 10 million

workers and this comprises about one—fourth of the entire covered population.

     Firms are not identified by name in the descriptions. However, a

sufficient amount of detail is given about each firm   so   that it was possible

to match firms up between the 1975 and 1980 samples. For example, the

descriptions report the industry in which the firm produces, the date at which

the pension plan was adopted and amended, and the number and types of

employees covered by the plan. Screening on the basis of these and other

criteria resulted in a longitudinal data set of 70 matched firms for the two

years in addition to the two cross—sections of 200+ firms for each year.
                                     15




     The major empirical task was to covert the verbal descriptions into

machine readable data. This required setting up a coding system that was

specific enough to capture all of the essential detail associated with each

plan. After that was done, it was necessary to write a program which

calculates the present value of pension benefits at each age of retirement. A

brief summary of that approach follows.

     Pension benefit formulas assume three different types. The two most

common fall under the rubric of defined benefit plans. A defined benefit plan

specifies the pension flow as a fixed payment determined by some formula. The

pattern plan awards the recipient a flat dollar amount per year worked upon

retirement. The conventional plan calculates the pension benefit flow from a

formula which depends upon years of service and some average salary. In

contrast to the defined benefit pians are the defined contribution plans where

the employer (or employee) contributes a specified amount each year during the

worklife to a pension fund. The flow of pension benefits that the worker

receives upon retirement is then a function of the market value of that

fund. The defined contribution plan is much less frequently used than is

either the pattern plan or conventional plan.

     In order to test the theory exposited above, it is necessary to obtain

estimates of the expected present value of pension benefits for each potential

year of retirement. Specifically, the way in which pension values vary with

age of retirement must be calculated. Some plans do not permit the individual

to receive early retirement benefits or only permit early retirement up to a

given number of years before the normal date. This means that in order to

perform the necessary comparisons, sometimes plans had to be deleted from the

relevant sample so that the entire series of retirement values would be valid.
                                      16




     It is important to realize that there are no real individuals in this

sample. Since the data sets discussed above are descriptions of pension

plans, the "individuals" below are hypothetical ones, created to perform the

necessary simulation exercises. For each plan, for each of the two years,

twelve "typical" employees were created, having all combinations of salary

upon normal retirement of $9000, $15000, $25000 and $50000 and of tenure of

10, 20 and 30 years in 1975 and 20, 30 and 40 years in 1980. Much of the

analysis below relates to these 2928 "individuals" from 244 plans in 1975 and

to the 2712 "individuals" from the 226 plans in 1980. Since this simulation

exercise was computationally expensive, a representative group was selected

having salary of $25000 and tenure of 30 years upon normal retirement. Many

of the comparative statics results below are derived from an examination of

the individuals in this representative sample.

     In order to calculate the expected present value of retirement at each

age, two steps must be taken. First, for any hypothetical employee, the

pension flow that he receives upon retirement in any given year must be

calculated. Second, that flow must be converted into an expected present

value by discounting it appropriately and by taking into account the age—

specific death rates. Even the first step is far from straightforward.

     Most plans have many restrictions on the maximum amount which can be

accrued and many provide for minimtm benefits. Additionally, a number reduce

pension benefits by some fraction of the social security benefits to which

some basic class is entitled. Moreover, a number of plans provide supplements

for retirement before the social seucirty eligibility age. Sometimes these

supplements relate directly to social security payments while at other times

they depend upon the individual's salary or benefit level.
                                           17




        Other restrictions have to do with vesting requirements, with the maximum

age at which the individual begins employment, with the minimum        number of

years    served   before the basic accrual or particular supplements are

applicable. The accrual rate or flat dollar amount per year to which the

individual is entitled is often a nonlinear function of tenure and salary and

these kinks had to be programmed into the calculations.

        In calculating retirement benefits, assumptions about wage growth for

older workers are crucial. All plans which are based on salary compute some

average of annual earnings over some relevant period. Therefore, it is

nominal earnings growth that will affect the pension values. Elsewhere

(Lazear 1981), I estimated earnings growth and found something that is well—

known    among labor economists: earnings growth    is   often negative in final
years because hours of work decline (primarily for health reasons) in the
final years before retirement. In the sample I examined based on CPS         data

from the mid—70's, the estimate of earnings growth for a particular synthetic

cohort was anywhere from —2% to -13% depending upon how the sample was

selected. Since more rapid wage growth will tend to make pension values

increase with the age of retirement, selecting higher rates of wage growth

tends to push the results against the theory of this paper. To be

conservative, I selected a wage growth rate of zero for most of the analysis,

and also recalculated pension benefits with a growth rate of positive 5%, well

above that actually observed in the data.

        Since all values are nominal, the nominal interest rate should be used as

the discount factor. For most of the analysis, 10% was used, but 15% and 5%

were also tried in order to ascertain the sensitivity of the results to the

choice of discount rate. Although there were effects of varying the rates,

none of the qualitative conclusions was altered.
                                            18



    Finally,    in performing the actuarial correction, it was necessary to

choose a life table. The 1975 life table for Americans was used for the 1975

sample and the 1978 table was used for the 1980 sample. Both were obtained

from the U.S. Vital Statistics. The choice of table turns out to be the least

crucial part of the analysis. Values do not vary greatly from year to year

and discounting makes what small differences there are unimportant. What is

important, however, is the possibility that early retirees do not have the

same life expectancy of normal retirees. It is likely that many individuals

retire early as the result of poor health and consequently have higher age-

specific death rates. If this is true, then ignoring those differences will

tend to bias the results in the direction of higher pension values for early

retirees than is actually the case.



Findings

    We start by discussing the data from the 1980 sample. Table 1 contains

some descriptive statistics. Notice that there is a tremendous amount of

variation in the present value of pension benefits even within each salary

tenure group. For all "workers" taken together the standard deviation is as

large as the mean. Within each salary—tenure group, the standard deviation is

around half of the mean. A simple rule of thumb suggests that the mean

pension value is about one—thirteenth of the product of final salary and

tenure at retirement. It is somewhat more than this for very low salary

workers and slightly less than this for high salary workers. This reflects

both the provisions for maximum and especially minimum pension values which

make the benefit structure progressive.

     Before   going   further,   it is interesting to compare this to the cross—
section    from 1975. Those data are presented in table 2. Although the average
                                         19




pension value if smaller in 1975 than 1980, this is the result of differences

across groups. The 1975 data are constructed using hypothetical workers with

10, 20, and 30 years of tenure whereas the 1980 data are constructed using

hypothetical workers with 20, 30, and 40 years of tenure. In fact, within

each comparable salary—tenure group, the values for 1975 are significantly

higher than those for 1980. We defer until later discussion of the reasons

for this pattern. Another interesting difference is that the pattern is

significantly less progressive in 1975 than in 1980. In 1975, the rule that

the pension value equals about one-tenth of the product of final salaxy and

tenure seems to hold across all salary levels with only slight traces of

progressivity.

     These findings do not suggest that pensions were larger in 1975 than they

are in 1980. There are two main reasons: First, firms are not matched across

years in these tables so that some of the difference may simply reflect random

sample variations. Second, final salaries were substantially higher in 1980

than in 1975 so the relevant comparison is not necessarily the one that holds

salary level constant.

     In the context of the model, the most important      results   relate to the way

in which pension values vary with the age of retirement. Table 3 selects

those "individuals" in the 1980 sample who were permitted to retire at least

ten years before the normal age and traces the mean present value of pensions

for that group. EPV-10 refers to the expected present value of retiring ten

years before the normal   age,   and similarly for EPV—9...EPV—1. EPVO is the

present   value of retiring at normal age •   The   table is broken down by pension
benefit formula type and then by salary arid tenure level.
     First   examine the first panel which relates to conventional plans. Note

that for all tenure—salary groups, the value of early retirement exceeds that
                                                    20




of normal retirement (EPV-1O > EPV-9 > ...EPR—1 > PV0). For ease of

reading, ERAT(t) is defined as EPV(t)/EPRO so that ERAT > 1                               for all

t < 0 •     This evidence supports the major prediction of the model: The

expected present value of pension benefits decline as the age of retirement

increases. Firms actually do "buy out" workers who retire early with higher

pensions. As such, the interpretation that pensions act as severance pay is

consistent with these results.

      Further, ERAT—lO increases with tenure and salary. The buyout is

larger not only in absolute terms, but also in relative terms for employees of

longer service and of higher salaries. This is consistent with the

interpretation that an upward—sloping age—earnings profile acts as an

incentive device.

      This is most easily seen by examining WVDIFF-10...WVDIFF-1 •                          WVDIFF(t)

is defined as WTt —          VTt      and   is   calculated using the relationship shown in

eq. (7). WVDIFF > 0 implies that the worker is being paid more than his

marginal product and it results whenever PT-i > PT—i +                       1
                                                                                 •   WVDIFF-1/SALARY

is the ratio of overpayment during the final year before retirement. That

ratio goes from 1/6 for workers in the group with salary = 9000, tenure = 20

to 1/2 for workers in the group with salary = 50000, tenure                           40. This result

has a nice interpretation.

      First consider tenure: Individuals with shorter tenure are those who

initiated their employment with the firm more recently. In the context of

figure 2, those workers are less likely to have wages which exceed their

marginal products. As the result, the buyout should be smaller. In fact, for

individuals whose tenure is below t in figure                    2, the     buyout should actually

be negative. (Although this occurs in a significant number of cases, it does

not occur frequently enough to make the means display an increasing pattern.)
                                          21



        Second, high salary workers are those most likely to be performing jobs
where wage incentive schemes are useful. Since those may be the jobs which

are most difficult to monitor, a large penalty in the form of lost earnings is

likely to be an integral part of the optimal compensation profile for these

workers.

       These points are also supported by consideration of panel 2 of table 3

which relates to pattern plan workers. It is also true that the general

tendency is for the pension value to decline with age of retirement. But the

decline does not seem to be as pronounced for these employees as for those

with conventional plans. In fact, for those with only 20 years of experience

at    normal retirement, the means   of WVDIFF—10, WVDIFF—9, and WVDIFF-8 are

actually    positive reflecting location in terms of figure 2 before t •     Since
most of these workers are blue collar workers where more direct monitoring is
possible,    it is not surprising that the wages conform more to marginal product

for these workers than for their higher level counterparts.

        Finally, panel 3 reports defined contribution plans. We hesitate to draw

any significant   conclusions from this panel for two   reasons.   First, there are
so few observations. Second, the Bankers' Trust studies do not really report
the   appropriate information for defined contribution plans so these

calculations are more likely to be a function of interpretations made by them

and by me. The one obvious feature is that definitionally, a defined

contribution plan cannot decline in present value with age of retirement since

the worker is always entitled to the present value of his contributions.

Since contributions are never negative, that value must grow with age of

retirement (although not necessarily at the same rate).

        It is also true that pensions associated with retirement after the normal

age should follow the same pattern of decline with age. Most of the sample
                                       22




was subject to mandatory retirement, but 13 conventional plans did allow the

worker to elect to remain beyond the date of normal retirement. Table 4

presents information on those individuals. Since the pattern is similar

across salary and tenure groups, we only report those calculations for a

representative group with salary = 25000 and tenure = 30.   The pattern of

declining pension values is the same and smooth both before and after normal

retirement.

     It is interesting that this group for which there is no mandatory

retirement have more steeply declining pensions than the group which does not

distinguish on the basis of mandatory retirement. Compare ERAT(t) in table

4 with that for the corresponding group (salary = 30000, tenure = 30) in table

3 and it is clear that pensions decline more rapidly in table 4. This

suggests that reductions in pensions are an alternative to mandatory

retirement .

     The 1975 cross—section provides a basis for comparison. Results for the

representative group are reported in table 5. In comparing these values with

those for the appropriate groups in table 3, two things stand out. First, for

pattern plans, the pensions are higher in the 1980 cross—section than in the

1975 cross—section while the reverse is true for conventional plans. Second,

the decline in pension value with age of retirement is sharper in 1975 than in

1980 for pattern plans while the reverse is true for conventional plans. We

defer attempts to explain these findings until after discussion of the matched

sample since these differences may simply reflect random sampling variation

across firms rather than trends over time.

     The one obvious feature is again that the expected present value of

pension benefits decline with increases in the age of retirement. Both years

provide strong support of that conclusion. Again, this is consistent with the
                                           23




idea that pensions function as severance pay in an efficient compensation

scheme.

        There are some obvious institutional differences between the 1980 period

and 1975. The most obvious is that the primary social security benefit

against which many   benefit   formulas are offset, increased between 1975 and

1980.     In order to determine the effect of social security on the

calculations, the 1980 analysis was repeated, plugging in the 1975 primary

social    security formula. Since that value was lower than the 1980 value
pensions increased. That is, some benefit formulas usually subtract some
fraction of social security benefits from pension payments. Over time the
amowit subtracted has increased. Table 6, col. 2 presents the results for the

representative group (salary = 25000, tenure =      30).
        Pension benefits for 1980 in column 2 with the 1975 social security

formula are about 7% higher than those using the 1980 formula for conventional

plans. Although it is difficult to state the increase in primary social

security benefits as a scalar, for the average worker that increase amounted

to 68%. Thus the "elasticity" of the mean of pension benefits with respect to

social security benefits is .1 •      It   is less than 1 primarily for two

reasons: First, not all plans offset social security payments. Second, even

those that do offset benefits do not do so fully. No pattern plans had social

security offset provisions.

        A general point is that because of the way that benefits are offset

against social security primary benefits, any change in those benefits have

major impacts on pensions and therefore on retirement and tax revenues, We do

not explore those implications here.

        The rate of inflation, wage growth, and nominal interest rates were

different in 1980 than they were in 1975. In fact, one could argue that
                                      24




earnings growth of 5% per year for old workers and a nominal rate of interest

of 15% axe more reasonable. Column 3 of table 6 reports the results on the

1980 data using these assumptions.

     Although the values change somewhat, the qualitative conclusions remain

essentially unchanged. Pension values decline significantly with age.

Incidentally, the reason that values are so much lower for conventional plans

under the revised assumptions is that wage growth of 5% implies that an

individual who retires ten years early has a salary of $15,348 rather than

$250000. Since conventional pians are contingent upon final salary, benefits

fall. At normal retirement, values are lower because of higher discount

rates. Only the latter consideration affects pattern plans, causing their

decline to be steepened substantially. The reasoning is not quite so

straightforward, however, since these are means of highly nonlinear

functions

     Finally, as a last check on the robustness of the results, the analysis

was repeated under the assumption that the nominal interest rate was only

5%. Col. 4 of table 6 contains those results.

     With a nominal interest rate of 5%, the decline in pension value does not

occur until about six years before normal retirement for the respresentative

group. However, for groups with longer tenure (40) the decline occurs

throughout the period for conventional plans and during the last nine years

for pattern plans. Moreover, in 1980, a nominal discount rate of 5% is surely

well below the feasible range since short rates were above 20% and 30—year

mortgage rate were around 16%. It is difficult to believe that 5% was the

anticipated discount rate.
                                        25




The Matched Sample:

    Any of the differences noted above may have been the result of random

differences in the cross-section rather than true time variations. To

eliminate that source of confusion, 70 plans have been matched across the two

years    and this section reports findings based on that sample.

        The major changes occured for pattern plans. In the matched sample,

there was an increase in pension values of about 50% for normal retirement and

over 100% for retirement ten years early. Since pattern plans are independent

of final salary, it is not surprising that their values should increase in

nominal terms over the period. However, two points are interesting. First,

certainly for early retirement, but even for normal retirement the increase

probably exceeds the increase in prices so that some of the gain is real, not

nominal. Second, the decline in pension benefits with early retirement seems

to have steepened sharply over the five year period, reflected in the 1004%

gain for early and only 504% gain for normal retirement.

        Again this may reflect a substitution of pension reductions for mandatory

retirement in light of changes in the Age Discrimination in nploymemnt Act.

Of course, if pensions acted perfectly as an efficient severance pay device

there would be no need for mandatory retirement at all. The inability to

induce both efficient layoffs and quitting simultaneously provides a role for

mandatory retirment and its restriction works in the direction of inducing

more worker—initiated separations.

        The results for conventional plans suggest a different pattern. Although

differences are small, the benefits have, if anything, declined over time.

This should not be taken at face value. More than this decline can be

attributed to changes in social security. The maximum decline here is less

than 5% and the mean decline due to social security was estimated at 7%. But
                                       26



more important is that conventional plans depend upon final salary which

increases over time with inflation. This table makes comparisons based on

equality of salary in nominal terms. But using the information in table 3, we

can adjust the pension benefits to take this into account.

     At tenure=30, an increase in salary from $25000 to $50,000 increases
                             135,577 — 63,165
normal retirement value by                      or 114%. Therefore we can
                                  63,165
estimate that each dollar increase in final salary at tenure    30 increases

normal retirement pension value by $1.14. If the average final salary in

these firms grew say 30% over the five year period, normal pension value would

be expected to increase from $61,907 in 1975 to (61.232)(1.30)(1.14) =

$90,745 in 1980. This would be an increase of 47%. This increase is about

the same as that for pattern plans over the same period.

     A similar exercise can be performed to correct the present value of

retirement ten years early. Under the same assumptions, this results in an

estimated pension value of 143,886 in 1980 based on the 1975 salary of

$25,000. This is an increase of 40% so the steepening of the decline in

pension values for pattern plans does not seem to be duplicated for

conventional plans •6

     Summarizing, pattern plans on average pay 50% more at normal retirement

and 100% more on ten years early retirement than in 1975. Conventional plans

are estimated to pay 47% on ten years early retirement than they did in

1975. In both years and under any reasonable assumptions, the expected

present value of pensions tend to decline with increases in the age of

retirement.
                                      27




An Alternative Explanation and Other Issues:

     Throughout the model it was assumed that workers were risk neutral.

However, if workers are risk averse, then another explanation for the decline

in pension value with age of retirement is available. When a worker begins

employment, he may not know whether or not he will become ill and be forced to

retire before the normal age. Since illness is a bad event, workers may wish

to insure against that cnotingency by paying higher pensions to early

retirees.

     At some levels, this story is not inconsistent with the model. Eqs. (1)—

(7) would have to be modified to take utility rather than alternative use of

time into account. But the pension still acts as severance pay and induces

workers to leave when appropriate. Appropriate carries a different meaning,

however. Now, workers cannot be induced to leave if and only if the

alternative use of time exceeds the value of the worker to the fix-in.   To do so

distroys the role of severance pay as an insurance device. This well—known

result appears in many places,7 but its point carries with it two implications

for this analysis. First, severance pay does not induce efficient separation

in the sense of a first best, perfect information optimum. Second, and as the

result, the decline in pension value with retirement age is not an accurate

measure of the difference between wage aid marginal product. In fact, it

overstates that value because some of the payment for early retirement is

insurance.

     There are a number of arguments which suggest that the insurance story is

somewhat less plausible. First, there are other forms of insurance, some

provided by the firm and other by a third party, which seem to be set up

explicitly to handle these contingencies. Health insurance and more to the
                                          28




point   disability   insurance perform exactly those functions. It is not clear

why a declining pension value should be required to play the same role.

       Second, if pensions act as insurance, one would think that there would be

no reason to prevent workers from taking them early. But most pension plans

severly limit the age of early retirement. This is not true in general for

health insurance and disability insurance. If pensions are an incentive

device, it is easier to rationalize the unwillingness to pay pensions to early

retirees.

       Third, most pensions that are based on salary use the final few years

salary as the basis of computation. If insurance were the motive, a lifetime

average which more closely reflects expected permanent income would be

appropriate. In fact, with insurance, a case could be made for a negative

relationship between final salary and pension, given lifetime income, because

of the inability of the older disabled worker to adjust to the fall in income.

       Fourth, the decline in pension values is steepest for high income, white

collar workers who have conventional rather than pattern plans. Yet one might

argue that it   is the   blue collar workers who have both riskier jobs and fewer

alternative   forms of insurance. Although insurance may be a partial motive
for pension values which decline with age of retirement, it     seems   difficult to
believe that this is a major factor in the explanation.

Conclusion

       The expected present value of pension benefits generally declines with

the age of retirement. This phenomenon is easily explained if one views the

pensions as a form of severance pay rather than as a tax—deferred savings

account. Further, the real value of pension benefits have remained constant

or   increased in real terms over the period between 1975 and   1980 even   though
                                     29




the same is probably not true for older workerst real earnings. Finally,

there is some evidence to suggest that higher pensions for early retirement

are being used as a substitute for mandatory retirement clauses in labor

Contracts.
                                         30



                                      Footnotes
     1This   analysis marries the models presented in     Lazear (1981) and Hall   and

Lazear (1982).

       more general formulation allows the severance payment to vary with the

identity of the party who initiates the separation. Hall and Lazear consider

this case and discuss its drawbacks.

     3That the entire remaining stream must be examined is recognized in

Fields and Mitchell (1981). Bulow (1981) also points oit (as my calculations

implicitly do) that the "true" current wage also includes the value of

changing the pension as the result of working that period.

     4See also Burkhauser and Qiinn (1981).

     5E.g., for some ages the mean rises even though no one plan ever rose.

The nonlinearities makes some plans fall by less than others.

     6There was only one matched defined contribition p.an.

     7To name a few, see Arnott and Stiglitz (1981), Azariadis (1980), Gree

(1981), Green and Kalu   (1981),   Grossman and   Hart (1981)   and (198lb).
                                                    31



                                                References
Arnott, Richard, and Joseph Stiglitz. "Labor                  Turnover,   Wage Structures, and

        Moral Hazard: The Inefficiency of Competitive Markets," Econometric

            Research Program       *299, (September, 1981) Princeton University.
Azariadis, Costas. "nployment with Asymmetric Information," CARESS WP *80—22

            (May,    1980).
Bankers' Trust Study of Corporate Pension Plans. New York: Bankers' Trust

            (1976).

_________________             Corporate Pension Plan Study, 1980. New York: Bankers'
            Trust.

Becker, G.S. and      G.J.     Stigler. "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and

            Compensation of Enforcers," Journal of Legal Studies 3,1 (1974) pp.

            1—18.

Bulow, Jeremy. "Early          Retirement       Pension Benefits," National Bureau of

            Economic Research WP *654 (1981).

Burkhauser, R. and J. Quinn. "The Effect of Pension Plans on the Pattern of

            Life    Cycle Consumption" (1981).
Current Population Survey. (March                1974, 1976).

Fields, Gary and Olivia Mitchell. "Pensions and                  Optimal   Retirement Behavior,"

            NYSSILR WP #27 (March, 1981).

Green, Jerry. "Wage—Enp1oyment Contracts," HIER Discussion Paper 807 (January

            1981).

Green, J. and C. Kahn.

Grossman,    Sanford    and    Oliver   Hart.     "Implicit   Contracts, Moral Hazard and

            Unemployment,'      AER (l98la).
________________          "Implicit Contracts under Asymmetric Information,"
            Unviersity of Chicago (February 198lb).
                                         32




Rail, Robert E. and Edward Lazear. "The Excess Sensitivity of layoffs an

         Quits to Demand," University of Chicago (December 1981).

Lazear, Edward P. "Why   Is   There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political

        Economy 87 (December 1979) PP. 1261—4.

______________    "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity ana Hours

        Restrictions," lmterican Economic Review (September 1981) pp. 606-

        20.   (1981b)

_______________   "Severance Pay, Pensions and Efficient Mobility," University

        of Chicago (1981).
                                        33




                                   Table 1

                                  1980 Data
                    Moments of the Expected Present Value
                        of Normal Retirement Benefits
                  (Sample Selection criterion: EPV—0 valid)



                                                     Standard
Group                            Mean                Deviation      N


All                              55690                  50636      2646

Salary   Tenure

9000        20                   17102                      8063    218

9000        30                   25209                  11144      220

9000        40                   32676                  14610       221

15000       20                   23054                  10597      220

15000       30                   34167                  14100      220

15000      40                    44020                  18027      221

25000       20                   37367                  19140      221

25000       30                   55353                  26110      221

25000       40                   70779                  32897      221

50000      20                    75730                  44270      221

50000       30                  111368                  61755      221

50000      40                   140551                  77253      221
                                    34




                              Table 2

                              1975 Data

                  Moments of Expected Present Value
                    of Normal Retirement Benefits
                   (Sample Criterion: EPV—0 valid)



                                                Standar4
GrQup                        Mean               Deviation      N

All                          55690                    50636   2646

Salary   Tenure

9000        10               10624                     3921    192

9000        20               20864                     7700    194

9000        30               30403                    11411    183

15000       10               16416                     7008    194

15000       20               31359                    14116    204

15000      30                47369                    20118    186

25000       10               26125                    13869    199

25000      20                51337                    26328   206

25000      30                76989                    39165    188

50000       10               50931                    31338   205

50000      20               101462                    60683   206

50000      30               151337                    90222   188
                                                                               'fable 3


                                                        1980 Expected   l'reeuitValue ot unsion Eujieti La
                                                                          Defined Benefit
                                                                        Coiiveiitjonal Ilaiis
                                                                (Sample;     Valid ElV-10. . .EPVO)


            9000          9000       9000       15000         151)00        15000         25000       25000       25000        50000       50000      50000
Salary
'fenure       20            30         40          20            30            40            20          30          40           20          30         40

Variable


E1?V-l0    27225          50845      73959      35384         66875         97232         55958      107585       158225      115633      226685      332604

           26911          48451      69381      35391         64506         92318         56822      105111       151713      118342      222374      319090

8LV-8      26392          45905      64904      35116         61886         87459         57200      101951       144918      119778      216465      306211

EPV-7      25684          43266      60506      34603         59074         82620         57081       98212       137902      120120      209160      291814

IPV—6      24856          40681      56288      33945         56211         77814         56522       94213       130778      119398      201062      276943

1PV-5      23868          38216      5227/      33162         53484         73241         55604       90176       123844      117/06      192441      261907

EPV—4      22752          35594      48218      32058         50344         68345         54142       85524       116234      114845      182598      245945

           21496          32993      44277      30634         47113         63512         52165       80656       108553      110988      172413      229942

EPV-2      20089          30311      40347      28890         43598         58377         49549       75143       100236      105770      160908      212544

I?:pv-1    18699          27785      36690      27146         40278         53594         46903       69863        92429      100288      149675      195920

EVP-0      17032          24839      31624      24846         36166         45962         43244       63165        19476       92555      135577      168913

ERAT-lO       I•    617      2.131      2.517      1.550         2.122         2.542         1.601       2.285        2.836       1.972       2.993

ERAT-9        1•    609      2.038      2.312      1.553         2.041         2.407         1.619       2.212        2.694       1.996       2.887       3.609

ERAP-B        1.587          1.939      2.228      1.541         1.955         2.274         1.623       2.129        2.550       2.000       2.770       3.401

ERAT-7        1.552          1.835      2.085      1.519         1.865         2.143         1.612       2.039        2.406       1.985       2.644       3.194

ERAT-6        I .   509      1.733      1.946      1.490         1.773         2.013         1.590       1.944        2.263       1.953       2.512       2.989

ERAT—5        1.453          1.636      1.815      1.456         1.686         1.891         1.557       1.854)       2.126       1.908       2.378       2.789

EItAT-4       1   • 389      1.528      1.679      1.409         1.581         1.762         1.512       1.747        1.982       1.84/       2.236       2.590

ER.AV—3       1. 317         1.421      1.547      1.349         1.485         1.636         1.456       1.641        1.840       1.776       2.094       2.395

ERAT-2        1 •   234      1.307      1.412      1.274                                                                                                  2. 192
                                                                          Table 3

                                                   1900 Expected Present Value of Pension Benefits
                                                                    Defined Benefit
                                                            Conventional Plans (continued)
                                                            (Sample: Valid EPV—10. . .EPVO)


Salary      9001)     9000       9000       15000        15000          15000       25000     25000      25000       50000      50000      50000

Tenure        20        30         40         20            30            40           20        30        40           20         30         40
Variable


ERAT—1        1.151      1.20*      1.287     1.198         1.268         1.377       1.303      1.408       1.549      1.581      1.784       2.000

ERAT-0        1.000      1.000      1.000     1.000         1.000         1.000       1.000      1.000       1.000      1.000      1.000       1.000

WV0IFF—1Q    121       922       1764         —2           913          1894        —332        953       2S10       —1044       1661       490*

WVDWF—9      220      1019       1898        116          1111          2060        —160       1340       288*        —609       2506       5801

WVDIFF—8     330      *231       2051        238          1311          2251          55       1744       3272        —1S9       3408       6716
WVDIFF—7     424      1323       2164        337          1469          2466         286       2052       3655         370       4155       7641

WVDIFF—6     551      1394       2264        441          1539          2581         5*8       2278       39*4         955       4866       8416
WVDTFF-5     693      1628       2519        605          1949      -   3040         908       2888       4725        1176       6112       9910
WVDIFF—4     851      1716       2691        972          2206          3300        1350       3324       5245        2634       6956      *0930

WVL)lLF—3   1056      2015       2952       1310          2640          3857        1964       4141       6249        3920       8644      13071
WVDIFF—2    1148      2087       3022       144*          243           3952        2187      4363        6451       4531        9282      13738

WVDIFF—1    1515      2678       4605       2090          3738          6938        3326      6089       11775        7029      128*6      24551
NORMAL      2911      4267       5282       4759         6994           8679        7085      *1608      14363       *5783      23258      28787



N            133       133        134        140          14;            *44         141        144        144         143        144        144
                                 37




                           Table 3 (cont.)

                      Defined Contribution
                         Pattern Plans
           (Benefits are Independent of Final Salary)


Tenure
Variable              20                     30            40


EPV—10            20450                  40651          64349

EPV—9             21085                  40103          61913

EPV—8             21513                  39296          59276

EPV—7             21704                  38262          56477

EPV—6             21667                  37031          53554

EPV—5             21454                  36164          51868

EPV—4             21053                  34485          48489

EPV—3             20498                  32716          45117

EPV—2              19730                 30752          41577

EPV—1              18863                 28767          38430

EPV—0              17982                 26876          35361

ERAT—lO               1.113                  1.491         1.810

ERAT—9                1.150                  1.473         1.743

ERAT—8                1.176                  1.446         1.670

ERAT—7                1.189                  1.410         1.592

ERAT-6                1.190                  1.367         1.510

ERAT—5                1.180                  1.334         1.461

ERAT—4                1.161                  1.274         1.367

ERAT—3                1.132                  1.210         1.272

ERAT—2                1.092                  1.140         1.173

ERAT—1                1.047                  1.068         1.085

ERAT—0                1.000                  1.000         1.000
                                 38



                           Table 3 (cont.)

                       Defined Contribution
                          Pattern Plans
            (Benefits are Independent of Final Salary)


Tenure
Variable              20                       30          40


WVDIFF—10           —244                      211         939

WVDIFF—9            —181                      342        1118

WVDIFF—8             —89                      482        1305

WVDIFF—7              13                      631        1500

WVDIFF—6             126                      489         951

WVDIFF—5             249                     1042        2098

WVDIFF—4             378                     1208        2303

WVDIFF—3             577                     1475        2659

WVDIFF—2             716                     1640        2600

WVDIFF—1             801                     1718        2789

NORMAL              2766                     4123        5421




N                     38                       38          38
                                        39




                                                                      Table 3 (cont.)

                                                     1960 fcpected Present Value of Pension Benefits
                                                                   Defined Contribution
                                                                    Conventional Plans
                                                              (Sample: Valid EpV—10. . .EPVO)


Salary      9000      9000       9000        15000         15000       15000     25000       25000      25000       50000       50000      50000

Tenure      . 20        30         40           20            30          40        20          30         40          20          30         40
Variable


EPV—10     12673      25346      38019       18342         36685       55028     79855      92130       104405     110490      130873      151256

EPV—9      14915      28475      42035       21580         41214       60840     74546      87680       103924     104846      127313      150007

EPv—8      11256      31636      46016       24975         45789       66602     70081      84009       112287     100447      124857      156816

EPV—7      19670      34800      49931       28469         50369       72269     66364      83964       120471     97148       123350      170478

EPV—6      22131      31940      53749       32033         54913       77794     63310      90640       128407     94808       129091      183789

EPV—5      24615      41025      57435       35621         59379       83130     60836      91162       136028     93295       139642      196637

EPV—4      26280      42705      59130       38031         61810       85584     62865      102189      141492     91610       148476      206947

EPV—3      27865      44257      60649       40332         64056       87781     67321      106923      146524     98781       156887      216587

EPV—2      28500      44334      60168       41251         64168       87086     70131      110026      149322     105018      163361      223525

EPV—1      28995      44255      59516       41966         64054       86142     73865      112742      151618     110929      169314      229122

EPV—0      29344      44016      58689       42472         63708       84944     76686      115029      153372     116434      174652      235071

ERAT—lO       0.431      0.575      0.647       0.431         0.575      0.647      0.916       0.754      0.673       0.760       0.654       0.597

ERAT—9        0.508      0.646      0.116       0.508         0.646      0.716      0.876       0.738      0.685      0.747        0.661       0.614

BRAT—a        0.588      0.718      0.784       0.588         0.118      0.784      0.846       0.727      0.742      0.144        0.673       0.655

BRAT—i        0.610      0.790      0.850       0.670         0.790      0.850      0.825       0.742      0.798      0.748        0.689       0.717

ERAT—6        0.754      0.861      0.915      0.154          0.861      0.915      0.810      0.803       0.853      0.759        0.734       0.771

BRAT—S        0.838     0.932      0.978       0.838          0.932      0.978      0.802      0.862       0.905      0.715        0.798       0.835

ERAT—4        0.895     0.970       1.007      0.895         0.970       1.001     0.835       0.905       0.940      0.106        0.850       0.880

ERAT—3        0.949      1.005      1.033      0.949          1.005      1.033     0.892       0.945       0.971      0.849        0.899       0.923

ERAT—2       0.971       1.007      1.025      0.971          1.007      1.025     0.932       0.966
                                          40


                                                                           Table3 (coot.)

                                                      1980   Expected Present Value of Pension Benefits
                                                                      Defined Contribution
                                                                         ConventionalPlans
                                                                (Sample:    Valid EPV—10. . .EPVO)


Salary       9000      9000           9000       15000        15000         15000      25000         25000      25000       50000      50000      50000

Tenure         20        30             40          20           30           40            20          30         40          20         30         40

Variable


ERAT—l         0.988      1.005          1.014      0.988        1.005         1.014        0.968       0.985       0.993      0.953      0.969       0.977
ERAT—0         1.000      1.000          1.000      1.000        1.000         1.000        1.000       1.000       1.000      1.000      1.000       1.000
WVDIFF—10    —864      —1206          —1548      —1251        —1745        —2240        2046          1715         185       2175       1372        481
WVDIFF—9     —992      —1340          —1688      —1436        —1940        —2443        1893          1557      —3546        1865       1041      —2887

WVDIFF—8    —1126      —1476          —1826      —1629        —2136        —2643        1733            20      —3817        1539        702      —6373

WVDIFF—7    —1263      —1611          —1958      —1828        —2331        —2835        1567         —3425      —4072        1200      —2945      —6830

WVDIFF—6    —1401      —1741          —2081      —2028        —2520        —3012        1396         —3681      —4301        853       —5956      —7252

WVDIFF—5    —1033      —1043          —1052      —1496        —1509        —1523       —1272         —3121      —3393        1046      —5484      —6401

WVDIFF—4    —1082      —1059          —1036      —1567        —1534        —1500       —3030         —3233      —3436       —4897      —5745      —6583

WVDIFF—3     —471        —58            360       —690          —84           522      —2561         —2331      —2101       —4686      —4864      —5213

WVDIFF—2     —408         65            539      —591            94           780      —2590         —2244      —1898       —4885      —4919      —5121
                                  -

WVDIFF—1     —317        211            752       —459          314          1088      —2564         —2079      —1594       —5004      —4852      —4863

NORMAL       4560      6840           9120       6600          9900         13200      11916         17875      23833       18777      28166      37555



N               1             1           1          1            1             1           2            2           2          3          3          3
                                     41




                                  Table 4

               1980 Expected Present Value of Pension Benefits
                                Defined Benefit
                              Conventional Plans
                    (Sample: Valid EPV—1O through EPV+l0)

Salary = 25000, Tenure = 30


Variable


EPV—10             172152

EPV—9              164207

EPV—8              155953

EPV—7              147497

EPV—6              139459

EPV—5              131337

EPV—4              123435

EPV—3              115517

EPV—2              107090

EPV—1               98892

EPV—0               90864

EPV+1               81671

EPV+2               73155

EPV+3               65256

EPV+4               57955

EPV+5               51232

EPV+6              45070

EPV+7               39446

EPV+8              34337

EPV+9              29718

EPv+i0             25562
                        42



                  Table 4 (cont.)



ERAT—lO   1.837

ERAT—9    1.755

ERAT—8    1.670

ERAT—7    1.583

ERAT—6    1.499

ERAT—5    1.415

ERAT—4    1.335

ERAT—3    1.253

ERAT—2    1.167

ERAT—1    1.083

ERAT—0    1.000

ERAT+1    0.899

ERAT+2    0.805

ERAT+3    0.719

ERAT+4    0.639

ERAT+5    0.565

ERAT+6    0.497

ERAT+7    0.435

ERAT+8    0.379

ERAT+9    0.328

ERAT+10   0.282



N = 13
                                 43



                              Table 5

           1975 Expected Present Value of Pension Benefits
                    (Sample: Valid EPV-10...EPVO)


Variable                                  Group
                                Defined Benefits              Defined
                              Conventional  Pattern          Contribution

EPV—10                            125113          33779          62454
EPV—9                             120062          32585         62016
EPV—8                             114846          31215          62273

EPV—7                             109373          29698         64556

EPV—6                             103770          28059          67358

V—5                                   98161       26831         70045

EPV—4                                 92247       25215          72904

V—3                                   86338       23692          75589

EPV—2                                 80283       22017          77623

V—1                                   74422       20478         79395

EPV—0                                 65962       19007         80441

ERAT—lO                                  2.052       1.764           .782

ERAT—9                                   1.990       1.703           .779

ERAT—8                                   1.922       1.633           .785

ERAT—7                                   1.848       1.555           .812

ERAT—6                                   1.768       1.471           .846

ERAT—5                                   1.686       1.407           .878

ERAT—4                                   1.596       1.323           .913

ERAT—3                                   1.505       1.244           .945

ERAT—2                                   1.409       1.157           .969

ERAT—1                                   1.314       1.077           .989




                                        127         42              11
                                                                       Table 6
                                         1980 Expected Present               Value of Pensions
                                                         Comparative         Analysis
                                                  Salary =             25000, Tenure — 30
                                                 (Samp1e Valid EPV—i0. . .EPVO)

                                                 Defined Benefit             Pattern Plan
Criterion +          (1)                        (2)                                     (3)                            (4)
              Wage Growth = 0            Wage Growth =             0             Wage Growth — 5%               Wage Growth       =0
                 r=.1                       r..i                                    r=.15                          r—.05
              Soc.    Sec. — 1980        Soc.   Sec. — 1975                      Soc. Sec. =             1980   Soc.   Sec. = 980
Variable


EPV-1 0                40651                          40651                                   48189                      37328
EPV-9                  40103                          40103                                   45650                      38291

EPV—8                  3 9296                         39296                                   42961                      301 1
EPV-7                  38262                          38262                                   40178                      39489
EPV—6                  37031                          37031                                   37353                      39728

EPV—5                  36164                          36164                                   35134                      40201

EPV—4                  34485                          34485                                   32180                      39859

EPV—3                  3 27 16                        32716                                   29326                      39314
EPV-2                  30752                          30752                                   26481                      38447

EPV—1                  28767                          28767                                   23797                      37358
EPV-0                  26876                          26876                                   21379                      36247
ERAT-lO                    1   • 491                     1   •   491                             2.222                       1•   015

ERAT-9                         •   473                   1.473                                   2.109                       1.043

ERA-8                      1 • 446                           .446                                1   •   988                 1
                                                                                                                                 .064
AT-7                       1 • 410                       .410                                    1.862                       1. 79
ERAT -6                    1.367                         1 .367                                  1 • 733                     1.087
ERAT-5                     1.334                         1   .334                                1.629                       1.1QO

ERAT-4                     1.274                         1.274                                   1   • 494                   1.092

ERAT-3                     1.210                         1.210                                   1   . 364                   1•   079

ERAT—2                     1 • 1 40                      1•      140                             I •     234                 1   .056
BRAT—i                     1 • 068                       1.068                                   1.111                       1 .028

BRAT-C                         • 000                     1   •   000                             1.000                       1•   000



N — 38
                                    44



                                                                Table 6

                                         1980 cpected PreSent Value of Pensions
                                                        Comparative Analysis
                                                 Salary •     25000, Tenure • 30
                                             (Sample: Valid V—10. ..SPVO)


                                           Defined Benefit Conventional Plan
Criterion        (1)                         (2)                                 (3)                        (4)
            Wage Growth         0    wage Growth • 0                      Wage Growth — 5%           Wage Growth          •0
               r .1                          —    .1                         r = .15                    r   •   .05
            Soc. Sec. —1980           Soc.   Sec. — 1975                  Soc.   Sec.         1980   Soc. Sec.        —   1980
Variable


EPV—10           107585                          115384                           75317                     98194

!PV—9             10511                          112624                            72110                    99791

v—s              101951                          109222                           68908                     100673

EPV—7            98212                           105190                           65751                     100866

V—6              94213                           100945                           62739                     100629

EPV—5            90176                           96537                            60051                     100129

V—4              85524                           91512                            56973                     98769

EPV—3            80656                           86313                             53779                    96880

V—2              75143                           80482                            50347                     93876

EPV—1            69863                           74810                            47206                     90727

V—0              63165                           67749                            43452                     35261

SRAT—10                 2.285                           2.297                            2.197                     1.548

ERAT—9                  2.212                           2.221                            2.070                     1.558

ERAT—8                  2.129                           2.137                            1.949                     1.559

!RA—7                   2.039                           2.045                            1.835                     1.553

EAAT-6                  1.944                           1.949                            1.728                     1.540

ERAT—5                  1.850                           1.852                            1.632                     1.523
SRAT—4                  1.747                           1.748                            1.531                     1.496
SRAT—3                  1.641                           1.641                            1.431                     1.461
ERkr—2                  1.522                           1.523                            1.326                     1.409
ERAT—1                  1.408                           1.408                            1.231                     1.355
ERA'—0                  1.000                           1.000                            1.000                     1.000


 —   144               144                             144                              137                       144
                                      46


                                            Table   7

                                 Matched Data: Pension Values
                                 (Sample: Valid EPV—10...EPVO)
                                  Salary = 25000, Tenure — 30

Years Before Normal Retirement    EPV8O                   V75     EPV80—V75


Conventional Plans
PV—10                             99981                  102380      —2399

V—9                               97554                   98815      —1261

SPV—8                             94583                   94874       —290

EPV—7                             91241                   92823      —1581

EPV—6                              87617                  88272       —654

V—5                               84049                   86952      —2902

EPV—4                              79727                  82376      —2649

EPV—3                             75201                   79034      —3832

EPV—2                              70260                  73616      —3355

PV—1                              65715                   68334      —2618

EPV—O                              61232                  61907       —675



N — 19




Pattern   Plane

EPV—10                             43097                  20199      22898
V—9                                42476                  20179      2296
EPV—8                              41583                  23283      18300

V—7                                40451                  2284       17609

EPV—6                              39112                  22261      16851

EPV—5                              38660                  25111      13548

EPV—4                              36737                  23818      12918

EPV—3                             34729                   22724      12005

EPV—2                              32505                  21272      11233

SPy—I                              30274                  19925      10349
EPV—0




N—
