                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 BUBBLES, RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS
                    AND FINANCIAL MARKETS


                      Olivier   J. Blanchard

                         Mark W. Watson



                     Working Paper No. 9115




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            July 1982




We are indebted to David and Susan Johnson for research assistance,
Jeremy Bulow and David Starrett for useful discussion, and to the
National Science Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, and the Harvard
Graduate Society for financial support. This paper was prepared
for the conference on "Crises in the Economic and Financial
Structure," New York University, November, 1981. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #945
                                                   July 1982

           Bubbles, Rational Expectations and Financial Markets


                                Abstract


     This paper investigates the nature and the presence of bubbles in

financial markets.

    Are bubbles consistent with rationality? If they are, do they, like

Ponzi games, require the presence of new players forever? Do they imply

impossible events in finite time, such as negative prices? Do they need

to go on forever to be rational? Can they have real effects? These are

some of the questions asked in the first three sections. The general

conclusion is that bubbles, in many markets, are consistent with

rationality, that phenomena such as runaway asset prices and market crashes

are consistent with rational bubbles.

     In the last two sections, we consider whether the presence of bubbles

in a particular market can be detected statistically. The task is much

easier if there are data on both prices and returns. In this case, as

shown by Shiller and Singleton, the hypothesis of no bubble implies

restrictions on their joint distribution and can be tested. In markets

in which returns are difficult to observe, possibly because of a

nonpecuniary component, such as gold, the task is more difficult. We

consider the use of both "runs tests" and "tail tests" and conclude that

they give circumstantial evidence at best.


                                             Olivjer    J. Blanchard
                                             Mark W. Watson
                                             Dept. of Economics
                                             Harvard University
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              (617) 495—2119
Introduction

     Economists and financial market participants often hold quite different

views about the pricing of assets. Economists usually believe that given the

assumption of rational behavior and of rational expectations, the price of an

asset must simply reflect market fundamentals, that is to say, can only depend on

information about current and future returns from this asset. Deviations from

this market fundamental value are taken as prima facie evidence of irrationality.

Market participants on theother hand, often believe that fundamentals are only

part of what determines the prices of assets. Extraneous events may well influ-

ence the price, if believed by other participants to do so; t'crowd psychology

becomes an important determinant of prices.

     It turns out that economists have overstated their case. Rationality of

both behavior and of expectations often does not imply that the price of an asset

be equal to its fundamental value. In other words, there can he rational devia-

tions of the price from this value, rational bubbles.

     The purpose of the paper is twofold. The first is to characterize 'the con-

ditions under which such a deviation may appear, the shape it may take and the

potential implications of such deviations. The second is to investigate how we can

discover such deviations empirically. Some of the paper is a review of recent

.work, but much of it is exploratory in nature and will appear a bit tentative.

 Although this is no doubt due to shortcomings in the authors' thinking, it may also

 be due to the nature of these bubbles. They present economists and econometri-

 cians with many questions to which they may have little to say.

      Some may object to our dealin-g with rational bubbles only. There is little

 question that most large historical bubbles have elements of irrationality

  (Kindleberger [1978) gives a fascinating description of many historical bubbles).

 Our justification is the standard one: it is hard to analyze rational bubbles.

  It would be much harder to deal with irrational bubbles.
Section I        Rationality, Arbitrage and Bubbles


       Rationality of behavior and of expectations, together with market clearing,

imply that assets are voluntarily held and that no agent can, given his private

information and the information revealed by prices, increase his expected utility

by reallocating his portfolio.

       With many more assumptions, this leads to the standard "efficient market" or

"no arbitrage" condition.

       Let                         -        +x
             -
                         R
                             t
                             -
                                       Pt


then                              =    r             or equivalently



             (1)         E(p+ilt) -         +x   =
                                                     rp.

Pt is the price of the asset, x, the direct return.           We shall refer to x as the

"dividend," although it may take, depending on the asset, pecuniary or non-pecuniary

forms. R is therefore the rate of return on holding the asset, which is the sum

of the dividend price ratio and the capital gain.               is the information set at

time t, assumed common to all agents. The condition therefore states that the ex-

pected rate of return on the asset is equal to the interest rate r, assumed constant.

       Among the assumptions needed to get equation (1) some are inessential and

could b relaxed at the cost of increased notational complexity. These are the

assumptions of a constant interest rate, no constraints on short sales and risk

neutrality. One assumption is,hwever, of more consequence: it is that, at

 least after having observed the price, all agents have the same information. As

 we shall show, bubbles can exist even in this case and these bubbles would remain

 even if agents have differential information. The question is, however, whether

 differential information allows for a larger class of bubbles, and whether some
                                              -3.-



aspects of real world bubbles involve differential information.                            1e shall return

to this issue --   with   not much to say --       after        we define bubbles. (Note also that

because of the common. information assumption, equation (1) is stronger than the

usual "efficient market" formulation, which is that, for the subset of information

common to all agents,         the   following relation holds:


                      E(p+iIw) - Pt       +
                                              x    =                                                 *




      Given the assumption of rational expectations and that agents do not forget,

so that k+i.' we can solve equation (1) recursively forward, using:


                      E(E ( .     I+)         = E(     .
                                                                         -          vi 2. 0

Thus the following p is a solution to equation (1):



            (2)       p* =
                           i=0
                              E     81+1 E( x+.I)
                                             1
                                                                      0        (1 +   r)      < 1.


p*   is the i-resent value of expected dividends and thus can be called the

"market fundamental" value of the asset. (The term is standard in financial

markets. It was introduced in economics in a similar context by Flood and

 Garber [1980]). p is, however, not the only solution to (1).                              Any

 the following form is a solution as well:

       (3) Pt              E(xt+.I) +    c     =
                                                       p*   +
                                                                 c   ,       with


            E(c+i1)         Oc
       Thus the market price can deviate from its market fundamental value with-

 out violating the arbitrage condition. As                       >   1, this deviation c must,
                                               (1)
 however be expected to grow over time.

       Can this deviation c embody the popular notion of a "bubble", namely move-

 ments in the price, apparently unjustified by information available at the time,
                                      -4-


taking the form of a rapid increase followed by a burst or at least a sharp de-

cline? The following three examples give paths of c which satisfy equation (3)

and seem to fit this notion.

     The simplest is that of a deterministic "bubble,t' c =            In this case
                                                              c0Ot.
the higher price is justified by the higher capital gain and the deviations grow

exponentially. To be rational, such an increase in the price must continue for-.

ever, making such a deterministic bubble implausible. Consider, therefore, the

second example:


          (4)       c =    (Ti0) c1 +        with   probability


                       =                     with   probability 1-li



         where                   0
                    E(1ilQi)

     How will such a bubble look? In each period, the bubble will remain, with

probability 7T, or crash, with probability l-T. While the bubble lasts, the

actual average return is higher than r, so as to compensate for the risk of a

crash. The average duration will be of (l-ir). There can be many minor

extensions of this example, which also appear to capture certain aspects of

bubbles. The probability that the bubble ends may well be a function of how

long the bubble has lasted, or of how far the price is from market fundamen-

tals. If ii increases for some period of time, c will be growing at a decreas-

ing exponential expected rate; if TI decreases, the higher probability of a

crash leads to an acceleration while the bubble lasts.

      In these two examples, the bubble proceeds independently of the funda-

mental value. There is no reason for this to be true as the last example

shows. Consider a war related stock which pays I every period if there is a

war, and 0 if there is no war. Suppose a war starts and that in each period

there is a probability ii that the war goes on, a probability (1-Ti) that it
                                                -5-




stops forever. The fundamental value is therefore. equal to:


    p =
               i=0
                    O'4-
                           E(x+.l)   =   E
                                         1=0
                                               oY = e(i-0it1
     Furthermore, it is constant during the duration of the war. The price

may, however, increase above' p in anticipation of future increases during

the war. For example, the following bubble might arise:

     C
         t   =C 0


     c.        =    (0ir)   c÷1 if there is war at t+i,


               =0                    ifthereisnowaratt+i.
     This will lead to an increase in the price above its fundamental value

initially, a further increase during the war, and a crash in both the funda-

mental value and the bubble when the war ends.


     Now that a definition and examples of bubbles have been given, we may return

to the simplifying assumptions made to obtain equation (1). What if agents were

risk averse? As the last two examples show, bubbles are likely to increase the

risk associated with holding the asset. If agents are risk averse, a higher ex-

pected return will be required for agents to hold it. Thus, the price will have

to be expected to grow even faster than in equation (3). If the probability of a

crash increases for example, the price, in the event the crash does not take place,

will have to increase faster, not only to compensate for the increased oroba-

bility of a fall, but also to cornp,nsate for the large risk involved in holding

the asset.

     What if agents do not have the same information? Each agent will then have

his own perception of the fundamental value, given by equation (3), with the agent's
                                       -6-


information set it replacing Q. As agents may not have the same fundamental

value,   they will not perceive the same bubble. There will be agent specific

bubbles, defined as the difference between the price and the agent's perception

of the fundamental value. These bubbles must still satisfy the second part of

equation (3), with 2j   replacing   Q: they must be expected to grow exponen-

tially, at rate 0. Could it then be that some agents in the market know that

there is a bubble while others do not? A typical speculation scheme of the 1920's

(Thomas and Morgan Witts [1979]) was the creation of a high volume of buying by

traders having the reputation of being informed, in the hope of creating addi-

tional buying by uninformed traders and a subsequent bubble. If such schemes

were consistent with rationality of uninformed traders, we might gain insights

on how bubbles start. At this stage, however, we do not know the answer (Tirole

[1980] makes some progress in this direction).
                                     -7-


Section II    Bubbles and trartsversality conditions


     The previous section has only shown that arbitrage does not by itself

prevent bubbles. Could there be, however, other conditions, imposed either

institutiona-Ily-or from market clearing or implied by rationality such that

bubbles can .in fact be ruled out? This section considers whether such con-

ditions may exist.

     As any deviation c must satisfy condition (3), this implies by successive

iteration.

     (5) urn E(ct+.It) =
             i-
                              + if     c >   0


                                   if c<O


This is true even for the last two examples. Although the probability that the

bubble ends tends to one as the horizon increases, the very large and increas—

ing value of the price if the bubble does not end implies that the expected

value of the price increases as the horizon increases.

     Condition (5) is clearly impossible to satisfy for any asset redeemable

at a given price at a given date. For such assets, the price must equal the

par value on that date: the deviation must be zero on that date. Working

backwards, the deviation must be zero today. Thus there cannot be bubbles

 on bonds, except on perpetuitieS.

      Condition (5) also implies that, at least for the model considered here,

 there cannot be negative bubbles. A negative value of c today implies that

 there is a positive probability, possibly very small, that at some time t+i,

 c. will be large and negative enough to make the price negative. If the

 asset can be disposed of at no cost, its price cannot in fact be negative2;

 rationality implies that c. cannot be negative today.   This argument may,
                                           -8-

however, be pushing rationality a bit too far. For negative values of c, the

probability of the price becoming negative may be so small, and the future time

so far as to be considered -   nearly     rationally -   irrelevant   by market participants.

     Apart from institutional boundary conditions, have we exhausted the restric-

tions imposed by rationality? Bubbles resemble Ponzi games. Ponzi games which

grow too fast are inconsistent with rationality. Isn't it the same for bubbles?

It may indeed be.

     Suppose first that there is a finite number of infinitely lived players -

market participants. If the price is below the market fundamental, then it will
pay to buy the asset and to enjoy its returns -          or   to rent it out to agents who

enjoy it most in each period -        forever,   i.e. never to sell it again. Thus there

cannot be a negative bubble. What if the price is above market fundamentals?

With short selling, it will pay to sell the asset short forever and thus again

there cannot be a positive bubble. The same result arises, however, even in the

absence of short selling. The only reason to hold an asset whose price is above

its fundamental value is to resell it at some time and to realize the expected

capital gain. But if all agents intend to sell in finite time, nobody will be

holding the asset thereafter, and this cannot be an equilibrium. (This point is

made more rigorously by Tirole f1980J.) Therefore, with rationality and infinitely

 lived agents, bubbles cannot emerge.

     As for Ponzi games, what is needed is the entry of new participants.             If

 a market is composed of successive "generations" of participants, then the above

 arguments do not hold and bubbles can emerge.

      This section ends with another set of intellectual speculations. We have
                                  -


 shown where bubbles may exist.        Can we say where bubbles are more likely to ap-

 pear? Bubbles are probably more likely in markets where fundamentals are aiffi-

 cult to assess, such as the gold market. If we assume that gold has two uses, one
                                    -9-

industrial use and a precautionary use against major catastrophies, the market

fundamentals for gold are the factors affecting future flow industrial demand

and flow supply, as well as the determinants of these major catastrophies. These

are difficult to assess, as least for the average market participant. He is more

likely to base his choice of whether or not to hold the asset on the asis of past

actual returns, rather than on the basis of market fundamentals. He may hold

gold at ahigh price because gold has yielded substantial capital gains in the

recent past. By the sane argument, bubbles are less likely for assets with

clearly defined fundamentals such as blue chip stocks or perpetuities.
                                  -10-


Section III   Real effects of bubbles


    Until now, we have taken the market fundamentals as given, unaffected by

the bubble. Bubbles, however, have real effects and do in turn affect market

fundamentals, further modifying the behavior of prices.

Bubbles and production of the asset.

     If the asset is not reproducible, the bubble will simply lead to rents to

the initial holders. Many assets subject to bubbles are, however, partly

reproducible. Consider for example housing:

     Housing can be thought of as an asset composed of two inputs, land and

structures. There is an upward sloping supply curve for land. The supply

of structures is inelastic in the short run, elastic in the long run. In a

well functioning market in steady state, the price of houses is equal to the

present value of housing services -    "rents".   In turn, the price and associated

return to building structures are such that new housing construction equals the

depreciation on the existing stock. (Poterba [1980] formalizes the housing mar-

ket along those lines, although he does not include land.) Suppose now that a

deterministic bubble starts in this market, with agents ready to pay more than

market fundamentals. The higher price of housing implies higher returns to

housing construction, a larger housing stock in the future, and thus, given an

unchanged demand for housing services, lower rents in the future. This implies

a decrease in the present discounted value of future rents: the bubble has the

effect of immediately decreasing the market fundamental value. What happens over

time? The price of housing increases, as the bubble must grow exponentially,

leading to a higher and higher husing stock and lower and lower rents. These

lower rents are reflected in a lower and lower fundamental value of housing

over time, which is simply the symptom of overproduction of housing. The increase

in new housing construction may come to an end if land supply becomes entirely
                                      — 11 —




inelastic,   at which point further increases in the price become reflected en-

tirely in land values. If the bubble is not deterministic but stochastic, the

story is identical. When the bubble bursts, the price drops to a level lower

than the pre-bubble level because of the very large housing stock.

     Consider finally bubbles in the stock market. Suppose that a firm is

initially in equilibrium, with a marginal product of capital equal to the

interest rate.    In the absence of bubble, the value of a title to a unit of

                                                     cost and the firm has no
capital, a share, is just equal to the replacement

incentive to increase its capital stock. Suppose that a bubble starts on

its shares, increasing the price, say by 10% above market fundamentals. Should

the firm invest more or should it disregard the stock valuation? One answer

is that it should add to the capital stock until the marginal product has been

reduced by 10%. When this is done, the market fundamental is decreased by 10%,

the share price is again equal to the replacement cost and initial shareholders

have made a profit on the new shares issued. The story thereaftcr is similar

 to the housing story above, with the fundamental value decreasing while the
                                                      for the firm would be to
 share value increases. (A more appealing strategy

 issue shares and buy shares of other non-bubble firms, therefore avoiding the

 decrease in marginal product. This strategy is, however, inconsistent with

 the assumption that the bubble is on titles to capital in the initial firm.)

 The above answer, however, assumes that the bubble proceeds independently of

 the actions of the firm. It may well be that the bubble depends on those

 actions, for example bursting, if the firm issues "too many" new shares. Again

 here, there are many stories consistent with rationality and the economist

 has little to say about which one will prevail.    It is therefore not clear how

 firms should react to bubbles on their stock, and this might explain why managers

 of firms seem sometimes to pay little attention to stock market movements.
                                     - 12   —




General equilibrium effects.

     A   bubble on the price of any asset will usually affect the prices of

other assets, even if they are not subject to bubbles. The increase in the

price of the asset which is subject to a bubble leads initially to both an

increase in the proportion of the portfolio held in that asset and an increase

in total wealth. The first will, if assets are not perfectly substitutable,

require an increase in the equilibrium expected return on the asset with a

bubble, a decrease in the equilibrium expected return on most other assets.

The second effect will, by increasing the demand for goods and possibly for

money, lead to an increase in the equilibrium average expected return. The

net effect is ambiguous but likely to be a decrease in the price of most of

the other assets, together with a further decrease in the fundamental value of

the asset experiencing the bubble. A bubble on housing or gold may for example

depress the stork market.
     Bubbles may therefore have many real effects. This raises a question

related to the previous sections.      A rational bubble must be expected to

grow exponentially. This may imply, when the effects on other markets are

taken into account, that some other prices may be expected to grow or decrease

exponentially as well. Won't this lead to expected negative prices or some

such impossibility, ruling out the existence of a rational bubble in the initial

market? The answer is that it depends. If for example, there exists a per-

fect substitute for a given asset, available in infinite supply at some -      possibly.
high -   price,   this prevents a positive bubble on this asset as it puts an upper

bound on its price. It'is, however, possible to construct general equilibrium

models in which bubbles cannot be ruled out. (3)
                                        - 13   -




Section   IV   Looking'for Bubbles, I


     Bubbles can have substantial real effects.    It is therefore of some im-

portance to know whether they are a frequent phenomenom or a theoretical possi-

bility. of little empirical relevance.

     One strategy is to specify a particular class of bubbles, to assume, for

example, that they are deterministic, and to attempt to find whether bubbles of

this class exist in a particular market. Although this sometimes may be a sound

strategy (such as in the case of the German hyperinflation studied by Flood and

Garber [1980]), bubbles can take many forms and specifying a class general enough

to include most makes discovery very difficult. A better strategy, and the one

we shall explore, is to find evidence of rejection of the "nobubble" hypothesis,

if possible in the direction of the hypothesis of the presence of bubbles.       (Re-

jection of the null hypothesis of Hno bubble" may be due to other phenomena

than bubbles, such as irrationality.)

     We therefore have to deal with two problems. The first is to characterize

the restrictions on the behavior of the price, p, given the dividend, x, under

the null hypothesis of no bubbles. The difficulty here is that even if p and x

are observable, we usually have no knowledge about the way information on x is

revealed to market participants. Information may come infrequently and in lumps;

it may come from variables which the econometrician cannot observe, etc. The

second problem is to find which of these restrictions are likely to be violated

in the presence of bubbles. The difficulty here is the lack of structure on

bubbles beyond condition (3).

     If we only have data on p, and are unwilling to make any assumptions about

the process generating x and the information process, there is no hope of showing

the presence or absence of bubbles. Recall that p is a sum of two components,

market fundamentals and bubbles. We cannot say something about one of these
                                            - 14   -




components without knowing something about the other component.
       This rather trivial point indicates how difficult it is to prove or dis-

prove the existence of bubbles in a market like gold, where market fundamentals

are hard to assess. It also implies that, to make progress we need data on x,

or assumptions concerning the generation of expectations of x, or both.

       In the next section we consider tests that can be carried out when only

data on p are available. These tests are useful only if one is willing to make

strong assumptions about x and the information structure.       Their usefulness is

therefore severely limited.        In this section we consider tests that can be used

when data on both p and x are available.

        Intuition suggests that bubbles may affect the second moments of (p. x) in

two    ways.     By introducing additional noise, they may increase the variance of p.

They may also weaken the relation of p to its fundamental determinant x and thus

decrease the correlations between p and x. We now consider these two intuitions

in turn, making them more precise and operational.


The Variance of p


        We must distinguish between the unconditional and the conditional variances

of P given respectively by:

   -

                              V    E(p -    E(p))2
                                                       and

                                  E E(p -
                                            E(pI1))2
Note    for future use that although Vc involves E(plc        which we do not observe,

it is also related, given eauation (1), to the variance of the excess return since

                              Vc = B(p(R    -   r))2
        It     follows from equation (3) that if astock is subject toa stochastic

 bubble, its unconditional variance is indeed infinite. This is not, howeyer,
                                                         - 15       -




necessarily     the case for the conditional variance. The excess return, in the
                                                         - -
                                                        (4)
presence of a bubble, is given by:

                              Pt
                                   -
                                           E(pt1)               =       +

     where
                                                   -
                                           C
                                                       E(cl2i)
     and

                                                       O [E(x+1I) -
                                           i=O

                is the innovation in the bubble and                         is the innovation in the mar-
so that

ket fundamental value. f and                               are negatively correlated, the excess re-

turn could have a lower variance in the presence of a bubble. It is probably

safe to assune that for most assets the innovations in the bubble are either

uncorrelated or positively correlated with the innovations in x, in which case

bubbles will increase the variance of the excess return                            and conditional variance

of p.

        What   are   the bounds on the conditional and unconditional variance of p

imposed by the hypothesis of no bubble? This question has been analysed by

Shiller [l98l, who has derived the maximum values for these two variances

given the variance of x. Given that in practice not only the variance but the

autocovarianceS of x can be estimated, it is easy to tighten his bounds by

using this additional information. To derive bounds, we need to make some

 assumption of stationarity. For notational convenience we will assume that x
                                                                                      variances and co-
 has zero mean (since means are unimportant when calculating

 variances) and is generated by

                                               n
                          x =      E           E a.. .
                                i=O j=l           13 jt—i

                                                                                             = k,   i = 0
        where        E(t) = 0, E(t)                             £Ct kt-i = 0,     unless j


        and               V(x)=
                            t              E
                                                   .
                                                       Z a. <c
                                       .                   13
                                       i=0 jl
                                           - 16    -




      Although this imposes restrictions on the process generating x, it still
allows information onxto come in lumps; the variance of the 's conditional on

the past need not be constant. We place no restrictions on the distribution of

the tS other than the moment restrictions.

      Given these assumptions, and assuming that 2 contains present and past

values of x, two upper bounds are easily derived (see Singleton 1980J). The

first is an upper bound on the unconditional variance of p: it is attained if

agents know in advance the future values of x, i.e. if they have perfect fore-

sight. In this case:


                    Pt =    E    01+1           so that
                           i=O



                    max = E[( E 0i+l
      (7)
                     u             .            t+1 )2]
                                   i=O

      The second is an upper bound on the conditional variance of p. This bound

is attained if the information set              includes only current and past values of x.

In this case

                    Pt -   E(pIt1)        =•    0i+l
      where
                                E(x÷11xt, x1, ...
                                                          ) - E(          x2...)
      so that
  •

       (8)          max =       E[(      01+1


      These upper bounds are likely to be violated when bubbles are present. We

can therefore test for bubbles by estimating the actual variances and these

upper bounds to see whether they are violated by the data.

      Shiller has computed the sample unconditional variance of p and the upper

bound given by (7), using annual observations from 1871 to 1979 for real prices
                                                        — 17 —




and real dividends from the Standard and Poor's index. (The data used are

deviations from an exponential trend. See Shiller [l98l for details.) The

sample variance, V               is 2512, while the sample estimate of the upper bound
           max
variance, V      ,   is
                     .
                             80, so that these point estimates clearly violate (7).

    To construct a sample estimate of the upper bound of the conditional

variance (8), we must first estimate a univariate ARIMA model for the dividend

series, x. The best fit is achieved by an AR(2) model:

                                                        x2 +
                                                                     '=
                          x =      a1
                                        x1 +       a2
                                 = 1.07 x1 - .30 xt2 +

The asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of the estimates is


                                               .0086       -.0071          0



            var ( a2 ) =                   -.0071           .0086          0


                                                   0             0       .0074



Diagnostic checks of the model are:

                 Q(24) =          23.9;   L(3) =        .850; L(8) = 3.96
The Q statistic is a general test for adequacy of the model, and if the model is

correctly specified, is distributed X2(24). L(3) and L(8) are Lagrange Multi-

plier tests, testing for AR(3) and AR(8) alternatives.                           If the model AR(2) is cor-

rect, they are distributed X2(1) and X2(6). All three tests suggest the AR(2)

specification is adequate.

     We must now compute an estimate of the right hand side of equation (8).

Note that            also follows:


                             =                 +                         for i > 0
      (9)                        a1                a2 t+i-2

                         =
                             t             =   0           for       0
                                             -        -



Multiplying   equation (9) by               and summing from one to infinity yields:


                                 =                                                       +
                                     ai0(.f1
                                                  'Yt+i +           + a2Q2(1f1''Yt+i

                                 = (1   -
                                            Ga1
                                                  -
                                                      G2a2Y'           Ga1 +   62a2))


                    i+l                      - 0
                                                 2             -l
                 E 0             = (.1 -
                i=0
                                         Ga1              a2) 0
     so that

                Vmax =
                          2
                                (1 - Ga1 - 0 a2)
                                                  2 —22
                                                      0



     We have estimates of a1, a2 and c. We need only a value for 0 ,                         or   recalling

that 0 = (1 +   r)     a value for the interest rate Following Shiller, we assume

r = 5%, so that 0 =      .95.    This gives an estimated upper bound: max =                  9.08.      We

now need to compute the sample conditional variance, given by E(p(R -                    r))2.       This

also has been computed by Shiller. It is: V = 653.83.

     The point estimates again violate the bound. Is the violation significant?

We need to compute the variances of the above estimates. Conditional on the value

of 0, and assuming that              is normally distributed, it is straightforward to

show that asymptotically: Var(VX) = 15.13 and Var(V) = 7843.92.                          The asup-

totic variance of (VmaX -
                                  V)    is thus: 15.13 + 7843.92          -    2   cov(Vx, V) We
won't calculate the covariance term, but by assuming that max and V are per-

fectly negatively correlated, we obtain a lower bound on the covariance term of

-344.50. This implies an upper bound on the standard error of (Vmax -                        V)    of

92.46. Thus the t-statistic on (Vmax -                    V)   is greater, in absolute value, than

6.97, indicating that the data violate the bound given in (8) at any reasonable

 significance level.
                                            -19-


CrossCOVariaflce5 of p and x


     The intuition that bubbles decrease the relation between p and x can be made

rigorous as follows. Assume that there are no bubbles, so that:


                   =         1+1
              Pt       i=O
                                   E(x+I)


                   =    Z 61+1     x÷ + Ut ;                      =0
                                                 E(uIc2)
                       i=0


Then the unconditional variance of p is given by:


              V        E[(E01+'      X4j + Ut)


                   =    0i+l       cov(p x+) ÷ E(ut


 By construction of u, E(u
                                       =   0,   so that:

                                                        r:Y

                     i+l                                      x       i+l

               i=O
                   0
                             cov(p x+) /        V   =             0
                                                              p i=O
                                                                            p(p. x+) =
                                                                                         1




      Under the null hypothesis, the relation of p and x is such that the appro-

 priately weighted sum of correlations between p and x, multiplied by the ratio

 of the standard deviation of x to the standard deviation of p. is equal to unity.

 It is likely to be smaller if there are bubbles. Using the same sample, we can

 estimate this ratio.         The two components are:


                                                                  while from above:
                  (O01 cov(p x+)) = 176.10,

                   V (p) = 2512.
 Again, point estimates strongly suggest rejection of the null hypothesis. We

 have not carried out a formal test; this could be calculated using spectral tech-

 niques as in Singleton [1981]. The result is suggestive of bubbles, with the

  same caveats as above.
                                        -20-


Section V     Looking for Bubbles, II


    We discuss in this section the use of two other types of tests for bubbles:

runs tests and tail tests. Both refer to the distribution of innovations in

prices, p -   E(p1c11),
                          or equivalently the distribution of excess returns p(R -   r).
A run is a sequence of realizations of a random variable with the same sign.

     The bubble component, c1, of the price innovation appears likely to have both

runs and a distribution with fat tails. If bubbles grow for a while and then

crash, the innovations in the bubble will tend to be of the same sign while the

bubble continues, then reverse sign when a crash occurs. The runs for the bubble

innovation will then tend to be longer than for a purely random sequence, making

the total number of runs over the sample smaller. Crashes will produce large

outliers so that the distribution of innovations will have fat tails (i.e. the

distribution will be leptokurtic).

     Those are, however, characteristics of the bubble innovations, which are not

observable. Price innovations, which are observable are the sum of bubble inno-

vations, e, and market fundamental innovations, r. To attribute characteristics

of price innovations to bubbles implies imposing restrictions on the distribution

of r. We now consider whether these may be reasonable.


Runs Tests


     Runs in innovations can only arise from a' skewed distribution. If we

assume that ri has a symmetric distribution, we can then attribute runs in price

 innovations to bubbles. Is it reasonable to assume that i-i,    the market fundamental
 innovation has a symmetric distribution? It may not be, even if x has a symmetric

 distribution, as the following example shows; suppose that:

                    =                       independent and white,
                             2t-l l'
      with      (lt' 2t)c t '      lt    k-
                                               - 21     —




Suppose further that the probability density of                             ,
                                                                                f(),    is skewed to the

right and the densi:ty of 2t is given by g(2) =                           f(-1).     In this cs.e .x has a

symmetric distribution, but even In the absence of bubbles Pt =                                  + 2t-l 02t
is skewed to the left and Pt -                              =                       is skewed to the right.
                                         ECpIcZ1)
     Even if r is synunetric, runs tests may have only minimal power against

bubbles. This is because bubbles do not necessarily generate long runs.                               Consider

the second example of a bubble given in Section II.                             If it, the probability of

the bubble continuing is unity, then the bubble innovation is simply                                  which

could have a symmetric distribution. Even if it is different from one and the

distribution of i is symmetric, we may still find no fewer runs than for a series

of independent random variables drawn from a symmetric distribution. Ifii 0,

the bubble innovation is, in this case

                                                                     —l
                            =     + c1     (1 -   ii)       (0 ii)              with probability it



                            =     .- cr10'                                      with probability 1-it


so that:

                 Proh( >                 > 0) =   it Prob(U > c1 (lit)(0it)Hc1 > 0)


                        +   (1-it) Prob(P > +c 1OhIl > 0)

Note that for it =     1/2,     this is just


                 Prob(e >                > 0) =   1/2 Prob(P >                     1B'ki > 0)

                        +   1/2   Prob      > +c 10ic1 > 0) = 1/2

Thus, for ii =   1/2   or it =    1, a runs test has minimal power against this type of bubble,

and it has very low power for values of it close to 1/2 or 1.
                                             — 22 —




      Not detered by these caveats., we nevertheless calculated the distribution of
runs for weekly innovations in the price of gold. We assumed, plausibly, that

holding gold during the sample period, 1975 - 1981 was not providing any direct

dividend, so that x was equal to zero. In this case, the innovations are given

by:

               p -
                     E(pI1)   =
                                  p(   R -   r)   =   p   -    (1 +     r) p1
We used weekly gold prices (Englehart) for the period January, 1975, to June, 1981.

In calculating the innovations we relaxed the assumption of a constant interest

rate. The rate of interest that we used was the one week rate of return on

Treasury bills which matured at time t.

      The results of the runs tests are presented in Table 1. They reveal no

evidence indicating the presence of bubbles. This is somewhat surprising given the

increase in prices at the end of 1979. In Figure 1 we have plotted the excess re-

turns from August 1977 until the end of the sample. The figure clearly shows that

the increase in late 1979 and early 1980 was not a steady one. Between the begin-

ning of September 1980 and the middle of January 1981, gold prices rose from $335

per ounce to $751 per ounce. During this 19 week period, 13 of the week-to-week

 excess returns were positive, while 6 of the excess returns were negative.


 Tail Tests


       The bubble considered above (with iT                   1 or iT     0) will at times explode or

 crash. While the bubble is growing it will generate small positive excess re-

 turns, whichwill be followed at the time of the crash by a large negative excess

 return. The distribution of innovations for this type of bubble will therefore

 be leptokurtic. This suggests that a large coefficient of kurtosis for price

 innovations might indicate the presence of bubbles.

       Thus, if we assume that market fundamental innovations are not leptokurtic,
                                - 23   -




                                TABLE 1


                  Runs for Gold Excess Returns

                        334 Observations

                                                       Expected Total
Length    +             -                  Total     for Random Sequence

                       44                   99             83.50
  1      45

                       23                   51             41.75
  2      18

                        4                    9             20.88
  3       5

                        4                    9             10.44
  4       5

                        4                    6              5.22
  5       2

                        0                    3              2.61
  6       3

                        0                    1              1.30
  7       1

                        1                    2               .65
  8       1

                        0                    1               .33
  9       1

                         1                   2                   .16
 10       1

                            0                0                   .08
 11       0

                            0                    0               .04
 12           0

                        81                  163            168
Total     82
                                      FIGURE 1



               146.31


        I



               go.36



Weekly Excess
Returns for Gold


               34.42




               -21.52




              -77.46

                        1977   1978          1979   1980   1981
                                    - 25   —




                                                the presence of bubbles. The
we can attribute fat tails in excess returns to

problem is, however, the same as for runs.     Even if the innoVations in x are not


Ieptokurtic, the market fundamental innovations may well he. As Shiller [1981]

points out, this will be the case in particular if information about future x's

comes in lumps.

     Again, despite the caveats, we computed the coefficient of kurtosis for excess

returns for our weekly gold series. Because the series was heteroskedastic

(see Figure 1) we computed the coefficient using data from the beginning of the

sample to October, 1979, and from October, 1979, until the end of the sample. The

kurtosis coefficients were 7.19 and 6.67 respectively.     These are much higher

                                                                                    It
than the normal distribution, which has a coefficient of kurtosis equal to 3.

is also much higher than the coefficient for 25 week T-bills, whose values over

the same periods were 4.30 and 3.36. Whether this is due to fat tailed fundamen-

                                                   to the presence of bubbles is
tals, to a particular information structure, or

impossible to tell.

      The limits of these two types of tests have been emphasized.    The results

                                           of runs suggests that if there were
 are nevertheless intriguing. The lack

 bubbles, they were either very long lived (11 close to unity) or short lived (11

 close to 1/2, so that the average duration is two weeks). The very high coeffi-

 cient of kurtosis on the other hand suggests either very leptokurtic market

 fundamentals or the existence of bubbles.
                                    - 26   -




Section   VI   Conclusions


     Speculative bubbles are not ruled Out by rational behavior in financial

market and are likely to have real effects on the economy.

     Testing for speculative bubbles is not easy. Rational bubbles can follow

many types of processes. We have shown that certain bubbles will cause viola-

tion of variance bounds implied by a class of rational expectations models.

Empirical evidence is presented which demonstrates that these bounds are violated.
                                                             would cause violation
We also noted that other alternatives (e.g. irrationality)

of these bounds., and our results must be viewed in light of this.

     Other tests for bubbles were suggested when only price data is available.

Our discussion demonstrated that these tests may have low power.
                                    — 27 —




                                   FootnOtes



(1) This indeterminacy arises not oflly in arbitrage conditions, but in all models

      in which expectations of future variables affect current decisions. It is

      the subejct of much discussion currently in macroeconomics, under the label

      of ltflçj   uniqueness."
(2)
      In some models, such as the model used by Cagan [1956), a condition similar

      to (1) holds with Pt being the logarithm of the price.   As a logarithm can

      be negative, the argument used in this paragraph does not apply.

(3) The first example of a bubble type phenomenon in a general equilibrium model

      was given by Hahn [19661.   In his model, however, bubbles imply that a

      price becomes negative in finite time. As this is impossible, rational

      expectations and general equilibrium implications exclude the presence of

      bubbles in his model.

(4) The assumptions of risk neutrality and of a constant interest rate,

      inessential in previous sections, are essential in this one. The moment

       tests are only valid if they hold.
                                    - 28   -




                                  References


Cagan, Phillip, "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation." InStudiesinthe
     Quantity Theory of Money, edited by Milton Friedman, Chicago: Universiy
     of Chicago Press, 1956.

Flood, Robert P. and Peter M. Garber, "MarketFundamentals versus Price-level
     Bubbles: The First Tests.t' Journal of Political Economy 88, no. 4
     (August, 1980): pp. 745-770.

Hahn, F. H. "Equilibrium Dynamics with Heterogenous Capital Goods," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 80 (November, 1966): pp. 633-646.

Kindleberger, C. P. Manias, Panics, and Crashes, Basic Books, N.Y., 1978.

Poterba, J. M. "Inflation, Income Taxes, and Owner Occupied Housing." Thesis,
     Harvard University, March, 1980.

Shiller, R. J. "Do Stock Prices Move too Much tobe Justified by Subsequent
     Changes in Dividends?" AmericanEconomic Review, 71, no. 3 (June, 1981).

Singleton, K. J. "Expectations Models of the Term Structure and Implied
     Variance Bounds." Journal of Political Economy, 88, no. 6 (December, 1980).

Thomas, G. and M. Morgan lVitts, The Day the Bubble Burst, Doubleday, N.Y., 1979.
