NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A SYNTHESIS OF KEYNESIAN, MONETARY, AND PORTFOLIO
APPROACHES TO FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES

Thorvaldur

Gylfason

John F. Helliwell

Working Paper No. 949

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MP 02138

July 1 982

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the workshop on
Open Economy Macroeconomics sponsored by the Institute for
International Economic Studies at the University of Stockholm,
August 24—28, 1981. We are grateful to participants in the
workshop, especially Torsten Persson, and to Max Corden and John
Cuddington for helpful comments. A longer version of the paper
with the same title appeared as Seminar Paper No. 10, Institute
for International Economic Studies, October 1981. The research
reported here is part of the NBER 's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #949
July 1982

A SYNTHESIS OF KEYNESIAN, MONETARY, AND PORTFOLIO APPROACHES TO
FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES

ABSTRACT

This paper presents a simple synthesis of Keynesian,

monetary, and portfolio approaches to macroeconomlc theory under

flexible exchange rates. By including the key features of all
the partial approaches in a general model, we show that some of the
important

contrasts that have bcen drawn

are due to a neglect of

between Lii

repercussions elsewhere in

app roLlciles

the economy.

After reconciling these false contrasts, we show how some of the
approaches still give different predictions about the effects of
monetary and fiscal policy using differing assumptions about the
international mobility of goods and financial assets.

Thorvaldur Gylfason
Institute for International
Economic Studies
University of Stockholm,
106 91 Stockholm
Sweden

John F. Helliwell
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C., Canada
V6T lY2

(08) 16 30 73

(604) 228 4953

A SYNTHESIS OF KEYNESIAN, MONETARY, AND PORTFOLIO APPROACHES
TO FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES

Introduction

The purpose of this paper is to extend our earlier synthesis of
monetary and Keynesian approaches to balance—of—payments theory under
1

fixed exchange rates to the

they
and

analysis of flexible exchange

As

have been presented in the literature, the Keynesian, monetary,

portfolio approaches to the determination of exchange rates give

very

different predictions about, for example, the effects of changes

in income

and interest rates on

contrasts

have been drawn between them, especially

and monetary

to

rates.

exchange rates. As a result, strong
between the Keynesian

approaches.2 Like our earlier paper, this one is intended

show that most of these contrasLs are potentially misleading, since

each approach can be best seen as part of a larger system. Within the
larger system which we develop, we show that the different predictions

the partial approaches are based in part on ignoring other important
parts of the system, and in part on particular assumptions about
of

expectations

and about the strength of the international

linkages among national markets for goods and financial assets.

2

In Section I we introduce the general model on which our
synthesis of the Keynesian, monetary, and portfolio approaches

is based. Section II presents a brief review of the partial
approaches in order to highlight the role of each of these in
the general model; we also discuss attempts that have been

made to discriminate empirically among the partial approaches.
In Section III we reduce the general model to a simple diagram
which illustrates the simultaneous determination of the exchange
rate and output in the shnrt and medium term, and use the diagram

to analyse the effects of monetary and fiscal policy. We also discuss
the role of exchange rate expectations and show how purchasing power parity
and interest parity can be handled as special cases of the general
model. Section IV summarizes our findings.

I.

A General Model of Exchange Rate Determination
We begin by presenting a general model of exchange rate

determination which, unlike the partial approaches, permits the

short—run endogeneity of output, prices, and interest rates to

be taken into account simultaneously. As the model is essentially
short—run in nature, it suppresses many elements of economic

behavior that are potentially relevant for exchange rates,
especially in the longer run. In particular, we ignore the
effects of capital formation and other changes in wealth

on spending and aggregate supply. This we do deliberately in order
to be able to present the synthesis in the simplest possible way.

3

Our model has a linkage between the current account and the
capital account similar to that emphasized by Kouri (1976) and by

Dornbusch and Fischer (1980): the exchange rate adjusts to give
portfolio equilibrium in the short run, and the resulting current
account surplus or deficit is the means by which the stock of

foreign assets adjusts towards its new equilibrium value. While
their models have much richer expectations structures than ours,
our model (like those of Kenen and Allen (1980) and Tobin and

Macedo (1980)) permits output to alter under a demand shock, thus
providing an important additional linkage between the current account
and the exchange rate.

The equations of the general model are as follows:
+

(1)

M = m(Y,
p

(2) B

(3)

r, r*, ( — e)/e)W

+—

(money market)

—

b(Y, r, r*, ( — e)/e)W

(bond market)

+
+
b*(Y, r, r*,( —

(foreign bonds)

—

eB*

(4) W =

M + B + eB*
+

(5) Y = E(Y,
(6) P

—

(wealth)

—+

—

r) +

e)/e)W

C +

÷
T(Y, Y, eP*/P)

(aggregate

= Q(Y)
PT(Y, Y, eP*/P) -,

eB*

0

(balance of payments)

Notation

T — trade

Y —

balance (real)

income (real)

e — exchange

supply)

+

÷

(7) LR

(goods market)

rate (units of domestic currency per unit of

foreign currency)

4

e

— expected exchange rate

P — price
F — net

level

capital inflow (nominal)

r — interest

rate (nominal)

R — reserves

(measured in domestic currency)

M -

money supply (nominal)

m -

money demand (real)

B — domestic
b —

bond supply (nominal)

demand for domestic bonds (real)

B* — domestic holdings of foreign bonds (nominal)
b* — demand for foreign bonds (real)

W - wealth

(nominal)

E — private

expenditure (real)

G — government
—

first

expenditure (real)

difference operator

Foreign variables are marked by asterisks.

The first four equations describe equilibrium conditions in the

markets for three types of assets:3 (i) domestic money M [equation (1)

with m > 0,

m <

0 and m, m— < 01; (ii) domestically issued nontraded

bonds B [equation (2) with b =

0

br >

0

b, b— < 01;

internationally
and (iii) 1%

traded bonds B* which are denominated in foreign currency [equation (3) with

b < 0,

b<

0, b**, b± >

0].

The three assets are assumed to be gross

5

substitutes. While M and B are exogenously determined, B* is initially predetermined, but changes as a result of international capital movements. Equation (5) shows income as the sum of private expenditure E, government expenditure G, and net exports T. Private axpenditure is assumed to vary directly

with income (0 <

E

<

1) and inversely with the interest rate (Er <

as usual,4 while net exports vary inversely with the level of domestic

income (T < 0) and directly with the level of foreign income (T > 0)
and with relative prices at home and abroad (Tp*p >

O).

Equation (6) is

a standard aggregate supply equation which can be derived from the

equilibrium condition for the labor market. Gradual adjustment of either
nominal wages or of price expectations to changes in the price level
ensures a positively sloped supply schedule; while either condition is

sufficient, neither is necessary. The focus of the analysis to follow
on the short to medium term justifies the exclusion of physical capital

from the supply function, even though the allocation of financial
capital among alternative assets plays a key role in the model.6

Equation (7) defines the balance of paynents as the sum of (nominal)

net exports and capital inflow from abroad; eB* is the net accumulation
of foreign bonds, measured in domestic currency, in the hands of
domestic residents.

6

II. A Brief Review of Partial Approaches
Before proceeding to analyze the general model and to present the
partial approaches as special cases thereof, it is useful to provide a
brief overview of these approaches as they have been formulated and
tested in the literature.
a3

Keynesian_approach. In the tradition established by Meade (1951),

Mundell (1962), and Fleming (1962), this approach may be represented by
rewriting the balance—of—payments equation (7) as
—

(7') R = PT(Y,

+

+—

+

Y*, eP*/P) +

F(r,

r*) = 0

expressing the capital account in flow form rather than in stock adjust-

ment form.7 With the exchange rate assumed to clear the foreign exchange
market, equation (7') may be solved for e to yield:
+

(8)

e =

f(Y,

—+
+
Y*, P, P*, r, r*)
—

This "Keynesian" exchange rate equation implies the ceteris paribus

propositions shown in the first line of Table i.8

b.

Monetary approach. In one of its two main versions, the monetary

approach emphasizes immediate and continual purchasing power parity
(PPP) through the close international linkage of goods markets
(Frenkel 1976, Bilson l978a, 1978b), and may be summarized by

combining domestic and foreign money market equations: M = Pm(Y,

and M = P*m*(Y*, r*), with the PPP condition e =
the following exchange rate equation:

(9)

e =

f(Y,

+— +—
+
Y*, M, M*, r, r*)

P/P.

r)

This yields

7

The other main version of the monetary approach gives priority
to the maintenance of interest parity through perfect arbitrage in

international financial markets (Dornbusch 1976a). In this version
the PPP equation is replaced by the interest parity condition
r =

r*

+ (e —

e)/e

where e is assumed to be equal to the forward

exchange rate. If, as in Dornbusch (1976a), P and e are taken as
largely predetermined in the short run, then this equation and the

money market equations can be solved to give:9
—

(9')

e

+

+—

—+

+

f(Y, Y*, M, M*, P, P*, -e)

Equations (9) and (9') imply the ceteris paribus propositions

shown in lines 2 and 3 of Table 1. As the table shows, the partial
Keynesian approach and the two partial monetary approaches generally
yield different predictions about the effects on the exchange rate
of changes in domestic and foreign incomes, prices, and interest

rates, reflecting different assumptions about what is being held

constant: In particular, the monetary approach with PPP holds
constant at all times a variable, eP*/P, that plays a crucial role
in the adjustment process according to the Keynesian approach.
c.

Portfolio approach. Within this framework, exchange rates (and

interest rates) are determined in the short run by equilibrium conditions
in asset markets, summarized by equations (1) — (4) above. Abstracting

3

from expectations and assuming output fixed, substitution

of equation (4) into (1) and (3) gives the following quasi—reduced—
form solution for the exchange rate (note that equation (2) is

redundant by Walras Law):

10

+ ?— +
(10) e = f(M, B, B*, r*)
This equation implies the ceteris paribus propositions shown

in line 4 of Table 1. The effect of r* on e is consistent with the
Keynesian approach and with the interest parity version of the monetary
approach, but not with the PPP version.

The portfolio approach also includes the balance—of—payments equation (7)

which governs the evolution of the exchange rate over time. If, for given Y,

Y*, P, and P, the instantaneous equilibrium solution for e from equation
(10) does not result in current account equilibrium, the corresponding
disequilibrium in the capital account changes B* and thus feeds back on
ii

the exchange rate through equation (10). Assuming stability,

this

dynamic process continues until equilibrium is reached in both the
current account and the capital account, implying the following
medium—term equilibrium solution for the exchange rate:

+ —
(10') e =

f(Y,

-I-

—

Y*, p, p*)

This equation implies the standard "Keynesian" propositions about the

effects of changes in output and prices. These predictions are
contrary to some of the ceteris paribus predictions of each of the
monetary approaches (see Table 1).

9

Empirical tests

What could one hope to learn from the results of empirical tests of

the various partial approaches to the exchange rate? Although each
approach offers an equation that may be estimated directly, each of
these equations contains variables that have important links to the
exchange rate through channels other than the one emphasized (as

illustrated by Lindbeck 1976, p. 140). This poses a potentially serious
problem of omitted variables, especially if the estimated equation is

a quasi—reduced form rather than a structural equation. For example,
estimates of equation (9) have been taken to '1offer strong support

for the monetary approach in general" (Bilson 1978b, p. 396), and
when the equation is run against direct estimates of the PPP condition,
e =

P/P*,

it generally provides much better forecasts of the exchange

rate. But how can the PPP condition, when estimated together with money
demand equations, do better than the PPP equation by itself? When Bilson
(1978a, p. 64) constrains the coefficients of equation (9) to be consistent with his a priori beliefs about the parameters of money demand
equations, he finds "the harsh truth ...

that

the monetary model does

not improve upon a sophisticated PPP model as an exchange rate fore-

casting tool". Yet if the true money demand parameters were included
in the estimating equation, would not the resulting equation have to be

identical to the directly estimated PPP equation? In the absence of
fortuitous cross correlations between the errors in the money demand
equations and the PPP equation, the monetary equation for the exchange
rate can only be better than the PPP equation itself by the coefficients
of r, Y,and N moving away from their true structural values (based on the

money demand equations) to capture indirectly channels of influence not

10

contained in the partial monetary approach. This may permit the
monetary approach with PPP to predict better than PPP by itself, but

is hardly grounds for satisfaction. A much more direct test of the
partial monetary approach would be to estimate the structural

equations directly, and to solve the three equations for the exchange

rate. The same applies to Frenkel's (1976) and Clements and Frenkel's
(1980) tests of the monetary approach with PPP and also to Frankel's
(1979) test of the monetary approach with real interest parity.
Since each partial approach involves different endogenous variables

on the right—hand side of the estimating equation, and hence provides
different scope for unmodelled channels of influence to be captured
unintentionally, there are difficulties with using these tests to

discriminate among the different approaches. In our general model,
to which we now return, we have therefore set up our equations in a way
that allows the partial approaches, to the extent that they are inconsistent,

to be interpreted

III.

as special cases.

A Synthesis of the Partial Approaches

The essence of the general model presented in Section I can be illu-

strated in a simple diagram. For this purpose we express the seven
equations of the model as two linear quasi—reduced—form relationships

between output and the exchange rate. The first is based on equations
(1), (4), (5), and (6), reflecting equilibrium in the markets for domestic
goods, money, and labor:'2

(11)

e =

k1Y

+

k2G

+

k3M

+

+
k4B*÷ k5B + k6e

k7r*

+

kP*

÷ ky* (K schedule)

ii

The second is based on equations (1), (3), and (4) and shows the pairs
of output and the exchange rate that give instantaneous equilibrium in
asset markets, including the market for foreign bonds:13
+

(12)

e =

a1Y

+

a2M

+

—

+

a3B

+

a4B*

+

a5e

+

+

a6r*

(A schedule)

The locus of both schedules depends on the three domestic exogenous
policy variables of the model: M, B, and C, as well as on domestic
holdings of foreign bonds B*, the expected exchange rate e, and

the three foreign exogenous variables: r*, P*, and Y*. M, B,
and C are linked by the government budget constraint, which we shall

take into account in our later discussion of the effects of monetary

and fiscal policy. The balance—of—payments equation (7). ensures that
the current account surplus (or deficit) implied by the above solutions for Y and e is matched by an equal deficit (or surplus) on
capital account, etB*.

The instantaneous equilibrium values for the level of output and
the exchange rate are determined by the intersection of the K and A
schedules as shown in Figure 1 (the C schedule is explained

lelow). The slopes of the two schedules (i.e., the signs of

k1 and a1) reflect not only the effects of income acting on the
exchange rate through the current account and asset demands, but also

price and interest rate effects. Thus, the positive slope of the K
schedule results from the positive relationship between the exchange
rate and aggregate demand via the current account that is only

partially offset by the negative demand effects of depreciation

12

through rising interest rates and prices. The negative slope of the
A schedule reflects the positive relationship between the exchange
rate and the excess demand for money via the domestic—currency value
of wealth; by creating an excess demand for money, depreciation

presses output down and interest rates up to preserve equilibrium in
asset markets, and this effect is reinforced by our provisional

assumption of exogenous exchange rate expectations. The arrows in
Figure 1 show how the K and A schedules shift in response to increases
in the predetermined variables.

The diagram shows clearly how potentially misleading it is to

regress e against Y and other variables in an attempt to see whether
e and Y are negatively related, as predicted by the partial monetary
approaches, or positively related, as predicted by the partial Keynesian

approach. In the general model e and Y can move in the same direction
or in opposite directions in the short run depending on what kind of

exogenous shock moves them both. For example, an increase in G, P,
or Y shifts the K schedule to the right, lowering e and raising Y.
But an increase in M, e, or r*, or a decrease in B*, shifts both
schedules to the right, so that Y rises while e can either rise or

fall. An increase in B shifts the K schedule to the left, but the
A schedule may shift in either direction, so that the effects on e and
Y are uncertain.

If we were concerned only with the initial instantaneous equilibrium,

this would be the end of the story: equations (1) — (6) determine Y and
e as shown in Figure 1 and equation (7) gives the resulting current account

position and hence eLB*. Over time, however, as B* changes, the exchange

rate and output must adjust until the final equilibrium values of Y
and e simultaneously satisfy equations (1) —

(7).

13

By rewriting the balance of payments equation (7) as

B* =

(7")

T(Y,

Y*, eP*/P)

we can determine the dynamic stability of the adjustment of B* by

evaluating the sign of the partial derivative B*/B* which depends on
the direction and magnitude of the reduced—form effects of B* on e, P,

and Y. Under reasonable parameter assumptions and with B* positive,
an increase in B* lowers e, and thus contributes to a reduction in T

and hence also in B*, thus ensuring stability.
Given stability, we can set LB* = 0 in equation (7") and solve
for e as follows:

+
e =

(13)

c1Y

+

c2Y* + c3P*

(C schedule)

This equation describes the current account equilibrium relationship

between e and Y. The C schedule is flatter than the K schedule
(c1 <

k)

as shown in Figure 1. To the right of the C schedule the

current account is in deficit, while to the left, it is in surplus.

Whenever the A and K schedules intersect off the C schedule, the
resulting current account imbalance will gradually shift the A
schedul&towards the point of intersection of the K and C schedules.
Thus, while the A and K schedules determine the exchange rate with B*
treated as predetermined, the C and K schedules determine the exchange
rate in the "medium term" when current account imbalances accumulate
to change B*.

14

Effects of Monetary and Fiscal Policy
We are now in a position to make some policy experiments with the

model. Assuming that the economy is initially in full equilibrium at
point E in Figure 2, a tax—financed increase in government spending
causes the K schedule to shift to the right so that output rises and the
exchange rate falls as the economy moves to a new instantaneous equi-

librium at point E'. Since E' is below the C schedule, the current
account is in deficit. As the stock of foreign assets runs down, the

A schedule also moves to the right. Meanwhile, the K schedule drifts
further rightwards as a result of the effect of B* on the demand for money.
This process continues until stock equilibrium is restored at E" where

both output and the exchange rate are higher than initially, notwith-

standing the initial appreciation. This conclusion would have to be
qualified to the extent that the higher taxes influenced capital

accumulation or introduced wage or price pressures. More importantly,
the market's anticipation of the medium—term depreciation will raise e
and thus reduce or reverse the initial instantaneous appreciation.
These results are summarized in the first column of Table 2.
Figure 3 shows the effects of an increase in the money supply
through an open market operation. The A and K schedules bot.h shift to
the right, producing a momentary equilibrium at E', with output

and the exchange rate higher than initially.14 Provided that E'
lies below the C schedule as shown in Figure 3, the resulting current

account deficit causes the A and K schedules to shift further to the

right until the full equilibrium is reached at E". The medium—term
depreciation of the currency is larger than initially, and may be
accelerated by speculative arbitrage.

15

Money—financed and bond—financed government spending are slightly
tricky to analyze with diagrams, because a sustained increase in C
must require (in the absence of increased taxation) continual growth

of M or B. The once—and—for—all increase in the money supply required
by a one—period increase in G is like the open market operation, except
the K schedule moves further to the right in the first period, and then back

again in the second as C is restored to its initial level. A permanent
increase in C involves a sequence of such steps. The analysis of bond—
financed spending is more complicated, as even the direction of the

first—period shift in the A schedule is uncertain. The first—period
effects of fiscal expansion are as shown in the upper panel of Table 2,

while the lower panel shows the effects of a sustained increase in C,
recognizing that the portfolio is not in equilibrium because M or B is
still increasing.

Some Special Cases
In our analysis of the general model the expected exchange rate e

was not assigned a major role, because we emphasized the medium—term
solution to the model in which the exchange rate adjusted so as to

make the stock of foreign assets constant, and

could be set equal to

e. But for the analysis of the dynamic path of the exchange rate toward
its medium—term equilibrium value (and hence of income, prices, and the

current account), the behavior of e is crucial. In this section we shall
see how the expectional and other assumptions associated with the partial
approaches can be treated as special cases of the general model.
a.

Expectations. The following scheme shows five different ways of

modelling exchange rate expectations:
(1)

static expectations

e =

e

(ii)

regressive expectations

e =

ee

+

(1 — O)e

(0 <

e < 1)

16

e =

(iii) adaptive expectations

Oe

+

(1 —

Oe

+

(1 —

(iv)

extrapolative expectations

=

(v)

rational expectations with
perfect foresight

e = e

O)ei

(0 <

&)e_1

(0 > 1)

U

<

t+l

Here e is the expectation, formed at time t, of the value of e at
time t+l, and e is some exogenously given value. The qualitative results
we report in this paper all apply without exception if expectations are
static, regressive, or adaptive, but instability is naturally a possibility

with extrapolative expectations. As Kouri (1976) and others have shown,
there are often a number of

perfect—foresight paths that are consistent

with rational expectations. He assumes that long—run perfect foresight
would rule out the unstable paths.

Using perfect foresight in our general

model would undoubtedly change the dynamic path of the exchange rate, and
could change the impact effects on the exchange rate in cases where the
impact and medium—term effects are in opposite directions.
b.

Purchasing power parity. In this case, goods markets are assumed

to be completely integrated between countries so that
e =

P/P*.

and

Accordingly, for given * the K and C schedules are

replaced by the aggregate supply curve, which is completely unresponsive

to changes in G, M, B, B*, e, r*, *, and

*•

follows that

(i) an increase in C has no effect on either Y or e unless it is

financed by either M or B; and (ii) an increase in M by open market
operations will raise both Y and e, by shifting the A schedule to

the right. These, of course, are standard monetarist propositions
for the short run with variable aggregate supply.

1)

17

c. Interest parity.

If capital markets are fully integrated

through perfect substitutability between domestic and

r*

foreign bonds (i.e., b*, b, b— *_cobr, b**, b— —co), then r =

(e—e)/e.

+

In this case, the general model retains its qualitative

comparative—statics properties (with the only exception that a3 in
equation (12) becomes unambiguously negative). Thus, in contrast to
the Mundell—Fleming model where pure fiscal expansion lowers e but
leaves Y unchanged under perfect capital mobility, a tax—financed increase

in G raises both e and Y in our model in the medium term; for even though
r is tied to r* and M is fixed, the demand for money can be satisfied at
a higher level of output through an offsetting reduction of wealth.

Hence, the link between the exchange rate and asset markets preserves
the efficacy of pure fiscal policy under perfect capital mobility.

An expansionary open market operation also increases both e and Y in
the medium term, but less than in the Mundell—Fleming model, for analogous
reasons.
d.

Full employment. Finally, if aggregate supply is fixed at full

employment (Q -, oo), the K and C schedules become vertical at the
full—employment level of output and completely unresponsive to exogenous

shocks, but the A schedule retains a negative slope. An increase in M
by open market operations as well as money— and also bond-financed
increases in G cause both e and P to rise, instantaneously as

well as in the medium term. If exchange rate expectations are
endogenous, the initial depreciation will be larger than other-

wise. Disregarding expectations effects, however, a tax—financed increase
in G leaves e unchanged in instantaneous equilibrium because it does not,
with Y fixed, affect portfolio balance immediately, but the increase in P

18

resulting from the rise in G leads to decumulation of foreign assets
and to currency depreciation. Thus, the medium—term effects of monetary
and fiscal policy on the exchange rate and the price level at full
employment are exactly as in the general case shown in Table 2.

IV. Conclusion
The main purpose of this paper has been to present a simple
synthesis of Keynesian, monetary, and portfolio approaches to flexible
exchange rates. By including the key features of all of the approaches
in a simple general model, we were able to show that some of the
contrasts that have been drawn between the approaches are due to a

neglect of important feedbacks elsewhere in the economy. Even after
these false contrasts were reconciled, we showed that some of the

approaches still give different predictions about the effects of mone-

tary and fiscal policy because of differing assumptions about the international mobility of goods and financial assets. Using our general model,
we were able to show how each of these assumptions altered the effects
of monetary and fiscal policies on the main macroeconomic variables,
at least in the short and medium term.

Although we have attempted to reflect the most influential currents
of theoretical and empirical work, we have restricted ourselves to the

simplest specifications that are consistent with the various approaches.
This simplicity was deliberate, as we wished to demonstrate as
clearly as possible the reasons for the contrasting results
from the various partial approaches, and to produce a general model

that is amenable to fairly easy exposition. The cost, of course,
is that we have not been able to deal fully with many important

19

issues relating to information, expectations, and dynamics.
Our current model is nonetheless larger and more complex than
that used in our fixed-exchange—rate paper, for we have added
a dynamic portfolio structure and some discussion of exchange rate

expectations. We hope that the more general model provides
sufficient insights to make the additional complexity worthwhile.

20

Table 1.

Summary of Propositions of Partial
Approaches

Effect on the exchange rate of an increase in:

j*
Keynesian approach
(Equation 8)
Monetary approach
with PPP
(Equation9)

Monetary approach
with interest
parity
(Equation 9')

p*

+

—

+

—

+

+

—

—

+

—

r

r*

M

l

+

—

+

+

+

+

+

Portfolio approach
for short run

(Equation 10)
Portfolio approach
for medium term
(Equation 10')

+

—

+

M*

...

—

Note: A plus sign designates depreciation; a minus sign, appreciation.
means "not applicable".

21

Table 2.

Effects of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on the Exchange Rate
and Output

Tax—financed
fiscal
expansion

Monetary ex— Money—financed
fiscal
pansion by
open market
expansion
operations

Bond—financed
fiscal
expansion

Instantaneous effects
Exchange rate
Output

—

+ (?)

+

+

?

+

+ (?)

Medium—term effects
Exchange rate

+

+

+

+ (?)

Output

+

+

+

+ (?)

Note: A plus sign followed by a question mark in parentheses
reflects our judgement that the algebraic ambiguity in
question can fairly safely be ruled out by appeal to
empirical evidence.

22

K

e

I"

B,B*

G,M,e,r* ,p* ,y*

C

LI
B,B*

Y
Figure 1
The K, A, and C schedules

Each schedule moves in the direction indicated by
the arrows in response to an increase in one of
the variables shown.

23

K'

/

E

K''

\

1/
Y
Figure 2

Effects of tax—financed increase in government spending.

24

e

\

\

\

K
K'

/

K''

/E"\

/

A'

A
Y

Figure 3

Effects of monetary expansion through open
market operation and of money—financed
increase in government spending.

25

FOOTNOTE S

1/ See Frenkel, Gylfason,and Helliwell(1980).
2/ For example, Frenkel and Rodriguez (1975, P. 686) write "

... the

equilibrium exchange rate is that relative price of monies at which the

existing stocks are willingly held. This view on the role and determination of the rate of exchange is in sharp contrast with the popular notion
that the exchange rate is determined in the flow market so as to assure

a balanced balance of payments." In the same vein, Mussa (1976, p. 51) argues that "From the perspective of the monetary approach, however, all of

this discussion of elasticities is fundamentally irrelevant since the traditional theory on which it is based contains two serious conceptual errors.
First, it views the exchange rate as the relative price of national outputs,

rather then as the relative price of national monies. Second, it assumes
that the exchange rate is determined by the conditions for equilibrium in
the markets for flows of funds, rather than by the conditions for equili-

brium in the markets for stocks of assets." See also Kouri (1976, p. 281),
Frenkel (1976, p. 201), and the surveys by Magee (1976), Kreinin and Offi—
cer (1978), and Isard (1978).

3/ Note that the balance—sheet constraint (4) implies that only
two of the first three equations are independent. By restricting
ourselves to these three assets, we are neglecting international

holdings of currency and real assets, although B* could be any
aggregate of net claims on non—residents, with r* as the representative rate of return•. These assets and equations are the same as
those used by Branson (1979), except we include income as an argument
in the asset demand functions.

26

4/ By assuming that private expenditure

and not of eP*/P, we suppress the

is a function only of Y and r,

distinction between the prices of

domestic output and of expenditure which

underlies the well—known

Laursen—MetZler effect. It is easy to make the distinction, but it
complicates the analysis slightly without materially altering the
results.

5/ In principle, exports should be inflated by P, and imports by eP*,
in the balance—of—payments identity

instead of simply inflating T by P.

6/ For sflnplicity we have also excluded imported factors of production

from the supply function. Their

inclusion would complicate the analysis

slightly without materially altering the results.

7/ In the general model, this specification

of the capital account

is overridden by the portfolio balance equations.
8/ It should be emphasized that these propositions

are specific to the

simple formulation outlined in the text. While Keynesian models of
exchange rate determination almost always include more endogenous

variables than we indicate, the simpler formulation represented by
equation (8) has often been contrasted to the monetary approach by
proponents of the latter (see references in footnote 2).

9/ In a second version of the interest parity approach (Frankel 1979),
real interest parity is assumed, giving a

quasi—reduced form that includes

the same signs as (9) and (9') on income and money supplies, the
opposite signs to (9) on interest rates, and includes the differnce

between the expected domestic and foreign

inflation rates with a positive

sign.

10/ Concerning the ambiguous effect of B on e, the currency depreciates
if B and N are closer substitutes in asset
but appreciates in the opposite case.

portfolios than B and B*,

27

11/ One potential source of instability is net foreign interest receipts

(see Branson 1979). Instability may also arise if the country is a net
debtor so that B* < 0 (see Masson 1981).

12/ The signs of the k coefficients rest on the fairly plausible
assumption that the effects of exchange rate changes on private

expenditure through expectations and asset revaluation effects on the
demand for money are minor relative to the exchange rate effects on the
current account.

13/ The sign of a2 — a3 is unambiguously positive, even though the sign
of a3 is indeterminate (cf. footnote 10) .

The positive sign of

a5 presupposes that B and B* are closer substitutes in asset portfolios
than M and B*.

14/ There is in the algebra the possibility that the increased transactions demand for money may lead temporarily to negative valuation
effects on the exchange rate, but this possibility can easily be ruled
out by speculative foresight.

28

REFERENCES

Allen,

P.R., and Kenen, P.B. (1980). Asset Markets, Exchange Rates,
and Economic Integration. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bilson, J.F.O. (l978a). 'The monetary approach to the exchange rate:
some empirical evidence'. IMF Staff Papers, vol. 25 (March),
pp. 48—75.
Bilson, J.F.0. (l978b). 'The current experience with floating exchange rates: an appraisal of the monetary approach'.
American Economic Review , vol. 68 (May), pp. 392—97.

Branson, W.H. (1979). 'Exchange rate dynamics and monetary policy'.
In: Lindbeck, A. (ed.) (1979). Inflatiøn and Employment in
Open Economies. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 189—224.

Clements, K.W., and Frenkel, J.A. (1980). Exchange rates, money and
relative prices: The dollar—pound in the 1920's' . Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 10 (May), pp. 249-262.
Dornbusch, R. (1976a). 'The theory of flexible exchange rates and macroeconomic policy'. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 78,
No. 2, pp 255—75.

Dornbusch, R. (1976b). 'Expectations and exchange rate dynamics'.
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 84 (December), pp. 116176.
Dornbusch, R., and Fischer, S. (1980). 'Exchange rates and the current
account'. American Economic Review, vol. 70 (December),
pp. 960—71.
Fleming, J.M. (1962). 'Domestic financial policies under fixed and under
floating exchange rates'. I.N.F. Staff Papers, vol. 9 (November),
pp. 369—79.
Frankel, J.A. (1979). 'On the Mark: a theory of floating exchange rates
based on real interest differentials'. American Economic Review,
vol. 69 (September), pp. 610—22.
Frenkel, J.A. (1976). 'A monetary approach to the exchange rate:
doctrinal aspects and empirical evidence'. Scandinavian Journal
of Economics, vol. 78, No. 2, pp. 200—24.
'A synthesis
Frenkel,J.A., Gylfason, T., and Helliwell, J.F. (1980).
of monetary and Keynesian approaches to short—run balance—of—payments theory'. Economic Journal, vol. 90 (September), pp. 582—92.

Frenkel, J.A., and Johnson, H.G. (eds.) (1978). The Economics of
Exchange Rates: Selected Studies Reading, Massachusetts:
Addison—Wesley.

Isard, P. (1978). 'Exchange rate determination: a survey of popular
views and recent models'. Princeton Studies in International
Finance, No. 42, Princeton University (May).

29

Kouri, P.J.K. (1976). 'The exchange rate and the balance of payments
in the short run and in the long run: a monetary approach'.
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 78, No. 2, PP. 280—304.
Kreinin, M.E., and Officer, L.H. (1978). 'The monetary approach to the
balance of payments: a survey'. Princeton Studies in International
Finance, No. 43, Princeton University (November).

Lindbeck, A. (1976). 'Approaches to exchange rate analysis — an introduction'. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 78, No. 2,
pp. 133—45.
Magee, S.F. (1976). 'The empirical evidence on the monetary approach
to the balance of payments and exchange rates'. American Economic
Review, vol. 66 (May), pp. 163—470.
Masson, P. (1981). 'Dynamic stability of portfolio models of the
exchange rate'. Journal of International Economics, vol. 11
(November), pp. 467—477.

Meade, J.E. (1951). The Balance of Payments. London: Oxford University
Press.

Mundell, R.A. (1962). 'The appropriate use of monetary and fiscal policy
for internal and external stability'.
IMF Staff Pappers, vol. 9
(March), pp. 70—76.
'The exchange rate, the balance of payments and
Mussa, M. (1976).
monetary and fiscal policy under a regime of controlled floating'.
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 78, No. 2, pp. 229—248.
Tobin, J., and Macedo, J. (1980).

'The short—run macroeconomics of

flexible exchange rates: an exposition'. In: Chipman, J., and
Kindleberger, C. (eds.) (1980). Flexible Exchange Rates and the
Balance of Payments. Amsterdam: North—Holland.

