                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            TAX EFFECTS ON THE ALLOCATION OF CAPITAL
              AMONG SECTORS AND AMONG INDIVIDUALS:
                      A PORTFOLIO APPROACH



                          Joel Slemrod




                     Working Paper No. 951




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                          August 1982


I am grateful to Roger Gordon for conversations which clarified my
thinking on a number of points, to Craig Swan and Yolanda Henderson
for comments on an earlier draft, to the participants at workshops
at the University of Minnesota, Harvard University, and Bell
Laboratories for stimulating discussions, and to Leonard Burman for
able research assistance. An earlier version of this paper was
presented at the joint NIA—TIA and AEA session of "Taxes and the
Allocation of Capital" held in Washington, D.C., on December 29,
1981. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             BER Working Paper #951
                                                  August 1982


Tax Effects on the Allocation of Capital Among Sectors and
            Among Individuals: A Portfolio Approach

                         Joel Slemrod




                          ABSTRACT

     This paper deals with the allocat:i.onal effects and implications

for efficiency of a tax system in which the rate of tax on capital

income differs depending on the recipient of the income and on the

type of capital producing the income. It suggests that, in their

attempts to measure the distortionary effect of the U.S. capiial

income tax system, economists may have been looking in the wrong

places. In the presence of uncertainty, the intersectoral distortion

may be much less than had previously been imagined. However, the tax

system distorts at two other margins which have not received much

attention. It distorts the inter—household allocation of the

housing stock, since the after—tax rate of interest is one component

of the opportunity cost of owner—occupied housing. It also distorts

the inter—household allocation of risk—bearing. Calculations using

a simple commutable general equilibrium model suggest that the excess

burden from these latter two   distortions   are significant components

of the total distortionary impact of the tax system.



                                                  Joel Slemrod
                                                  llepartment of Economics
                                                  University of Minnesota
                                                  1035 Management and Economics
                                                  271 19th Avenue South
                                                  Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                   (612) 373—3607
I. Introduction

     This paper deals with the allocational effects and the implications for

efficiency of a tax system in which the rate of capital income tax differs

depending on the recipient of the income and on the type of

capital producing the income. It argues that in the presence of uncertainty the

standard intersectoral misallocation problem may not be as large as

previously thought, but suggests that there are other sources of inefficiency

in the   current capital income tax   system which must be considered   in

addition   to   the intersectoral inefficiency In particular, there is an

inter—household misallocation of the housing stock, due to the differences

            in the opportunity cost of housing, and there is an inter—

household misallocation of risk bearing.. Calculations using a simple

computable general equilibrium model indicate that the excess burden caused

by these latter two distortions are signifl.cantcomponents of the total

static distortionary impact of the capital income tax system.

     Two decades ago, Harberger showed that the magnitude of the allocational

shift caused by differential factor taxation and the size of the accompanying

excess burden depend on the degree of substitutability in the production

sectors, the degree of substitutability, among the final products, and

the relative factor intensities of production. Harberger's insights have

most often been applied to the allocational and efficiency implications of

the extra taxation that corporate capital income bears compared to non—

corporate capital income. Using a range of plausible estimates for the

relevant parameters, Harberger (1966) concluded that the pattern of capital

income taxation prevailing in the U.S. during the mid—1950's reduced the

capital stock in the corporate sector by between one—sixth and one—third,

and imposed an efficiency cost of between $1 billion and $3 billion. Shoven

(1976) corrected Harberger's original estimates and, using the same
                               2




parameters, found the deadweight loss to be approximately 38 percent lower

than Harberger had calculated it to be The corrected efficiency cost

was between 0.2 and 0.6 percent of gross national product, though between

six and fifteen oercent of the revenue raised by the excess taxation

that corporate capital income bears. More recent models in this tradition

(e.g., Fullerton etal (1981)) have improved the estimates by adding to

the detail of the stylized economy.

      The mechanics and implications of the Harberger model have been

discussed at length elsewhere):' However for our purposes here it will

be useful to mention three characteristics of the model structure.

      1. There is no uncertainty. This assumption implies that In

equilibrium the after—tax rate of return on capital must be equal for

all   sectors.
       2. Relative tax rates on different kinds of capital income are not
                  2/ Without this assumption, for any given vector of
household—specific.—

before—tax returns for some households the after—tax returns on some assets

differ. Thus, households could arbitrage by going short in the lower—

yielding asset and holding a long position in the higher—yielding asset.u"

If there are constraints on borrpwing, the absence of this

assumption   i1ies   household specialization in assets. With this

assimption the household portfolios are indeterminate, since assets are

perfect substitutes for each other, each earning the same after—tax

return with certainty.

       3. All households face the same price vector for final goods.

       one of these three characteristics accurately represents the U.S.

economy. In this paper we show that these three unempirical assumptions

are critical to the model's predictions about the allocational and

efficiency effects of the U.S. system of taxing capital income. When
                                3



the model is modified in such a way as to allow more realistic

assumptions, the model's implications may look quite different.

     The   remainder of the paper contains three sections. Section II

presents a sipie general equilibrium model under certainty where

the opportunity cost of housing differs for different individuals,

The resulting exchange inefficiency is discussed and compared to the

inter—sectoral inefficiency caused by the tax system. In Section III

a general equilibrium model under uncertainty is presented. When

considered in this environment the intersectoral inefficiency may be

much lower than had been thought, though the exchange inefficiency remains,

This section then considers a third source of tax—induced inefficiency

in a stochastic economy, distorted allocation of risk—bearing. The

total welfare cost of taxation is then reconsidered using a modified

version of the general equilibrium model of Section II. Section IV

offer$ some concluding remarks.

II. A0 A Certainty Model

     We will first focus our attention on the third assumption of the Harberger—

type models, that all individuals face the same price vector for final goods.

Even in the absence of explicit household—specific taxes, this condition will

be violated whenever some of the goods are durable. One component of the

opportunity cost of a durable good is the after—tax rate of interest When

tax rates differ, then households will necessarily face different net

prices for the durable good.

     Housing is by far the most significant durable good in the U.S. In

Earberger's original classification of the economy into corporate and non—
                                       4



corporate sectors, housing comprised 67,5 percent of the non—corporate
                                                                       sector'

Since the service return from owner—occupied housing is not subject to taxa-

tion, the opportunity cost of owner—occupied housing is lower for house-

holds in higher tax     brackets.     In order to assess the implications of differential

rjces arising from differences in marginal tax rates, we present a model where

the only two vehicles for holding wealth           are   owner—occupied housing and non—

housing capital, the income from which is assumed to be taxable.


     Consider an economy where there are only two commodities, housing

services (H) and a composite non—housing good (C). It is assumed that

the only way an individual can consume housing services is by owning housing

capitai-'; one unit of housing capital produces one unit of housing services

per period, with no labor input required.              Then we can write the individual's

problem as

 (1) Max            U(C1,H1)
     C. ,H.
      1 1
                    subjectto Ciwl+r(l_tj)(KiHi)_ôI1j+Tj
                               or c + [r(l —     t.)   + o]H = wL,1 + r(l —   t,)K,
                                                                               ii +   T.
                                                                                        )_
                                  1               1        j



Here .w represents the wage rate, r is the rate of return td                  holding

 non—housing capital,       t.   the flat—rate tax on capital income, 1( is

 the capital   andownent,      (which may   be   divided between housing and non—housing

 capital), 5 is       the rate   of depreciation on housing capital, and T. is

 the transfer received from the government.              Since the imputed income from

 housing capital is not taxed, the tax structure is equivalent to one with an

 income tax    at   rate t applied to all capital income, including housing

 services, and a subsidy of tr to the consumption of housing services.

 Notice that two types of distortions result from this tax system. The

 first is that the relative price of housing services and other goods faced
                                                  5


by consumers in equilibrium will not equal the marginal rate of transformation

between the two goods, resulting in an inefficient provision of housing services.

The second distortion stems from the fact that the relative price of

housing differs for different individuals.              This implies that, for a

given stock of housing, the allocation of housing among individuals

is inefficient. In other words, reallocation of the housing stock,

accompanied by some set of transfer payments, could improve the welfare

of everyone.

       By extending the Ilotelling/Harberger measure of excess burden,

we can analyze the contribution of the exchange inefficiency to the welfare

cost. The standard expression, applicable when there is one representative

household and when producer prices are fixed, is



                               A
(2)                  L =   —
                               2 i   j 1313
                                          S. .T.T.




where    i and j index goods, S1. is the compensated substitution term,
and T. and T. are the rates of tax. When there are many households with
                 3
different rates of tax, the appropriate expression is




(3)
                     L =   —   A
                               2
                                 Ehi j           ijij   ,




where    h indexes households. If the substitution terms do not differ

by household, then this expression simplifies to



                     L =   —
 (4)                                  (S.1 + cov(T.T))


where N is the total number of households and T.1 refers to the

 average household value of           •     In   the special case where there is
                                           6




a distorting tax levied on only one commodity, (for example, housing (H))

expression (4) becomes



(5)                    L =   — N S( + var(TH))


GDmputing the welfare loss using      the   average tax rate thus underestimates

the actual welfare loss by the square of the coefficient of variation.

      There are good reasons to believe, though, that the household tax

rates will not be independent of the substitution term. Since the marginal

tax rate is positively correlated with income, even if all households

had identical price elasticities of demand, the substitution termswould

be negatively associated with tax rates. Even with identical incomes

and utility functions the slope of the compensated demand function may be

different at different after—tax prices.

      In this case, expression (4) may be rewritten, ignoring a higher—order term, as



          —2 N
(6) L =
                   1   j ij 1 j    + .. cov(T. T.) + . cov(S. .,T.) + . cov(S .,T))
                                      ij     1, j     1     13 j         j  iJ

In the special case where there is only one tax, (on housing services, e.g.)

this reduces to



          —
(7) L =
              4N             + var(TH)) + 2H cov(SHH, TH))



Clearly to the extent that the tax rate is positively correlated with the absolute

value of. the.ubstitution term there is an amount of welfare loss not captured

by the earlier expresson. On the other hand if ISHHI and T11 are

negatively correlated the earlier measure of welfare loss is an

overestimate.
                                             7




       These expressions overestimate the welfare loss when there is

an upward—sloping supply curve of housing services. It can be shown

that   in this case when only housing services are taxed the welfare loss
is equal to
                                                     h h2
(8) L =   —-[S            (Ta)       +
                                           dHS   —      s'
                                                        HH




      dHS
where -a--—   is    the slope of the supply curve of housing services. When

all   household's         are equal, L is equal to

                        dHS

(9)    — NSHH[4(                         + var (T11)]   ,



                              NSHH

which is equivalent to expression (5) with the addition of a factor
                2                                                       dS
multiplying TH •      When    the   supply curve is horizontal, then


is infinite, and (9) reduces to (5). When the supply curve         is   perfectly
              S
inelastic       = 0) , the excess burden is proportional to the variance
            4—
of the TH • Thus even in the case where the total stock of housing is
Inelastic, there is exchange inefficiency due to household—specific
prices for housing services.

II.B A General Equilibri Illustration

       The inefficiency caused by the existence of differential prices of

housing services may    be    of the same order of magnitude as the inefficiency

caused by the edstence of the subsidy to housing services. To illustrate

this, we consider a simple computable general equilibrium model of a

two—person, two—good economy of the type described above. Housing services

are produced using only capital with a constant—returns—to—scale technology,
                                   8




and the non—housing good is produced with a Cobb—Douglas technology

(the share of capital income in the net product is 0.2), The two

individuals have identical endowments of capital and labor, but

may face different tax rates on non—housing capital income. All the

government revenue is returned to individuals through lump—sum transfers

which are proportional to their (fixed) labor endowment.      (A complete

description of the system is provided Ia Appendix A.)

     The equilibrium of this economy can be computed exactly, and depends

on the behavioral and technological parameters, the tax rates, and the

government transfer policy. Given the equilibrium allocations, we can

calculate the utility level for each individual. Comparative static analysis

of alternative tax structures is accomplished by altering the tax parameters

Several measures of the resulting change in welfare are possible.

Our procedure is to calculate the change in national income valued

at prices before and after the policy change, and find the geometric

mean of these figures?'

      We consider three alternative tax structures. The first features

 no taxation of the capital income of either individual, so    that t1t20.
 The second structure (the "one distortion" case) taxes non—housing capital

 income, but at equal rates for both individuals, so that t1t2        0.3.


 Finally, the third scheme (the "two distortion" case) features a progressive

 tax system with rates that average to 0.3, but where rates differ so

 that t,0.l and t2        0.5.'

      The   theory   of the second best tells us that, generally speaking, we

 cannot conclude that an economy with distortions at two margins is more
                                    9



inefficient than if only one distortion existed. However, in this

example which uses standard assumptions about the structure of preferences

and technology the two—distortion       case does have a greater excess burden

than the one—distortion case, even though the total revenue raised is

about seven percen: lower in the two—distortion case. The details of the

equilibrium solutions are presented in Table 1 of Appendix A. Compared

to the no tax equilibrium, the onedistortion. tax structure causes an

efficiency loss of 0.92 percent of NNP, and decreases the non—housing

capital stock by 9.6 percent. These results are broadly consistent with

those reported by Harberger and Shoven.' The two—distortion equilibrium,

where one household faces a much higher tax rate than the other, has an

excess burden of slightly more than 1.2 percent of NNP. The reduction

of the non—housing capital stock compared to the no—tax equilibrium is

10.6 percent.

     The additional efficiency loss in the two distortion case, as

compared to the one distortion case, has two components. The

first is that, due to the structure of preferences, increasing

    from 0.3 to 0.5 provides more of an incentive for household

2 to purchase housing than the decrease in t1 from 0.3 to 0.1 provides

a disincentive to household 1. Thus, the total equilibrium housing stock

is greater than in the one distortion case and the inter—

sectoral misallocation is increased. The other component of the increased

excess burden is the exchange inefficiency resulting from the differential

user costs of housing. Starting from any given level of the total stock

of housing, differential opportunity costs imply an inefficient allocation
                                                10




of the housing stock among households. To illustrate this point consider the

following experiment. Take an economy where the allocation of inputs to

 sectors has been decided, and assume that the input allocation corresponds

 to the equilibrium outcome in the two distortion case. Now suppose that

 we can reallocate housin services so that: both house.-

 hold's marginal rate of substitution of housing services for the non—
 housing goods are equal; that is, so the condition for exchange efficiency

 is met. This reallocation will entail shifting housing services away from

 the highly taxed household toward the low tax household. Once this re-

 allocation is accomplished, adjust the level of government transfers so

 that household 1 is just as well off as it was before the reallocation.

 The change in the utility of household 2 is then a measure of the welfare

 gain from eliminating the exchange inefficiency.

         The result of performing this experiment in our simple economy

 is that the excess burden falls from 1.23 percent to only 1.02 percent of

 GNP. Loosely speaking, the exchange inefficiency is the source of abbut

 one—sixth        of   the   total   excess burden.

 IIl.A. Introducing Uncertainty

        Up   to   this point         the   analysis has dealt only with a nonstochastic

 environment. In             this   section that assumption is dispensed with by allowing

 the capital incozae of the corporate sector to be uncertain, due perhaps

  to the     presence        of a stochastic element in the production function.

 This   will allow us           to consider the implications of dispensing with the

 first o characteristics                   of the Harberger—type models that were

 discussed above.
                                       11




       We assume that in the presence of uucertainty households act

to maximize expected utility, which we assume for the sake of simplicity

can be written as i-fli


(10)                  EU. =
                              ii   ,   I)   —   i N)
                                                 I




                                                 iJ
where        and I. now represent the iLh househoidts expected value

of consumption of the corporate good and housing services, respectively,

       is a risk aversion parameter, and V. represents the variance of

the after—tax income stream.

       In addition to equity shares in corporate capital which are risky,

there also are riskiess securities. Any              net   supply of these securities

is provided by the federal government; in addition there may be riskiess

loans among individuals.

       Uncertainty in an individual's income stream has two sources.

The first source is non—zero holdings of corporate equity.                The second

source of uncertainty is the transfer payment received from the govern-

ment. When part of the tax base is corporate earnings, tax revenue itself

is stochastic. iniess the government can somehow "absorb" this uncertainty

(perhaps by having a random debt policy and thus spreading the risk

 across generations), the transfer payment must then also be stochastic.

        The individual's   sole   decision is how to allocate his wealth


among the    three   alternative assets: owneroccupied housing (H),

risky corporate capital ), and          riskless      securities (B).

The choice of H determines the quantity of owner—occupied housing

services that will be consumed. After the wealth allocation decision
                                            revealed, including the return to
is made, the state of the world is
                                          12


corporate capital and the transfer received from the government. All

income is then spent on the corporate good, C.

        Under these circumstances we can write the                 TDaxiJzaton



                                      i
problem as

                            —              V.
(ha) Max                  U(C.,H) —   —- ()
           iii
      H.,B.,E                            1


                          subject to C1 = wL1 + rB(l_tB)B + r i—c.)E— SF..        T.

                                      H =K. —   (E.+B)
                                                              +
                                      v = (l_tE.)2Ei2 ÷ VT.

Here rB and rE refer to the rate of return on the riskiess and risky securities,

respectively. V           is the variance of the stochastic transfer received from the

government, VET. is the covariance between the flow of equity income and the

transfer payments and            is the variance of the return from one unit of corporate

capital. The first two constraints can be combined into a single one as follows:



                                           + rB(l_tB)Kl + [rE(l_tE) —                  ÷ T.
(lib) C + [rB(ltB.) + tS]H1 =         wL                                rB(ltB.)IE.

En expression (lib), only C, iz and T. are stochastic. Thus (llb) implies

that


            + [rB(i_tB)    + ó]H1 = wL. + r(ltK. + [E(1_tEi) —
(hic)
                                                                     rJl_tE.].


        The first—order conditions for this problem reduce to:




(12)           =            tB.) +
                   rB(1
                                          13




(13)          E.

               I
                   =
                       UCIrE(l —   tEi)
                                iE1 tEl)
                                          —
                                              rB(1
                                                     -
                                                         LB.)]
                                                                 (1   —
                                                                          1
                                                                              2
                                                                          tEi)cEKi
                                                                                     ____
                                                                                       i




 The first condition is the standard requirement that the marginal rate of

 substitution of housing for the corporate good be equal to the relative

price, which in this case is the opportunity cost of owner—occupied housing plus

 depreciation, rB(1_tB) + 5. The second condition is an asset demand relation-

 ship for equity holdings. The demand for equity depends positively on

 the expected after—tax premium it earns over the riskiess asset, in-

versely on its after—tax variability and the degree of risk aversion,

 and is inversely related to the covariance between its return and the

 government transfer.

            In the case where all households face the same tax rates (tE), the ex-

 pected value and variance of government revenue can be written as follows:


               R=
 (14)                  tErEB + tErEE

       -                 2.22
 (lo)          VT =


 If        it is assumed that the government must balance its budget and cannot

 absorb any risk, then the total amount of transfers must equal R and

 the transfers must exactly reflect the uncertainty of the revenues.

             As an initial simplification, we assume that there are N identical

 individuals in the economy. Furthermore, the government treats each
                                                         14



individual identically, so each T has the same distribution. These

assumptions imply that


(16)    T. = R/N

                         222 2
(17)    VT. =        tE

(18)                     (1
        VET.                   tE)tEiEE/N

In a large economy each individual can ignore the effect of his own demand

for E on the aggregate value of E. Thus we can compute VETj to he
                                                                                          E.


         a:
(19)                     =    (1 — tE)tEEE/N


Substituting         this expression into the asset demand equation derived earlier
(expression (13)) yields

         E1                  TrE(l t  —            —
                                                       r(l    —
                                                                  tBfl        tEE
(20)                 =
                                                                                    t)j
                                                                         —
         K.                     (l —               tE)
                                                                             (1 —


From (20) we can form an                  expression for E1. Then we sum the dmand
functions       and impose the equilibrium condition that


            EE. = E
  —
(21)        .1
            1



Solving the aggregate equation for E then yields
                                                          —

 (22)            =
                         UIrE(l   —
                                      tE       —
                                                   rB(l       tB)]
            K                     2        —
                                               tE)
                                         15



        We can use this equation to determine the impact of changing the

taxation    of corporate capital on the demand for corporate capital. or

small changes, it is not unreasonable to hold Urn constant; that is,

the marginal rate of substitution between corporate goods and risk per

unit of capital is assumed unchanged. Ih this case, the partial derivative

of expression (22) with respect to tE becomes:


            afJ
<23)         KJ                — tB)
                       11c'B
                        2           2
              E       cYE(l — tE)


From (23), the response of demand for corporate capital to changes in its taxation

is seen to depend on the after—tax riskiess rate of return. This corresponds to

the result found by Gordon (1981)        The intuition behind it is fairly

straightforward.       The expected return to corporate capital has two cOm-

ponents, one of which is a       risk premium, 'measured by the excess
                                                       riskiess asset. The other component
of     the return over the after—tax earnings of the

is the aftertax riskiess return. The tax on corporate income falls on both components

                                                    that falls on the risk premium reduce:
of the return. However, that part of the tax

 the uncertainty of the return as well as the expected value of the return.

In     fact, when rB is zero the reduction in the expected return is exactly
the payment that individuals would be willing to pay to be rid           of the

uncertainty       the tax eliminates. Thus the tax on the risk premium cornpcnent
of the return does not alter the attractiveness of the corporate equity.
It is only the tax on the other component which alters its attractiveness.
Thus, the bite of the tax depends O           r(1 tB), the after—tax riskiess
 rate of return. If rB is zero, then there is no incentive to alter
                                                 16



equity holdings. If rB is non—zero, the incentive depends on the sign

of rB, if rB is positive, increasing 1E will decrease desired equity

holdings, and if rB is negative, increasing tE will increase desired

equity holdings.

       This modal    easily    generalizes to situations where individuals are

not identical, do not face identical tax                    rates,   and the government does

not simply transfer 1/N of its revenue                      to   each individual, Consider

the    alternative rule that individual I receives s of government
revenue, where Es. =          1.   Then the following relationships hold:

(24)       R=    rB1Bii
                  Et .B. + rEEii
                            Et .E.

(25)       VT = (EtEIEI) °E
                              22 A22
                                 (tEI.) E

(26)       T.1 = s.R
                  1


(27)       V.=sV
           Ti  iT
                            A     2
(28)       VETI = (1 — tEi)tESiEiEE


The term    t denotes             average tax rate on equity earnings
                              the weighted

where the weights are the proportion of total equity held by the investor;
thus the sum of the weights is unity. As above, we can find the optimal
holding of the risky asset, which now depends on 5., 4,                               and   E.


(29)        E.       UC.IrE(l
                                   —
                                       t.)   —
                                                 rB(l
                                                        —
                                                            tBifl    —
                                                                         4s.E
                               .4l )2
                 —
                 —
                                        —                                (1   —
                                                                                  tEi)Ki
                                          17




        Of more interest than any individual's response to changes in tE

is the economy's response. To determine this we must aggregate over all

individuals. After some manipulation, we can find the aggregate analogue

to expression (29T to be:


                              k.
               •= rEL                      rBEci k.(1.tBj)
(30)
               K      i .j    (l—t.)                  (1

                                        ESI
                                        i(l—t)
Here k. denotes the share of total wealth owned by individual I
(k.      K./K). Note that when                   is equal for all i, and tEi and
tBi are identical for everyone (so that             t = t1),   then expression (30) is
equivalent to expression (22). However, in the general case the response of E
to    changes In tE does not reduce to a simple expression like (23).

        The important message here is that the magnitude of the inter—sector

distortionary effect of the tax system may be much less than has pre—

vicusly been thought. Much of what has been considered to be distortion—

ary    taxation is   more properly thought of as payment (at the market

price) for the government's participation in risk sharing. Does this

mean    that   our system of taxing capital income is less distortionary than

we had thought? The answer         is    uncertain, for three reasons. The.

first is that the extent to which corporate capital income taxation is

merely payment for risk sharing          has not been precisely measured, and
would appear      to be sensitive to a number of features of the tax systemJ
                                              18


The second reason is that even when the presence of uncertainty is

recognized the user cost of housing differs dramatically among individuals,

and is therefore a source of exchange inefficiency. Our simple example

in the riskiess case suggested that this distortion may amount to a non—trivial

fraction of the inter—sector distortion; its significance is not diminished

when uncertainty is introduced. Finally, under uncertainty the tax system

causes an additional distortion due to the inefficient allocation of risk—

bearing among the economy's individuals. This source of excess burden must

be considered in a complete assessment of the tax system. This is our next topic.

III. B. The Welfare Cost of Inefficient Risk Bearing

       To see that the tax system may also cause an inefficient bearing of

the economy's risk, consider the market for the claim to a flow of income

which has an expected value of zero, which has unit variance, and which

is perfectly correlated with the stochastic income from the corporate

sector. At the consumer optimum, the marginal rate of substitution of

this risky claim for an expected unit of C is

                       iE                            A
(31)      MRS. =
                    K.U
                     1 Cl
                            [E(l — tEi)           + tEsiE].


If   expression (29) is used to substitute for E.,, this reduces to


                   —
                       rE(1 —   tE.)        rB(l —   tBi)
(32)      MRS.                         —
                            aE             tEi)

In order to eliminate the negative sign, we can consider the marginal rate

of substitution of the elimination of one unit of the risky claim for an

expected unit of good C. That is just the negative of expression (32), or
                                                   19


                         r (1 —
                          E
                                  t   .) — rB (1   -    tBi
                                                          .)
(33)                                  —
                 1
                                          tE.)

       Notice that this expression does not depend on how much risk the

government returns to the individual. The independence property obtains

because individuals can undo (or augment) any uncertainty from the trans-

fer by selling or buying risky (and perfectly correlated)corporate shares.

       That   the MRS need not be the same               Cor all individuals   is clear from

expression       (33).   However,         the presence of a progressive tax system does
not   by itself assure the existence of differences. As long as the safe

asset and the risky asset attract the same tax rate, then the MRS reduces

to (rE —          for all individuals F(owever, in the U.S. corporate
              rB)/aE
capital   income is first subject to a flat—rate corporate income tax, and
then the after—corporate—tax income is subject to the individual income
tax, at the standard rate for that part of earnings which is paid out as
dividends and at the capital gains rate for that part of earnings which
is retained within the corporation. Income from government debt is taxed
at the individual income tax rate. If the personal tax rate is denoted
     then tE = T + (1 — T)(dtB + (1 — d)ytB) where r is the corporate
incoetax rate, d is the dividend payout rate, and y is the ratio
of the effective accrual—equivalent capital gains tax rate to the ordinary
income tax rate. If this expression for tE is substituted into expression
(33),   it is clear that the              MRS will vary among individuals depending on
    By calculating the derivative of expression (33) with respect to tB
we can ascertain the direction of influence. After some manipulation,
we can    find
                                                20




             d(MRS)
                          (1   —   -t)(l   + d +(l_d)y)rB
(34)                  —
                                                     2
              d(t)                          - tEi)

Since all tes other than rE are strictly positive, the direction of

influence depends on the sign of rE. As long as r is positive, the

marginal     rate of substitution of a unit of risk reduction for an expected
unit of      good C increases with the tax rate. In other words, the in-

efficiency in risk bearing takes the form of the higher—taxed individuals

having too much risk and the lower—taxed individuals having too little

risk, There exists a reallocation of risk and expected consumption

(with   the higher—taxed individuals bearing less risk) such that all in-
dividuals are better off.
       Thus it   is the   combination of a progressive            individual income tax

system and the current system of corporate capital income taxation that

causes the inefficiency. Complete integration of the individual and

corporate income tax systems, so that tE equals tB for all individuals,

would eliminate the distortion. More generally, though, any feature of

the tax system which differentially taxed the return of the risky asset

and    safe asset would    be subject to this kind of inefficiency.

        Even in the   presence       of a completely integrated tax system, there is

reason to believe that there will still be inefficiency in risk—bearing.

This is because inefficiency may result whenever the average tax rate on
risky capital is different than the rate which is applied to deviations
from the expected return, that is when the total tax rate, t, is equal
to tr + tR(rE — ) where                     r
                                  is the expected return and tR is

                                                                          are          features
the    tax   rate applicable to deviations               from rE. There         many
                                            21




of the current system of taxing corporate capital income which cause tR

to diverge from tE. First of all, there are a number of tax incentives,

such asth investment tax credit, which serve to reduce,tE but which do

not    reduce   the marginal   tax   on earnings. Working in the other direction is

corporations' observed tendency to keep dividends relatively constant while

absorbing     income swings in variations in retained earnings. Since the
effective tax on retained earnings, th capital gains tax rate, is lower

that the tax rate on dividends, this kzLnci of financial policy causes tR

to be lower than tE•

       Although there are forces operating in both directions, there is no

reason to expect that tE and tR will be equa:L. The import of this inequality is

that it is tR and not tE which belongs in the denominator of expression

(33). In this case even though tBand tE are equal, unless the ratio

of (1—tE) to (l—tR) is the same for everyone, there will be inefficiency

in risk—bearing. when tE and tB are not identical, then the additional

divergence of tR and tE may either increase or decrease the inefficiency of

bearing risk.
III.    C.   A Further General Equilibrium Illustration

        The foregoing analysis has indicated that, compared to the certainty

case presented first, the excess burden of the capital income tac system is

lower    due to the fact that the tax on the risk premium is non—distortionary,
but is higher due to the tax—induced inefficiency in         private   risk—bearing.
In order to assess the net effect on the magnitude of efficiency loss, it
would be useful to construct a general formula for the approximate excess
burden,      as we did in the certainty case. However, even in this relatively

simple model, a simple expression is impossible to obtain, due to the com-

plicated general equilibrium effects of changes in tEi           and   tBi
                                                                             .   A
                                         22


reconsideration of the stylized two—good, two—person economy will, though,

be helpful in assessing the effects of introducing uncertainty into the

model. A few additional parameters are required (e.g., measures of house—

hcid risk aversioi. the riskiness of corporate equity, separate tax rates

for   riskiess   debt and corporate equity) to complete the model-. A complete

description of the model is          presented   in Appendix B.

       As with the certainty model, we will investigate several different

tax structures and compare the equilibria and the excess burden. We

include the three tax structures studied under the certainty case, where

equity and riskiess security income are not distinguished; both tax rates

are zero in the first case, both are 0.3 in the second case, and :tCO.l

and t2= 0.5 in the third case. In the additional case we consider, corporate

equity and riskiess security income are taxed differently. In order to

approximate the total effective tax on equity income that results in a

classical corporate income tax system, we set tE T+(1 t)dtB where T

is the average corporate income tax rate and d is the dividend payment

ratio. This formulation assumes a zero effective capital gains tax rate.

Setting   t   to 0.4   and d   to be 0.5, we obtain a value of 0.43 for tEl and

0.55   for tE2    given     tBl   and tB2 are 0.1 and 0.5, respectively.

       The results     of   these experiments, detailed in Table 2 of Appendix B,

are   revealing. Starting from the no—tax equilibrium, imposing            a flat rate

tax   of 0.3 on both individuals for both debt and equity income           causes an

excess burden equal to 0.44 percent of                   and reduces the corporate

                             percent   (compared to 0.92 percent of NI1P and a
capital stock by 6.9

reduction     of 9.6 percent      in the riskiess case). Since the riskiess

interest rate is positive, not all of' the tax represents a market
                                    23



payment for risk sharing, but the distortionary impact of the tax

is substantially less than in the riskiess case. Next we impose a

progressive tax system, but do not discriminate between assets, so that


t           0.1 and tE2 =
                            tB2
                                  0.5    This tax system marginally increases

aggregate demand for housing and also causes an inefficient allocation of

the housing stock. The new equilibrium has au excess burden of 0.65    percent:

of NNP, and a corporate capital stock of 7.6 percent lower than the no tax

equilibrium. The additional inefficiency and allocational shift

is of approximately the same magnitude as it was in the riskiess case.

However, it amounts to a larger fraction of the distortion caused in the

absence of progressivity (forty—five percent compared to twenty—five percent).

This is due to the fact that the inter—sector distortion

is much lower when the risk—sharing nature of corporate taxation is

considered. Finally, we consider the unintegrated tax structure where

                                                 This tax structure has
tE1O•43 tBl 0.1, tE2= 0.55, and tB2= 0.5.
two important effects: first, it raises the average rate of taxation

on corporate capital income, and, second, it introduces inefficiency in

the private bearing of risk. VIn the new equilibrium, thsre is an excess

burden equal to 1.67 percent of NNP, while the non—housing capital stock

is 13.6 percent 1owr than in the no—tax case.

     We can     perform a loose decomposition of the total inefficiency

by considering two experiments of the type discussed earlier'.. First,

for th given housing stock, we reallocate the

housing until the two household's marginal rates of substitution between

housing services and the non—housing good are equal. Then we readjust
                                          24



 transfers so as to keep one household just as well off. This elimination

 of the exchange inefficiency reduces the excess burden from L67 to 1.54

 percent of NNP. Just as in the riskiess model, the distorted allocation

 of the housing stock is a non—trivial component of the tax systems inefficiency.

        The next experiment keeps all capital and final good allocations the

 same and reallocates the private bearing of risk until both households

 have the same marginal rate of substitution between a risky claim and a

 certain unit of income. This experiment by itself reduces the inefficiency

 from 1.67 to 1.48 percent of NNP, thus accounting for about one—eighth of the

 distortion. The riskiness of corporate capital income and the degree of

 risk aversion parameters of the model are such that the utility loss

 from bearing risk amounts, in the classical corporate income tax case, to

 about 4.2 percent of the utility gained from the expected value of NNP.

 However, the private risk is borne very inefficiently, with the higher taxed

 individual in debt to buy corporate capital and the lower taxed individual
 holding very little corporate equity. When the risk is efficiently reallocated,

 the same amount of total risk causes disutility equal to 4.0 percent of NNP.

       When both the exchange inefficiency and the risk bearing inefficiency

 are eliminated, the excess burden declines from 1.67 to 1.35 percent of

 net national product. Thus about one—fifth of the total burden may be thought

 of as coning from these two usually ignored sources.

       The welfare cost due to inefficient risk bearing was noted by Gordon

and   Malkiel   (1931).   They calculated that the efficiency cost from
inefficient risk—bearing was approximately 0.01 r2V      ,   where   r   is the

nominal   risk—free   rate of return and V is the total amount of risky

securities outstanding. In 1975, this amounted to $44 million, or only

0.004 percent of c.
                                              25




      There are several reasons for the divergence between the Gordon—Malkiel (G—M)

estimate and the one presented here, which is approximately 0.3 percent of

1'NP. First, their calculation, if performed correctly, yields a welfare

loss of 0.0lrV , not 0.01 r2V as they idicate) Using their estimate

of 0.38 for r
                z
                     ,   their   corrected measure of welfare loss is $550 million,

or 0.05 percent of GNP. Second, the G—M calculation assumes that the only

source of risk is corporate equity. In the model presented here, all

non—housing capital income is risky. If the fraction of total capital

that is risky is 0.5 (as it approximately is in the examples used in this

paper) instead of approximately one—fourth, as assumed by G—M, and all risky

capital is equally risky, then their estimates of the efficiency costs of

misallocating risk should be increased by a factor of two. Finally, the

illustrative values chosen by G—M imply that the before personal tax risk

premium of equity is only 0.048. However, calculations performed by, for

example, Friend and Blume (1975) indicate that the observed historic rate—of--return

premium earned by corporate shares has been on the order of 0.09.

A recalculation of the. efficiency loss due to inefficient risk—bearing

using numbers consistent with this risk premium would yield a substantially

larger magnitude.

      If all   the   altarationssuggested in the last paragraph are made,

the corrected G—M calculation of $550 million in efficiency loss would

        become a figure on the order of three billion dollars (about 0.27

percent of GNP),         which   is similar to the estimate obtained in the model

                    14/
presentec nere.—

IV.   Concluding     Remarks

      This paper suggests that, in their attempts to measure the distortion—

ary effect of the capital income tax system, economists may have been
                                              26




looking in the wrong places. In the presence of uncertainty, the

intersectoral distortion may be much less than had previously been imagined.

However, it is important to recognize that the tax system also distorts

the inter—household allocation of the housing stock and the inter—household

allocation of     risk—bearing.        Calculations using a computable two—person,

                                                        that the excess burden from
two—sector general equilibrium model suggest
                                                    significant fraction of the
these latter two distortions amount to n

inter—sectoral inefficiency that has been estimated in previous studies.

     Several words of caution are in order here,             First of all, the

figures presented here are based on one particular parameteriZatiofl of a

stylized economy. There are several reasons to expect that a more realistic
                                                   The assumed unit elasticity of demand
model may alter the results somewhat.

between housing services and the non—housing good is on the high side of

recent econometric results. A lower elasticity would reduce the estimate
                                                              in capital income tax
of exchange inefficiency. The assumed dispersion

rates may somewhat overstate the true dispersion.             Also, the presence

of tax—exempt securities puts a lower bound on the after—tax rate of

interest earned by high tax bracket individuals, thus limiting the
                                        the opportunity cost of housing services.

                                                       nominal interest rates in the
On the other hand, though, the taxation of

presence of inflation       serves     to increase the dispersion. Also, the

existence   of   rental   housing     as a source of housing services and as an

alternative      asset   must   be   dealt with in a complete treatment of these

                                            that there is a riskiess asset in real
issues. Finally, the assumption

terns is untenable in a world of uncertain rates of inflation. Future
                                               consider the case where all assets,
development of this approach should

including owner—occupied housing, earn a stochastic return.
                                    27




     These caveats all apply to the particular estimates of the impact of

the tax system on the. economy presented here. Improvements in the success

of the model in representing the U.S. economy will no doubt increase our

confidence in the model's predictions.1' Nevertheless, it seems clear

that models which maintain the three assumptions mentioned at the beginning

of this paper will likely fail to accurately assess the effects of alternative

systems of taxing capital income.
                                     28



                                 Footnotes


          See, for example, the excellent survey by NcLure (1975).


          More precisely, it must be true for any two assets A and 3

that
       itA.
       1—
             1   =   l_tA•
                     1—
                               for any two individuals land j, where   t. is
            Bi            Bj
the ith individual's total tax rate on capital Income fron asset        A.

       F For further discussion of this point, see Feldstein and S.enrod
(1980).

          The other components are the rate of physical depreciation and the

(negative of the) expected capital gain. Since physical depreciation

on durable goods is not deductible from taxable income, this component

of opportunity cost is the same for all households. To the extent that

capital gains are taxable, the expected capital gain term will vary by

household. The accrual—equivalent tax rate on capital gains on owner—

occuied housing is, however, very small and this source of inter—household

variation in the opportunity cost of housing will be ignored in the

analysis that follows.

           See Harberger (1966), p. 110.

           In fact, sixty—five percent of all households are owner—occupiers.

           This procedure is similar to the one adopted in u11erton et al

(1981).    Note that owner—occupied housing is valued at its net—of—tax
full opportunity cost.
                                   29




      -'Notice that when owner—occupied housing is one of the assets

t-e fact that the relative rate of tax on the two assets differs does

not invite arbitraging or specialization. This is because the return

to owner—occupied housing is in the form of services which must be

consumed by the owner and are subject to diminishing marginal utility.


        Shoven reports that, in the case where the two sectors have

elasticities of substitution of one and zero, the reduction in the capital

stock in response to a tax on gross capital income of 0.46 will amount to

13.7 percent (See Shoven (1976), p. 1270, Case 5). This result is only

broadly comparable to the example in the text due to differing parameterizations.


         This utility function is a generalization to two goods of the

standard mean—variance utility function used in portfolio choice analysis.


         For example, the foregoing analysis assumed that the tax system

reduces the expected return and standard deviation of the return by equal

factors. The validity of this assertion depends on corporate financial

behavior and the specific structure of corporation income taxation. See

the discussion below.

         In the calculation of national income, risk is valued at the bearer's

marina1 rate o substitution. All        the   excess burden terms mentioned in

this section are computed as percentages of the value of national income

including the   (negative)   value of the private risk.


         The factors multiplying the integrals in the expression on page 188

of C—M should be divided by r , as should the values on the vertical

a:is of Figure 3 on the preceeding page.
                                    30




         Another difference between the G—N calculation and the one reported

here is the presence of tax—exempt securities in the former model, In their

presence, it is niddie—income households who own equity, while those poorer

and richer own taxable debt and tax—exempt debt, respectively This implies

that the marginal rate of substitution between risk and certain income

is not monotonic with respect to tax rate, and the efficiency costs of

risk—bearing are less than in the absence of tax-exempt debt. See G—M,

pages 173—174.


         See Slemrod (1982) for a more detailed general equilibrium model in

     the same spirit as the one presented In Section III of this paper,
                                             31




                                       References


 Auerbach, A1a, "Evaluating the Taxation of Risky Assets," NBER Working

   Paper No. 806,   November, 1981.

 Feldstein,; Martin, and Joel Slemrod, "Personal Taxation, Portfolio Choice,

     and the Effect of the Corporation Income Tax, Journal of Political

     Economy, LXXXVIII     (October     1980), 854—866.

Friend, Irwin and Marshall Bluxne, "The Demand for Risky Assets,'t

     Mierican Economic Review LXV (December 1975), 900—922.

Fullerton, Don, and Roger Gordon, "A Reexamination of Tax Distortions in

    General Equilibrium Models," in M. Feldstein (ed.), Simulation

    Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, Univ. of Chicago Press and NBER, forthcoming.

     1982.


___________, A. Thomas King, John Shoven, and John Whalley, "Corporate

     Tax Integration in the United States: A General Equilibrium Approach,"

                                    TVVT fC1.- 1O1\
              s.L.L,as.LL. LCVSCW LJtS.LSS
                                                          A77_AQ1
                                                           ..


Gricn,   Rc'ger, "Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax Revenues vs.

    Tax Dist:ticns," NBER Working Paper No. 687, June,1981.

___________, and Burton Malkiel, "Corporation Finance," in U. Aaron and

     J. P.echan (eds.), How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, Brookings

     Institution, 1981.
                                     32




Harberger, Arnold, "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax, Jouria1

    of Poltical Econoy LXX (June 1962), 215—240.

               "Efficiency   Effects of Taxes on Income from Ca?ital," in
__________
     K Krzyzaniak (ed.), Effects of Corporation Income Tax, 'ayre State

     State University Press, 1966.

McLure, Charles E., Jr., "General Equilibrium Incidenca Analysis:     The Earberger

   Model After Ten Years," Journal of Public Economics IV (February 1975),

    125—162.

Shoven, John, "The Incidence and Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income

    from Capital," Journal of Political Economy LXXXIV (Nov./Dec. 1976),

    1261—1283.

                    John Whalley, "A General Equilibrium Calculation of
______________, and

    the Effects of Differential Taxation of Income from Capital in the

    U.S.," Journal of Public Economics I (November 1972), 281—321.

Slemrod, Joel, "A General Equilibrium Model of Capital Income Taxation,"

    Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1980.

______________,   "A   General Equilibrium Model of Taxation with Endogenous

     Financial Behavior, in M. Feidtein (ed.), Simulation Methods in

     Tax Policy Analysis, Univers:ity of Chicago Press and ER, 1982.

 Stiglitz, Joseph, "Taxation, Risk Taking, and the Allccaticn of Investment

     in a Competitive Economy," in N. Jensen (ed.,) Studies in the Tbery

     of Capital Markets, 1969.

 _____________ "The Effects of Income, Wealth and Capital Gains Taxation
     on Risk—Taking,' Quarterly Journal of Economics VXXXIII (1969),

     262—283.
                                         33




                               Appendix A

        The following equations comprise the two—good, two—person model

 discussed in section II of the paper.




 1 = wL. + r(lt.)K,+T.
  1    1        11 1             I =   1,2
G.1 = (1—a)Y.1                   I =   1,2
      a1y1
                 + 6
                                   =




'
C. = K L1
r
w=
R =   rEt.K
       1 1 Cl

T.=s.R
 1   1                           1=1,2


where   the terms not defined in the text are:

Y ; income   including   imputed service flow from house

a     share of spending for housing services

E ; corporate equity holdings

K ; corporate capital

y ; share of corporate value added for capital income

s ; share of tax revenue transferred back to individual


      The parameter values used in the text examples are:

L.=50 a.=O.15 K175 1=0.2 s.O.5 60.04
                                                  34




                                      Table 1

         Solution Details o General Equilibrium Model With No Uncertainty

                    Case 1               Case 2                Case 3

                                                                             =   0,5
                    = 0        = 0   t1 =   0.3   t2
                                                       0,3   t1 = 0.1   t2
                          t2


         K          220.8                199.6                 197.5
          c
                    129.2                150.4                 152.5
       EH1
                    110.4                   99.8               107.9
         E1
                      64.6                  75.2                 671
         H1
                      53.4                  51.4                 54,9
         C1
                     110.4                  99.8                 89.6
         E2
                      64.6                  75.2                 85.4
         H2
                      53.4                  51.4                 47.4
         C2

         r           110.4                   0.115                0.116

                                             0.919                0.917
         w                0.937

                          0                  6.89                 6.45
         R


                                            —0.92                —1.23
change in
real ineotrie


                                                                 —1.02
change with
efficient housing
allocation
                                                   35




                                           Appendix     B


         The following equations comprise the two—good, two—person model

with         uncertainty discussed         in Section III of the paper.


                                                                                   1l,2
C. =
 1
             (l—a.)Y.
                   11                                                                      1 2
             a .Y.
H.                                                                                 1= 1,2
             rB(l_tBf)
                                       —
E.
             UcjfE(l_ tEl) — rB(1          tBj)]   — tESiKc                            =
 1                    2            2                    (l—t El)KI                         1,2
                    laE(1tEl)
B. =
 1           K.-H.--E.
              1  1   1
                                                                                  i = 1 2

K
 c=E.
    ii
B =EB.
    11
L =      L.
         :
         =
 rE

w =
             (l-)---j
                      '
                     1KC

 R=       rEii
            t.E.±rBiBii
                     .B.       t
         =    s.R
     1         1


                          r
                              a.                                                   i1,2
 U        =                                                                        I=      1,2
                     c.)1]

             The parameter values used in the text example are:

 L.=50              a=O.l5
                     1
                                   K.=175
                                    1
                                          y =0.2              s.=O.5
                                                               1       1
                                                                           3 Ea 0.04         = 0.04
                                                            36




                                                      Table 2

                 Solution Details of General Equilibrium Model With Uncertainty

                            Case .1              Case 2                       Case 3                     Case 4

                      tBl = 0       tEl = 0   tBI =   0.3   tEl =   0.3   tBl =   0.1    tEl =   0.1          = 0.1            0.43
                                                                                                       tBi             tEl

                      tB2
                             0 tB2 = 0        tB2 =   0.3   tE2 =   0.3   tB2 =   0.5 tB2 = 0.5        E2 = 0.5        tE2 =   0.55

         K                  177.5                165.2                        164.0                          153.3
          C
                            172.5                184.8                        l86.0                          196.7

                             88.7                 82.6                            55.7                        23.1

                             86.3                 92.4                            82.7                        85.2
         H1
                              0                    0                              36.6                        66.8
         B1
                             49.2                 47.9                            50.2                        47.4
         C1
                             88.7                 82.6                        108.3                          130.2
         E2
                             86.3                 92.4                        103.3                          111.5
         112

                              0                    0                          —36.6                          —66.8
         B2

                             49.2                 47.9                            45.3                        45,7
         C2

                              0.061.               0.073                           0.075                       0.065
         rB
                                0.126              0.126                           0.135                       0.142
         rE
         w                      0.897              0.884                           0.883                       0.871

         R                      0                  6.63                            6.94                        9.86




7. change in
real income                                       —0,4/i                          —0.65                       —1,67

7. change with
efficient housing allocation                                                      —0,51                       —1.54

% change with
efficient risk bearing                                                                                        -1.48

% change with
efficient housing allocation                                                                                 —l 35
and efficient risk bearing
