                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   LONG RUN TRENDS IN PATENTING



                          John J. Beggs




                     Working Paper No. 952




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          August   1982




This paper was presented at the Conference on R&D, Patents and
Productivity, Lenox, Massachusetts, October 2_1., 1981. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #952
                                                   August 1982

                       LONG RUN TRENDS IN PATENTING


                              ABS TRACT


          This paper examines the patenting in the U.S. from its origins in
1790 up to 1980. The prime intent was to identify relationships between
patenting and the rate of industrial development, and to further look for

any regular cyclical patterns in the time series of patents themselves.

          To this end, detailed records were gathered on annual patenting,

along with key descriptive data on industry structure for a sample of

twenty industries for the period 1850 through 1940. In general the cor-

relations between changes in the rate of patenting and changes in industry

characteristics are small. A tentative conclusion is that the rate of

change in patenting may move inversely with the rate of change in value

added. This leads the author to speculate on a "defensive R&D hypothesis"

which may reflect strongly the choice of sample industries. The industries

in the study were in existence in 1850 and managed to ward off challenges

from other new industries so as to still be in existence in 1940. At each

new challenge from a new product or a foreign competitor these industries

have attempted to protect their existing capital stock by upgrading the pro-

duction process and final product. While these changes do not normally rep-

resent major technological advances they are of a "tinkering" variety which

are likely to produce large numbers of patents.

          A spectral analysis of the 190 year time series of patents issued

suggests that the rate of change of this variable might be characterized

as a moving average process with lags at five and eight years. An interpre-

tation of this result is offered, along with caution against over interpre-

tation.
                                   Professor John Beggs     (203) 423—4098
                                   Department of Economics/Cowles Foundation
                                   2125 Yale Station
                                   Yale University
                                   New Haven, CT 06520
                        LONG RUN TRENDS IN PATENTING



INTRODUCTION

       By the beginning of the 19th century three of the important countries

of the word had firmly established patent systems. In the United States

the Constitution gave Congress the power "To promote the progress of science

and useful arts by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the

exclusive rights to their respective writings and discoveries" (Art. 1,

Sec. 8(8)). Thefirst patent law was so passed in 1790. These laws were

motivated by concern for the justice of protecting intellectual property

rights, and by economic concerns such as the need to guarantee sufficient

protection from competition to allow profitable development of inventions,

and the need to encourage the disclosure of new ideas which could form the

building blocks for future advances.

       This relationship between technological change and industrial develop-

ment is at the core of the economists' interest in the patent system. However,

there is much compounding of effects which makes the statistical analysis of

this relationship a difficult one. Essential dynamics are present in the crea-

tive process. Sinie inventions suggest the follow—up direction for future

research as well as creating pre—conditions for break—throughs in other not
                                                                        2




 obviously related fields. Industry structure and patenting may be linked in

ways which depend on more than the underlying rate of technological advance

in an industry. Firms may create patent portfolios as a direct instrument

of competition, for example, by "fencing—in" technologies in a way which makes

new entry into an industry more difficult.

       Patents are one of the few immediately applicable statistical mdi—

cLors of technological change. As an itemized list of per period inven—

tions, there is a desirable amount of objectivity in the statistical series.

The economic worth of individual patents varies greatly, and the intepreta—

tion of this data relies on "large—number" type properties to help ensure

that the average worth of a large number of patents is a meaningful quantity.

More troublesome are the biases introduced by changes in the laws and regula-

tions governing patentability of inventions, and by the    possibility that

the economy and particular industries may move through phases where the type

of inventive activity is more or is less susceptible to patenting.

       This paper proceeds first to examine, at the industry level, the rela-

tionships between the rate of patenting and certain aggregate indicators of

industry performance. Section 2 discusses the data set which has been pre-

pared to investigate the question. Section 3 outlines certain hypotheses

about the correlations between rate of patenting and   industry performance

variables, and then goes on to report statistical findings. Section 4 consi-

ders the dynamics of aggregate patenting and the role of inventions as pre—

conditions to further inventions.
                                                                            3



  2. DATA

        The source of Industry data for this study was the United States

 Census of Manufactures. The Census of Manufactures was taken as
                                                                 part of
 the Census of the United States
                                    every 10 years from 1850 to 1940. The
 Census of Manufactures was taken
                                    separately in 1902, 1914, 1921, 1923,
 1925, 1927, 1931, 1933, 1935, 1937, 1947, 1954, 1958, 1963, 1967, 1972,
 and 1977.  In all years in which the Census of Manufactures was taken con-

 currently with the Census of the United States, the data on manufactures

 was from the year before the official census year. The data collected in-

 cluded number of establishments, number of workers, average
                                                             wage, capital
 expenditures, value added and value of product.

        The data collected from all
                                      years is generally comparable, but there
were two changes in the Census of Manufactures which could not be back—dated.

The Census of Manufactures data
                                   for number of wage—earners includes salaried
employees in and before the year 1879 and does not include them after that

date. Therefore, the data on number of wage—earners and
                                                        average wage in-
cludes salaried employees and their salaries in 1879 and all previous
                                                                      years.
The data for 1947 and all
                          years thereafter uses the classification "produc-
tion workers" in place of "wage—earner"
                                             This does not create a large ambi-
guity in the data, since the two classifications
                                                   are very similar. Both class-
ifications exclude salaried
                           officers, non—working foremen, and clerical per-
sonnel. The 1947 Census of Manufactures
                                        states that the two classifications

are "closely comparable." Capital data was included in the Censusof Manufac-

tures from 1850 until 1919. Data
                                    pertaining to capital was not collected from
1919 unti11933 when expenditure
                                  on plant and equipment was taken.
                                                                         4



    -   In   some cases, there have been small changes in industry definitions

throughout the period. This generally occurred when a broadly defined in-

dustry was split into its component parts by the census during the later

years of this study. Since the earlier years often gave no breakdown of

industries, the earlier definition would be used.

        Data has been collected for a sample of twenty industries which are

listed in Appendix I. The criteria for including particular industries

were primarily associated with the complexity of the technology. The in-

dustries were chiefly those having more elementary technologies and indus-

tries for which it would be possible to identify the relevant patent statis-

tics. It is important to recognize, for the purposes of later discussion,

that the patents classified as belonging to a particular industry represent

only a small part of the complex of technologies which must come together

before a new industry can progress. For example, a patent for a new design

of a sewing machine would appear in our statistics. The whole series of

developments in metal alloys and machine tooling which permitted this new

sewing machine patent would not appear in the data. As the economy has moved

into the new electrical, electronics and chemical technologies, these inter—

dependencies have grown ever more interwoven and more difficult to unravel.

For this reason, the data collecting exercise focused primarily on "old"

industries and for the most part on the period 1850 through 1939.

        Patent data were collected annually for each industry from published

reports of the U. S. Patent Office. The data collecting procedure is described

in some detail in Appendix II. Patents were identified with industries by

making use of an exhaustive alphabetical index of patents published by the
                                                                            5



  Patent Office. This procedure Is not entirely clean because no published

  (or apparently unpublished) record exists of how patents were indexed.

 Discussions with retired patent examiners seems to indicate that patents

 were indexed according to industry of predominant impact, be that either

 the industry of origin of the    patent or the industry of use. TJnfortun—
 ately, there is no entirely untainted way to handle this question. Ap-

 pendix II gives, for comparative purposes, a brief summary of the Schmookler

 procedures. Schmookler's data does not match as well as the new data set

 with data collected by the Census of Manufactures.



 3(a). SOME HYPOThESES

        In his classic work "Invention and
                                             EconomjcCrowth," Schmookler
 asked the question "are inventions
                                      mainly inowledge—induced or demand—
 induced?" The up—side of demand induced invention is possibly the easiest

and best understood of all the
                                 mechanisms for stimulating invention. Here
an expansion of the market creates the
                                          opportunity for new products, for
new investment and for the replacement of old processes by the new.

Schmookler (1966) demonstrated the close links at the industry level between

investment in plant and equipment and
                                        successful patent applications, per-
haps nowhere more so than in the well known example of the railroad indus-

try. An investment series for our sample of industries could not be con-

structed from the available data. In its place a surrogate was considered,

namely wage expenditures as a percentage of value added. It would seem

that the wage bill would fall relative to value added in times of high in-

vestment and rise relative to value added in times of low investment levels.
                                                                            6



 The surrogate suffers from the deficiency that it includes the effect of

 changes in the wage rate and changes in the price of final output, but,

 In the absence of an alternative, it provides a crude Indicator of changes

 in investment. The use of this surrogate is discussed further in Section

 (3b).

         There is also the possibility of a "dOwn—side" effect of demand in-

duced invention.' In the event that an existing Industry is challenged

by the emergence of a new industry, It will likely experience a slump in

sales. In the absence of any competitive response the industry will sure—

ly be driven out of existence. The natural reaction should then be an in-

creased and more intensive search for better productionprocesses and better

products for the industry.     In the time period of our study, industries
such as Ice making, cotton
                             manufacturers, wool textiles, flax, hemp and

jute, turpentine and rosin, clay products and the confectionary industry

have had to face such challenges. A fall in output due to some economy

wide decline in output would be met in a different fashion to a decline

resulting from the encroachment of other Industries. For this reason, the

relevant measure of changes In output is the change in output relative to

the change in, say, gross national product. Such a variable is defined

below where the results are discussed.

         The nature of the technological change In an Industry will determine

how wages move relative to the national average. Labor mobility and the In--

stitutional response of organizations such as trade unions enter into the

adjustment mechanism. Proceeding by example, it seems that inventions such

as power tools subs tantially reduced the skill levels required by the wood—
                                                                               7




 craft artisan, and presumably lowered the marginal product of labor, and

 hence the real wage In this industry. One can think of converse examples

 where the initial skill levels were quite low and the introduction of

 Inventions required higher levels of skills, such as the ability to read

 and write. The phenomena discussed thus far are associated with changes

 in the technical skill requirements
                                         of workforce. Technological change
 may also be associated with   rapid   expansion of the market and increased
 demand for certain types of skilled labor or for labor in certain
                                                                   geograph-
 ic localities. In the event of reasonable labor mobility, these fluctua-

 tions above or below
                        prevailing average wage levels should soon disappear.
 In the event   of significant productivity gains in strongly unionized in-

dustries, there is the possibility that labor will be able to negotiate

some share of the new surplus above that this
                                                  it might have earned in compe-
titive labor markets.



3(b). EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

       The data brought to bear on the above questions are discussed in

Section 2. The variables
                            cover twenty industries and, after expressing the
variables in rates of change, there are 363 observations. Where relevant,

the variables measure rates of change relative to the national aggregate.

This has the effect of
                         purging the data of movements in the macroeconomic

aggregates associated with the trade cycle. Variables are expressed in

logarithms to give the coefficients
                                       an elasticity type interpretation. The
variables are then:
                                                                             8




                  =         atents1 /Patentstil
                      log
                            [Patent / Patentsj1j



                                          /                    1
                            rvaiue Added     /Value Added
              2
             x    = log
                            L   GNP
                                        it
                                                  GNPt1
                                                            it—i




             X3it =   log   —___
                            I/Wage Earnersj*Av. Wage1 /#Wage Earnersit 1*Av. Wage11
                                   Value Added1
                                                        ________________________________
                                                                Value Added.i


              4   =         [Av, Wae. /Av. Wage.
                      log
                            LAy. Wager / Av.Wage J

A subscript (1, t) indicates an observation for the 1tFi industry in

period t .
             Patents        is a variable f or all patents issued in the U. S.

for period t .    Av. Wae is the average wage for production workers

in manufacturing and was taken from the individual Census of Manufactures.

The number of patents issued in any industry in a given year has a high

variance. To help eliminate chance or measurement error influences, the

variable Patent. is the average number of patents per year in

periods t , (t—l)      and (t—2)

       Examining movements in an industry series relative to movements in

the national aggregate of the series is a particularly tough test of the

theory. One difficiulty is that the national aggregate may not be the most

meaningful yardstick against which to measure performance. An industry's

performance could be compared to industries of like technical characteris-

tics (either on the product on the process side), or could be compared to

industries facing similar amounts of foreign competition or located in
                                                                                 9




  similar geographic regions. The development of such performance criteria

  is not an easy task either
                             conceptually or as a matter of data preparation.
  Taken in Conjunction with the difficulties in defining
                                                         industry boundaries,
  it must be supposed that there is a considerable
                                                   amount of measurement
  error in the data.

         Interpreting the direction of
                                         causation among the above variables
  is difficult. The data is
                            not Particularly rich in time series having on
 average only thirteen observations
                                    per industry. Furthermore, the time
 series data does not
                      correspond to equally spaced time intervals. The
 period of time between Census of
                                  Manufactures varies from two years to ten
 years, and further the data for each
                                      industry do not correspond to the same
 period of time. Some series
                              conmience earlier than others and some end
 earlier.

        Statistical linkages
                               appear to exist between the rate of
                                                                     patenting
 and the rate of growth of
                             value added, and between the rate of patenting
and the rate of change in
                             the wage bill expressed as a proportion of value
added. In both cases the
                             coefficients on the regressions are negative.
The wage rate variable
                         does not appear to be correlated with the rate of
change of invention in this data set. As was discussed in
                                                           Section 3a, the
wage bill as a Percentage of value
                                   added will be taken as an inverse sur-
rogate for the rate of investment.
                                      Schmookler (1966, pp. 151—162) used a
cruder surrogate for investment
                                  namely value added itself. Though our
variable x3 is far from
                          a perfect surrogate for investment, it should
represent an improvement over
                              Schinookj.e'5 use of simple value added
                                                                      in
that it corrects for the cos of labor. The results in
                                                        equation (3) indicate
                                                                           10




                                       TABLE 1

                         Single Variable Regressions
                   Patenting and Industry Characteristics


             (1)     X =       0.113    X        R2 =   0.035
                               (.031)




            (2)          =     0.121 X3          R2 = 0.042
                              (0.041)
                                        j

            (3)      X =     — 0.165
                              (0.192)
                                        X        R2 = 0.015




                     Degrees of freedom = 362




Note that intercept terms are insignificant. This is to be expected from

the definition of the variables which effectively centers the regression

around the origin. Measurement error will bias both the coefficients and
the R2   statistic towards zero.
                                                                           11



 that there is not an apparent link between wages and invention, giving us

 more confidence that movement in the variable x3 is being driven more by

 investment than changes in the cost of labor. Since x3 is an inverse

 surrogate for investment, equation (2) has the correct sign, and supports

 the investment—demand—induced explanation of patenting, namely, that many

 new inventions are embodied in a new capital equipment. While this result

 is in good congruence with Schmookler's earlier mentioned work, the theory

 has been put to a far more rigorour test. By defining variables in terms

 of rates of change relative to the national aggregates, one avoids the pos-

sibility of spurious relationships which might emerge as all the indicator

series move together up and down the trade cycle. Since those regressions

are "with—in" regressions, the relatively low value of the R2    statistic
is to be expected. Before
                            leaving this equation, there remains the possi-

bility that the causal direction is the reverse of that discussed above.

It is again useful to reflecton on the nature of the patent "statistic."

Patents do not measure technological change, though they are a manifesta-

tion that some change is taking place. Patents which represent major tech-

nological breakthroughs may well lead to growth in industrial investnient.2

The point to be made is that such patents are only a very small percentage

of total patents issued in an industry in a given year. The great bulk of

patents are for inventions which represent incrementally small advances in

knowledge. Such patents are for minor modifications, often of such devices

as locks, switches, hinges, metal cutting devices, tools, etc. It can be

argued that these small inventions are less likely to explain movements in

industry investment.
                                                                             12



  •     Of considerable interest are the results in equation (1).    Here

 there is a negative relationship between the relative rate of patenting

 and the relative rate of growth of value added. This result is different

 from the Schmookler results which used level of value added as a surrogate

 for investment and found a positive relationship between the level variables

 of value added and patenting. The apparent difference in the results is

 because the equations are testing for different effects. Schmookler's3

 (1966; pp. 160, 161) results are across industry regressions with a trend

 variable included. Industries with large value added have larger numbers

 of patents per year, so there is considerable regression on the scale of

 the industry. As well, there is possible synchronous behavior of the series

through the trade cycle. The proposition being tested in equation (1) is

somewhat more subtle. The question is rather how an industry behaves as it

goes faster or slower relative to the other industries about it. The evi-

dence in equation (1) is that when industries do well relative to other in-

dustries about them, they slacken up on the rate of patenting relative to

all other industries. This would be consistent with the Kamien and Schwartz

(1978) argument that, in the absence of a financial constraint, individual

firms experiencing high profits will be less likely to innovate, since such

innovation serves to cannibalize existing profitable market positions. Con-

versely, if an industry goes more slowly relative to its neighbors, it re-

sponds by quickening the rate of invention. In periods of severe coinpeti—

tive pressure, brought on by the encroachment of other industries into its

turf, firms may respond by quickening the tempo of their inventive ,ef forts.

Under such circumstances, there may be an undue increase in the "number"
                                                                           13




of .patents if the patents are of a type which attempt to modify and up-

grade an existing capital stock or an existing product. Such patents will

be small, low value patents but could, given the nature of the activity, be

very numerous. Inventions are made by firms and by individuals rather than

by an "industry" and the extent of competitive pressures will surely change

from industry to industry, but it would seem that, to the extent that the

fortunes of firms in an industry are tied to one another, those pressures

will, in general, be greater when an industry is faring less well relative

to other industries.4



4. INVENTIONS AND FURTHER INVENTIONS

       Though invention is undoubtedly a response to market opportunites

(and hence an economic phenomenon), the direction and the pace of inven-

tion may well depend on previous invention. Previous inventions may estab-

lish the necessary technological preconditions for the development of some

new product or process, and shape tastes and preferences for the develop-

ments which should follow.

       It seems the history of patenting has indeed been a complicated one,

and process of sorting out persistence effects, from changing underlying

trends is not easily accomplished. The longest published series of patent

statistics for the U. S. is for patents "issued," which runs continuously

from 1790 to the present. A shorter published series is available on

patent "applications," commencing some fifty years later. To study these

series and their time series behavior, it is necessary to envoke types of

dc—trending procedures. This is always, at best, a hazardous undertaking
                                                                                 14



 (Nelson, Kang, 1981), and almost all procedures attempted for these parti—

 cluar series result in a residual series
                                              exhibiting a long—swing. While
 it remains possible that such long—swings exist in the data, it is suffi-

 ciently easy to artificially create such cyclical behavior by incorrect de—

 trending, that this result cannot be taken seriously without much further

 investigation.

         One de—trending procedure which does not induce long swings in the

 data is a transformation to rate of change of patenting, that is,
     —
                      . Some interesting results are reported below when this

 de—trending procedure is applied to patents "issued," a series of 190 ob-

servations.        A word of warning at the outset, though: the results report-
ed here are not robust to segmentation of the data set, and do not apply

to the shorter time series on patent "applications." It is certainly true

that the signal—to—nojs ratio in these series is very high and it appears

reductions in sample size are not well accommodated. More seriously, of

course, one must recognize the possibility that the results reported are

merely a sampling artifact of one particular sample series. In subsequent

research, when the question of de—trending has been considered at greater

depth, it   will   be necessary to reconcile any differences in   the   time series
behavior of the patents "issued" series and the patents "applications"
series. The patents "applications" series contains noise and related ef-
fects associated with changes in the general desire to patent inventions
(either for economic reasons or whimsical social reasons). The patents

"issued" series is a more seriously complied series in that each patent

issued has passed some rigorous technical examination of its merit. On th
                                                                                   15



 debit side, however, various forms of bureaucratic inertia may induce arti-

 ficial cycles in this series. The questions do not arise immediately here

 since it appears that statistically meaningful results are only to be found

 In the 190 period patents "issued" series.

        The smoothed periodogram for the series of rates of change of patents

 issued is shown in Figure 1. The shape of the periodogram is suggestive of

 a process with a five period lag with a small coefficient (i.e., the periodo—

 gram is rounded rather than spiked). An autoregressive process with a five

period lag was fitted to the data and the residuals were examined. The per—

iodogram of the residuals suggested an eight period lag. The model finally

fitted to the data was a moving average process, where         y is the rate of
growth of patents issued per year.


(5)         y =     ÷ 0.264 C         ÷ 0.071
             t                  •••                8
                     (0.030)           (0.011)

Asymptotic estimates of the standard errors are shown in parentheses. The

theoretical spectrum for the estimated moving average process is shown in

Figure 2. Visual inspection indicates that there is good conformity between

the periodogram and the estimated spectrum. There are two—and—one—half

waves in both (due to fifth order lag term), and the peaks and troughs are

the correct relative magnitude (occasioned by the eighth order lage term).

      The initial five year lag from patent invention to patent invention

is the result of time taken to understand
                                                 and develop the original patent
and to then understand and
                             produce the appropriate follow—up invention.
Since these are national
                           aggregate patents, one might expect longer lags
                                                                              16



 than if one simply studied a patent series within a single industry. In-

 ventions in one industry may lead to follow—up inventions in other indus-

 tries but the transmission process will be slower. For example, a patent

 issued for a semi—conductor invention may be associated with a rapid follow—

 up patent In semi—conductors, but the follow—up patent in, say, automated

 tool cutting will occur much later.    Also, since the data covers the period
 from 1790 much of the sample is from an era when information transmission

 mechanisms were much less sophisticated than today, so that the intuition

 of everyday experience in 1981 may not be particularly relevant to most of

 the sample.

       A burst of patents in period     t leads to follow—up patents in period
 (t+5) , hence it is reasonable to expect further
                                                  follow—up patents some

period later. The lags associated with this second round of follow—up pat-

ents are likely to be shorter than the first round because there has been a

period of growing awareness and experience of the new technology. The data

indicates a reduction in the lag from five to three years. The magnitude

of the coefficient on the second round should have magnitude of the order

of the first coefficient
                           squared, (0.264)2 .   This   gives a value of 0.0696,

which IS remarkably close to the estimated coefficient of (0.071). The
                                                                       mag-
nitude of third round follow—ups will likely be of the order (0.264) and

hence too small to be estimated from the available data set, The actual

magnitudes of the coefficients seem to fall within a reasonable range. A

one percent increase in patents in period t leads to subsequent 0.33 per—

cent of patents over the next eight years (this is a rough calculation be—

cause of the non—linearity introduced
                                        by the compounding rates of growth),
                                                                               17




 .1-I


0
 a
 0
-e
 0
-'-4
'-4
a)




      0
                                      ¶12
                                                                              1T

                                                              Angular Frequency


          Figure 1: Smoothed Periodograin
                                            Annual Rate of Change of

                    Aggregate U. S. Patents Issued,
                                                      1790—1—80.
                                                                           18




.lJ
"-4
 U)
 C
 C)




 '-1
4-)
 C-)
a)
04
(ID




       0                              ¶12                                   ¶
                                                             Angular Frequency



           Figure 2: Theoretical Spectral Density Function for Moving
                     Average Process given in Equation (5)
                                                                               19


  whIch is on
                average four percent of a
                                            patent per year. This is quite close
  to the average rate of
                         growth of patents issued per year over the entire
 sample period which is about
                               five percent. We conclude that though the
 model in (5) is not
                     statistically robust, it is particularly rich in inter-
 pretation, and hence of interest
                                   in guiding future research on this topic.5


 CONCLUSIONS

        The history of the links
                                   between technological change and economic
progress can yield a deeper
                             understanding of mechanism driving our modern
 economy. The results reported here are conditional
                                                      on the nature of the
 sample data employed and
                          are very much affected by measurement errors and
changes through times in
                          institutional structure. The results are, however,
amenable to Interesting
                         Interpretation and do point the direction for future
research, both in the collection
                                  of better data and in the formulation of
more exacting tests of our models.
                                 20



               APPENDIX I

  INDUSTRIES INCLUDED IN STUDY




  1. Pulp and Paper
  2.   Rubber Tires

  3. Ice Making

 4, Iron and Steel

 5. Glass

 6. Salt

 7. Meat Packing

 8. Cotton Manufacture

 9.    Wool

10.    Flax,   Hemp and Jute
11.    Sewing Machines

12. Tobacco

13. Turpentine and Rosin

14. Soap

15. Clay (including Bricks)

16. Chicolate and Candy

17. Sugar

18. Matches

19. Watches

20. Typewriters
                                                                             21



                                   APPENDIX   II
                    PROCEDURES FOR COLLECrING PATENT DATA



I.   Published Patent Statistics

        With its founding in 1830 the U. S. Patent Office began publishing

an "Annual Report of the Commissioner of Patents." This volume listed the

patents issued each year under one of 16 headings. Also included was a de-

tailed description of each invention. By 1871 there were 145 such subhead-

ings. In 1871 the "Official Gazette of the Patent Office" and an accompany-

ing Index replaced the annual report. The descriptions of inventions were

published in a monthly magazine and the alphabetical Index directed the

reader to the relevant monthly volume. In 1898 the Patent Office modified

the method of classification to distinguish three categories of patent: (i)

method or process, (ii) function, and (iii) structure. In 1954 the Patent

Office ceased publishing the alphabetical index to inventions. At this time

a strictly numerical subheading system was adopted. The procedure for link-

ing patents to industries would then be as follows:

       (a) find desired industry in the "Index of Classification"

       (b) record headings and subheadings and obtain one—line

            description of headings

       Cc) check the current "Classification Bulletins" to insure

            that pertinent patent gr—ups had not been reclassified

            during the year

       (d) examine the technical "Definitions of the Subclasses"

            (a volume several thousand pages long) to determine

           whether subheadings are pertinent to industry
                                                                            22



        (e) use the "Index to the Gazette" and find patent
              numbers issued that year in the appropriate
              subheading
        (f)   finally turn to the Official Gazette and monthly

              "Volumes of Patents" to find descriptive informa-

              tion on the invention.



II. Collecting the Patent Data

       The same procedure was used to obatin a patent series for each of

the 20 industries. The only variation in the reports is the number of

years covered. The series begins for each industry ten years before the

Census of Manufacturers commenced publishing data for that industry. The

patent series continues either until Census figures were no longer available

or until 1953. After 1953 the Patent Office began using a classification

system which makes obtaining an accurate count difficult.

       For each year the patents listed in the Index under the name of the

industry and under related headings were counted. Each patent title was

examined to determine whether it had a meaningful bearing upon the industry

under consideration.



III. Notes on Schmookler Patent Data

      The patents in Schmookler's (1972) study were counted according to

the date of application between 1874 and 1950. Data is given on a "when-'

issued" basis for the years 1837—1876 and 1947—1957. Schmookler's study

covers "capital goods inventions classified according to the industry
                                                                               23



  expected to use them." Schmookler assigned Patent Office subclasses to SIC

  industries. The Patent Office classification system is based on technologi-

 cal—functional not industrial principals, so Schmookler had to "convert from

 the Patent Office Classification System to the industrial classification."

 If an entire subclass seemed to apply to an industry he automatically in-

 cluded it. Otherwise, he took a sampling, and if 2/3 of the patents seemed

 to belong, he included the entire subclass.     Once Schmookler determined the
 subclasses to be included, the Patent Office counted the number of patents

 granted per year in each class between 1836—1957.

        The inter—industry features of many inventions was also addressed in

 the data set. If Schrnookler could
                                      not determine which industry to assign
 a patent to, or if an invention could be
                                            used in many industries, the patent
was simply disregarded. Hence, he did not include steam engines with rail-

roads or tractors with farm data.

       Along these lines, some uncertainty arises as to whether Schmookler

grouped the patents according to industry of origin or industry of use.

One quote indicates that "the inventions were to be assigned to the current

main producing or using industry."    However, it was also stressed that patents
be assigned to "the industry expected to use them." In some cases, patents

were included twice, once in the "using" industry and once in the "manufactur-

ing" industry.

       Schmookler breaks down broad industrial
                                                 classifications, like "Agri-
culture," into activity types, like "Harvesting," and finally into commodity

groups, like "plows." Patent office subclassesareassigned to commodity

groups, and it is from these that the time series of data is constructed.
                                                                             24




                                 FOOTNOTES


1.    The term "Indian Summer" is also sometimes used to describe this

      phenomenon.

2. Often these breakthroughs came very early in the sample period for the

      industries being studied here. For example, Goodyear purchased the

     patent for sulphur vulcanization of rubber in 1839; most of the ideas

     and patents on synthetic rubber were available by 1910 (by 1939 synthe-

     tics were still less than 2 percent of the market); the amonia absorp-

     tion system for ice—making and refrigeration was patented in 1862;

     plate glass was first manufactured in 1852; the electric typewriter

     was patented by Edison in 1872; Singer patented a sewing machine in

     1851 with a straight needle, stationary hanging arm, fed by roughened

     wheel, material held in place by presser foot beside the needle (in

     subsequent years, there have been as many as three hundred patents per

     year on sewing machines, each a small variation on an established idea);

     ivory soap, special characteristics being that it was white and would

     float, was manufactured in 1879; first friction match was patented in

     1827 and the safety match was patented in 1855; the first battery clock

     was patented in 1840, the self—winding watch in 1924 and the Quartz

     crystal clock in 1927; chocolate was invented in Switzerland in 1872

     and the first packaging for national distribution of a confectionery

     was in 1872 when Mr. Cracker Jack (real name) launched his famous

     popcorn product; other tchno1ogies such as iron and steel and sugar

     refining were well established by the 1880's.
                                                                             25



 3. Similar results were found in the current data series;
                                                           they are not
    reported here as they are almost
                                       an exact replication of Schmookler's
    findings.

4. Results similar to the above results are also
                                                  reported in Beggs (1981)
    where the data is again
                            industry level, but for the period 1953 to
    1978. In that pacer, a short—run
                                        negative relationship is found be—
    tween the rate of growth of R&D
                                      expenditures and the rate of growth
    of industry profits.

5. My interpretation of these results has benefited from
                                                         discussions with
    Derak de Sola Price.
                                                                               26




                                   REFERENCES



 Beggs, J. J. (1981), "The Dynamic
                                     Interaction Between Industry Level
        Profits and Research and
                                   Development," Cowles Foundation Dis-
       CUSS ion Paper No. 588.

Kamien, H. I. and N. L. Schwartz
                                    (1978), "Self—Financing of an R&D
       Project," American Economic Review,
                                                Vol. 68, No. 3, pp. 252—261.
Nelson, C. RI, and H. Kang (1981),
                                     "Spurious Periodicity in Inappro-
       priately Detrended Time Series,"
                                          Econornetrica, Vol. 48, No. 3.
Penrose, E. T. (1951), The
                             Economics of the Inteyzational Patent
       System, Greenwood Press, Connecticut.

Schinookler, J. (1966), Invention and Economic Growth, Harvard
                                                               University
      Press, Cambridge, Mass.

           (1972), Patents, Inventjoiw and Economic Change     and Selected
      Essays,   edited by Z. Griliches and L. Hurwicz, Harvard University

      Press, Cambridge, Mass.
