                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE THEORY OF LOCAL PUBLIC GOODS TWENTY—FIVE
               YEARS AFTER TIEBOUT: A PERSPECTIVE




                        Joseph E. Stiglitz




                      Working Paper No. 95!4




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge   MPk 02138



                           August 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NEER Working Paper #954
                                                    August 1982



               The Theory of Local Public Goods Twenty—Five
                   Years After Tiebout: A Perspective



                                 ABSTRACT



       This paper asks, under what conditions can the Fundamental Theorem
of Welfare Economics be extended to economies with local public goods?
We show that there are some fairly restrictive sets of assumptions under
which   a competitive local public goods equilibrium (if it exists) is ef-
ficient; more generally, however, competitive local public goods equilibria
may be inefficient in the allocation of individuals among communities,
in   the number of communities, and in the level and kinds of public goods
provided.
       The primary sources of inefficiency are identified and analyzed;
these flmarket!t failures are closely related to some important policy
issues concerning, for instance, urban concentralization, fiscal decentrali-
zation, and regional redistribution. In communities in which landlords
control the public sector, the level and kinds of public goods provided
may be incorrect, and what goods are provided are supplied inefficiently.
In contrast, in communities in which renters control the public sector,
there are no incentives for efficiency in the supply of public goods.
Because of what we refer to as rental capitalization, there may in fact be
perverse incentives with respect to the kinds of public goods or "bads't
provided.
      Not only is it the case that not every competitive equilibrium is
Pareto optimal, but not every Pareto efficient allocation can be sustained
by a competitive local public goods equilibrium (with the appropriate
lump sum redistributions).
      Just as the Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics does not adequately
reflect the vices and virtues of competition in the market economy with
purely private goods, so too here: the virtues of a decentralized mechanism
for providing public goods may be vastly underestimated by our analysis.
                                    Professor Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                    Department of Economics, Dickinson Hall
                                    Princeton University
                                    Princeton, NJ 08544        (609) 452—4014
                  THE THEORY OF LOCAL PUBLIC GOODS TWENTY—FIVE

                      YEARS AFTER TIEBOUT: A PERSPECTIVE*

                                       by

                               Joseph E. Stiglitz


I.     Introduction

       It has long been recognized that there are three fundamental problems

associated with the provision of public goods:

       1.   The revelation problem: for private goods, individuals reveal their

preferences in the process of purchasing goods; for public goods, preferences

must be elicited in some other way. If individuals' payments for public goods

(e.g., taxes) depend on their declared preferences, they will have an incentive

to misrepresent their preferences.

       2.   The social choice problem: Arrow established that there does not

exist, in general, a social choice mechanism satisfying the commonly accepted

desiderata of (i) non—dictatorship; (ii) transitivity; (iii) independence of

irrelevant alternatives; and (iv) Pareto optimality.

       3.   The management of the public good: while for private goods, there

are strong incentives for firms to provide the goods which individuals wish

to purchase and to produce them efficiently, the incentives for citizens to

obtain information to select good public managers, and the incentive for

public managers to provide for the public good, are either absent or far from

perfect.

       Twenty—five years ago, Tiebout argued that, at least for those public

goods which were supplied locally, if individuals were mobile among communities,

all three problems could be resolved: by their choice of communities, they

reveal their preference. Communities either provide the goods which mdi—


*
    Paper originally presented at Peterkin Symposium, Rice University,
    April 16—17, 1981. Financial support from the National Science Founda-
    tion is gratefully acknowledged. The author is indebted to Peter
    Mieszkowski and Robin Lindsey for their helpful comments.
                                                                                       2.




viduals wish —— and do so efficiently ——   or   individuals leave to other conimuni—

ties that provide public goods which are more in accord with their tastes and

which provide these goods more efficiently. Competition among communities is

thus like competition among firms for customers, and just as the latter leads

to efficient resource allocations, so too does the former.

     In the past twenty—five years a considerable body of literature has been

devoted to assessing the validity of Tiebout's contention, both to generalizing

Tibout's model, to ascertaining its theoretical limitations, and to testing it

empirically.

     The objective of this paper is not to present a systematic survey of this

voluminous literature.1 Rather, I would like to return to the fundamental

question posed by Tiebout a quarter of a century ago: what implications does

the ability of individuals to choose a community have for the provision of

public goods? Although there clearly is some similarity between competition

among firms in the supply of private goods, and competition among local commu-

nities in the supply of public goods, is the analogy sufficiently close that

the conclusion concerning Pareto optimality established for the former is also

valid for the latter?

     In the twenty—five years since Tiebout's original contributions, not only

have we gained considerable understanding of the questions with which Tiebout

was concerned but we have also learned much about the conditions under which

private markets attain a Pareto efficient outcome. For instance, we know that

(a) if there are incomplete futures or risk markets; (b) if there is imperfect

information, and individuals can acquire information or if one individual's

beliefs are affected by the actions of other individuals; or (c) if there




1. For a recent survey see P. Pestieau (1980). For another recent treatment
    of the subject, see Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980), Chapter 17.
                                                                                     3.




are non—convexities in production which result in only a subset of the set of

potential goods actually being produced; then the market allocation is in gen-

eral not Pareto optimal.

      The basic   conclusion of this paper —— that   it is only under very special

and   unreasonable   assumptions that the process of individual choice among com-

munities leads to Pareto optimality ——     should thus come as no surprise. Yet I

shall argue that Tiebout!s insight into the importance of choice in the political

process is an extremely important one, with numerous policy implications.


II. The Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics with Local Public Goods

      The central result of modern welfare economics, generally referred to as

the Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics, establishes conditions under which

every competitive equilibrium is Pareto efficient, and under which every Pareto

efficient allocation can be supported by a competitive equilibrium (with the

appropriate lump sum redistributions).

      Among the conditions which are conventionally imposed is that there are no

public goods. In general, with pure public goods the market allocation will not

be Pareto efficient. While Pareto efficiency requires that the sum of the mar-

ginal rates of substitution equal the marginal rate of transformation, in market

equilibrium each individual will equate his own marginal rate of substitution

with the price ratio (which equals the marginal rate of transformation in com-

petitive equilibrium).

       I am concerned here, however, with a class of public goods, which I shall

refer to as local public goods, the benefits of which accrue only to those who

belong to a particular group (which I shall call the community), and not to those

who belong to other groups (communities) within the society. There is thus an

element of "privateness" in local public goods; while within the community the
                                                                                   4.




good is a pure public good, Ubetween? communities it acts like a private good.

Those outside the community receive no benefit. The concept is a natural one;

the local public library in Princeton provides no benefits to the citizens of

Houston, and conversely. The question with which I shall be concerned here is

under what conditions will the Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics be

valid for economies with local public goods.

    At the outset, I should remark that the analysis presented here reflects

only one of the two major strands which have evolved out of the work of Tiebout.

In the analysis here, we shall assume that individuals can belong to only one

community; they live, work, and play within their own community, and it supplies

them with their public and private goods. In the other strand, individuals can

belong to many groups: they may live in one community, work in another, and

belong to a swimming club which provides one local public good, and to a tennis

club which provides another. It is my conjecture that many of the results re-

ported here also apply to this other environment, but a full treatment of this

more general case is beyond the scope of this paper.1

     Introducing local public goods requires a reexamination both of what is

meant by Pareto efficiency, and what is meant by competitive (market) equilib—

riuni. Both of these turn out to be complicated questions.




1. Thus, there is some suggestion that the communities implicit in our analy-
    sis are more like metropolitan regions than like suburban villages.

    It should be emphasized, however, that our analysis of local public goods,
    like Samuelson's analysis of pure public goods, is concerned with polar
    cases; just as there are few pure public goods, there are probably few pure
    local public goods. It is, however, only by analyzing these polar cases
    that one can understand the underlying structure of the problems posed by
    public goods.
                                                                                       5.




2.1 The Notion   of   Pareto   Efficiency
     The basic definition of Pareto efficiency ——   that   no one can be made better

off without making someone else worse off ——   remains, of course, unchanged.
Recent research in welfare economics has emphasized, however, the importance in

defining and characterizing the set of Pareto efficient allocations of speci-

fying clearly the information which is available (or more generally, the tech-

nology by which information may be acquired), and the set of admissible instru-

ments (e.g., whether lump sum taxes can be employed to redistribute income,

whether there are restrictions on the set of risk markets, etc.).1

     Let me illustrate this point by means of a simple example. We have two

groups in the population, those who like public goods and those who do not.

There is a single private good, and all individuals have identical endowments

of a good, I , which can be transformed either into a unit of the public good

or of the private good. There are four cases to consider:

     (1) There is perfect knowledge concerning who is a high demander, who

is a low demander, and the government can restrict migration. Then Pareto eff i—

ciency entails a single coimnunity. The set of Pareto efficient allocations are

those analyzed by Samuelson, where the sum of the marginal rates of substitution

equal the marginal rate of transformation. Point A in Figure la represents the

particular Pareto optimal allocation where a uniform wealth tax is imposed.

    (ii) There is perfect knowledge concerning who is a high demander, who is

a low demander, but migration cannot be restricted. By migrating, individuals




1. Some of these restrictions should, of course, be derived from more funda-
    mental characteristics of the economy. Thus, the restrictions on the
    ability to employ differential lump sum taxes may be derived from restric-
    tions on the information available to the government, its ability to dif-
    ferentiate among individuals; restrictions on the set of risk markets may
    be derived, either from assumptions concerning the transactions costs tech-
    nology or informational assumptions.
                                                                     5a.




Public Good
          G


                             Budget constraint of merged community




                               Feasible allocations with migration




              Figure la.                              Private Good
                           Budget constraint of separate community
                                                                                   6.




can avoid paying any taxes imposed by a community on its residents.1 Then the

set of Pareto efficient allocations which can be supported is restricted. Thus,

in Figure lb point A is not an equilibrium. Pareto efficiency will require, in

this case, discriminatory taxation (e.g., low demanders are at point C, high

demanders at point B).

     (iii) there is imperfect knowledge concerning who is a high demander, or

discriminatory lump sum taxation is not allowed, and consumption (use) of the

public good cannot be monitored. Migration cannot be restricted. Then, the

only feasible tax (in this example) is a uniform lump sum tax; Pareto optimality

may entail two communities (X and Y in Figure ic); but if there is a single

community, Pareto optimality will not, in general, entail the sum of the mar-

ginal rates of substitution equalling the marginal rate of transformation (D in

Figure lb).

     (iv) under the same assumptions as (iii), if now use of the public good

can be monitored, Pareto optimality may entail the use of a benefit tax, with

a single community rather than two. The gain from the consolidation of the two

communities into one exceeds the loss from the distortion associated with the

benefit tax (low demanders consume less of the public good than is available

(point H), even though there is zero marginal cost associated with their util-

izing more of the public good). (See Figure lc).2 Thus, contrary to the

popular view, which holds that benefit taxes for public goods are inefficient,

since they restrict the consumption of something for which the marginal cost




1. If lump sum taxes can be imposed independent of residency, then the set
    of Pareto efficient allocations is the same as in (1) above.

2.   Thus, the points F and H satisfy the self—selection constraints; the low
     demanders prefer H to F although high demanders prefer F to H.
                                                                          6a.




    G




        gire lb.                              P
        A: Pareto efficient with uniform lump sum tax and no
            migration.

        With migration, and discriminatory lump sum tax, low demanders
        are at B, high demanders are at C.
        With migration, and no discriminatory lump sum tax, all individuals
        are at D.




    G




F




                                              P
        gure lc. Without discrimination, there will be two communities,
        at X and Y. Highly non—linear use tax, leading low demander
        to H and high demander to F, generates a Pareto improvement.
                                                                                   7.




of consumption is zero, we show that, under these quite plausible conditions

concerning the information available to the government, benefit taxes may be

necessary for Pareto efficiency.

     This example illustrates the critical role, in the analysis of the Pareto

optimal allocations, of assumptions concerning the ability of the government to

control migration (to restrict the establishment of new communities), and to

discriminate among different citizens, either directly or indirectly (e.g.,

through benefit taxes).

     A third characteristic of the economy that will play an important role in

our subsequent exposition concerns "congestion." In the example just discussed,

there is no congestion in the use of the public good, no diminishing returns to

scale, of the kind that would result from increased transport costs in larger

communities, and no diminishing returns in production, that would result from

increasing the number of workers in a community with, say, fixed land size.

That is why when there is perfect information concerning individuals, and when

discriminatory taxes can be imposed, Pareto efficiency always entails there

being a single community. If the "congestion" effects are strong enough, then

even under the above conditions it may be desirable to have more than one

community.

     For any particular set of assumptions; e.g., concerning migration and the

feasibility of discriminatory taxation, we can characterize the set of (constrained)

Pareto efficient allocations. In evaluating whether a local public goods equi-

librium (to be defined shortly) is Pareto efficient, we shall be particularly

concerned with three questions: whether the number of communities is correct,

whether the allocation of individuals among communities is correct, and whether

the level of expenditures on various public goods within a community is correct.
                                                                                    8.



 2.2 The Nature   of     titive   Eqibrium with Local    Public Goods

      The characterization of the local public goods equilibrium also requires

 us to specify clearly our assumptions concerning migration, the feasibility of

 discriminatory taxation, and the importance of congestion. In addition, we

need to specify how the supply of public goods is determined, the nature of the

political process, and the possibilities for "public entrepreneurship."

      The "spirit" of the Tiebout conjecture is
                                                  most appropriately captured, I
 think, by the free mobility assumption; although certain types of discrimination

may be admissible, it is not permissible to discriminate between
                                                                    "original"
inhabitants and migrants.

     In the subsequent discussion, we shall employ two classes of models. In

one, all resources are mobile. Each individual has an endowment of a vector of

resources which he can trade with other individuals. A "community" is then a

collection of individuals, which share in common a set of public goods. The

individuals within the community interact in production. The "rules" of the

community specify the relationship between the individual's endowments and his

consumption of private goods.

     In the second, there is one immobile resource, which we can think of as

land. The different communities can be thought of as different islands. The

critical distinction is then that when an individual moves from one community

to another, he does not take his land.   (He may still be able to enjoy some

return to his land, if the "rules" of his original community allow those who

contribute just land to the community to obtain a return.)

     The free migration assumption imposes the requirement that, in equilibrium,

an individual of a given type enjoy the same utility in all communities which

they inhabit, and the "rules" of the communities which they do not inhabit
                                                                                        9.




combined with the supply of public goods which these communities provide,

generate a level of utility which is less than (or equal to) that level.

       If we take as exogenous (a) the number of communities; and (b) the rules

relating the levels of public goods expenditures and taxes to the number of

individuals inhabiting the community; then the only question addressed in the

analysis of equilibrium is that of the allocation of individuals among these

communities. But one of the primary reasons for interest in the Tiebout mech-

anism is that individuals' choices convey information about their preferences,

and —— so it is conjectured ——     this   in turn leads to an efficient determination

of the level of public goods.

       Thus, a complete analysis of the equilibrium requires a specification

of the process by which the levels of public goods and taxes get determined.

In various parts of this paper we take several alternative approaches:

       (i) When there is unanimity on what course of action the government

should take, then it is reasonable to assume that the action undertaken is that

action which is unanimously favored. The central theorem of Subsection 3.1

establishes, in fact, a general condition under which there will be unanimity

(even with communities with citizens of different tastes). On the other hand,

in the special examples we investigate in Subsection 4.1 all individuals

within a community are identical, and so unanimity is trivial.

       (The determination of the level of public goods may still not be trivial;

what individuals vote for will depend on their perceptions of the consequences

——   either   in terms of migration or land values ——   of   alternative tax—

expenditure programs.)

      (ii) When there are differences in view on what course of action the govern-

ment should take, we shall assume the level of public goods reflects the prefer—
                                                                                      10.




 ences of the median voter.'

      The concept of "competition's which is relevant for the analysis of local

 public goods equilibrium is not obvious. Three assumptions will be employed

 in the subsequent analysis.

      (a)   TJtility Taking. Each community faces (or believes it faces) a

 perfectly horizontal schedule of individuals of each
                                                        type. Each community is,
 in other words, a utility taker. This is the natural extension of wage—taking

 or price taking behavior for economies in which there are only private goods.

      (b)   Free_Entry. Any entrepreneur can propose a new community, with a
 new set of rules.

      (c)   Monopolistic Competitive. Just as there is a widespread view that,

when there are fixed costs of producing different
                                                    commodities, a monopolistically

competitive model may be more appropriate than a perfectly" competitive model,

so too here. Although there are many towns (firms), no town (product) is a

perfect substitute for any other. There may be systematic biases in the number

and variety of towns in the local public goods equilibrium, just as there are

biases in the number of firms and the variety of goods they produce in the

private goods equilibrium (Dixit—Stiglitz (1977), Stiglitz (forthcoming),

Spence (1976), Salop (1979), and Lancaster (1975)).




1. We ignore the problems associated with preferences not being single peaked,
    as they often are in the kinds of situations being considered here. See
    Kramer (1973), Stiglitz (1974), and Slutsky (1977).

   We employ the median voter model because of its analytical simplicity. We
   make no judgment about the appropriateness of the model as a description
   of the determination of public goods at the local level.
                                                                                      11.




III. Sufficient Conditions for the   Efficiency of   Local Public Goods Equilibrium

      In the previous section, we attempted to clarify both what might be meant

by a Pareto efficient allocation and a local public goods competitive equilib-

rium. There has been, since Tiebout's original paper, a widespread belief that

local public goods equilibrium will in fact be Pareto efficient, and that every

Pareto efficient allocation with local public goods can be supported by a local

public goods competitive equilibrium. This, unfortunately, is not the case,

and a major concern of this paper is to explain the major reasons why this is

so.

      First, however, it may be useful to begin with two situations where the

local public goods competitive equilibrium is a constrained Pareto optimum.

The central feature of both situations is that there is a sufficiently large

number of communities, that the decision makers in each community take the level

of utility of each type of individual as given; if the community offers a

utility level below what a particular type of individual can obtain elsewhere,

individuals of this type will all leave the community; if they offer a utility

level in excess of what the type can obtain elsewhere, there is a flood of

immigration.

                                                 1
3.1 Unanimity in the Provision of Public Goods

      We first show that with an infinite number of people of each type, and a

sufficiently large number of islands,2 the local public goods equilibrium (if

it exists) is Pareto optimal. Moreover, when each type of individual takes the




1. The results discussed in this section are described in greater detail in
    Stiglitz (forthcoming h) and Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980).

2. Identical results obtain if all factors are mobile (i.e., there is no
    land) so long as there is an infinite number of people of each type.
                                                                                      12.




  utility level of other groups as given, there will
                                                        be complete unanimity both
  about the level of expenditures on various
                                                public goods and the taxes by which
  those public goods are financed. This is so, even though, in general, commu-

 nities will not be homogeneous, so long as there are productive interactions

 among individuals or so long as there are transport costs, and different

 individuals face different transport costs or have different utility functions

 for land. The focus on homogeneity in so much of the literature is simply a

 red herring.

      To see this, we construct the utility possibilities frontier of the

 economy. This specifies the maximum amount of utility that can be attained by

 one type of individual given the level of utility of other individuals.

 Because of the free migration assumption, all individuals of a given, type

 attain the same level of utility. (In the absence of public goods, we could

have draw-n a "factor price frontier"
                                        specifying the maximum level of factor

price we could pay to one factor given the factor price paid to the other; as

the relative factor price increases, the relative factor intensity decreases.

Here the return to participating in a
                                        community includes not only the wage, but
also the benefits of the public good.)1

     To see how the utility possibilities schedule can be constructed, for

simplicity, we focus on the case where there are only two groups in the popu-

lation. Let N. be the number of individuals of type I in the community,

N1/N2 = n   .   Then for each value of N1 and    N2 there will be a utility

possibilities schedule as depicted in Figure 2a. Next, we construct the fixed




1. The analogy to "utility equivalent contracts" discussed in the share-
    cropping literature (Stiglitz (1974)) or the labor market literature
    (Stiglitz (1975)) should be immediate.
                                                                     12a.




U'




                                                U2




     Figure 2a. Utility Possibilities Schedule: Fixed Size Island.
                                                                                                  13.


n—utility        possibilities schedule, where we allow the number of individuals

in the island to vary as we vary the levels of utility of say U1. (This

utility possibilities schedule may be constructed as the outer envelope of a

set of utility possibilities schedules, each of which takes n and, say,

N1 + N2 , as fixed. See Figure 2b). Next, we construct the variable—n utility

possibilities schedule, as the outer envelope of all of the fixed n utility

possibilities schedules. Figures 2c and 2d illustrate two possible cases.

         In Figure 2c the utility possibilities schedule (for each n )           is
concave.1 The outer envelope, giving the utility possibilities schedule

for the economy, may or may not be concave. Along the outer envelope, as we

increase U1/U2 , we decrease n

         We have thus constructed what is, in effect, a market demand curve for

type 1 labor (relative to type 2). The market equilibrium is simply the inter-

section        of this "demand curve" with the curve giving the relative supply
(Figure 3a).
         In    Figure 2d the utility possibilities schedule (for each n )        is
convex.        Clearly, the outer envelope will then be convex. As we have drawn

it, the outer envelope (over a region at least) consists of a small n curve

(n   =
         n1)    and a large n (n = n2)         curve. These dominate intermediate values
of n .         Thus,   for relative supplies   of the two types of labor between

and n2 the levels of utility will be fixed at U1* and U2* ; in equilibrium

there     will be two types of communities (one with n =
                                                                n1   ,   and one with n =
                                                                                            n2)
Changes in the ratio of the aggregate supplies of the two types will be

reflected in the mix of the two communities (Figure 3b).




1. Even with concave utility functions, the utility possibilities schedule
    with fixed population may be convex. See Stiglitz (forthcoming b).
                                                               1 3a.




Figure 2b. Utility Possibilities Schedule for Fixed Ratio n


(Outer envelope of utility possibilities schedules with same
N1/N2 but different scale.)
                                                                  1 3b.




U2




                                                     U'

     Figure 2c. Utility possibilities schedule with island size
                 and ratio        variable is outer envelope of
                     fixed n utility possibilities schedule.




          — Small       n




U
                                   Large n

                                         Intermediate n



                 U
    Figure 2d.    Convex utility possibilities schedule:
                  changes in relative supplies of two types of
                  individuals leaves unchanged utility levels.
                     (Intermediate values of n dominated.)
                                                                13c.




                              Supply




                                                   n

     Figure 3a. Equilibrium as the intersection of
                 demand and supply of labor of type 1.




U'




     Figure 3b.   Equilibrium as the intersection of demand
                  and supply of labor: changes in relative
                  supplies of different types of labor change
                  mix of communities.
                                                                                  14.



     To see that the point we have depicted is in fact the equilibrium, observe

 that if any single group were to ask, what is the best that we could do, given

what utility we need to offer to others to join (or remain in) our community,

the best they could do is to have that resource allocation corresponding to the

point on the utility possibilities schedule we have identified as the equilibrium.

Moreover, since all groups would thus choose the same point, there is unanimity

(even though underlying preferences may differ markedly). Finally, when all

communities act in this way, the demands for the different kinds of labor in

each community add up precisely to the supply.

     Note, too, there is no scope for redistribution within this environment.

Any community attempting to redistribute income against some group will find

it without any of that group in its population.

     Finally, we note that it is possible to show that even with well—behaved

concave preferences and technology, the utility possibility schedule is not

concave, as illustrated in Figure 4. If the equilibrium described earlier lies

at a point within the convex portion of the utilities possibilities schedule,

the ex ante expected utility can clearly be increased by having two sets of

communities, and randomly assigning individuals to one or the other)

3.2 Land Value Maximization

     The second set of conditions in which the local public goods competitive

equilibrium is efficient in its supply of public goods entails communities

which choose the level of public goods to maximize the value of the land rent.

Communities which provide more attractive public services will find that indi-

viduals are willing to pay higher land rents to live in the community. If each

community is a utility taker (in the sense defined earlier) and finances the

public goods through a land tax, then the level of rent which the ith individual




1. Under certain conditions, not only does social optimality (in the sense of
   maximizing ex ante expected utility) entail randomization, but so too will
   the market equilibrium. See Stiglitz (1982).
                                                           14a.




U2




                            N




                                          U1



     Figure 4.   Convex utility possibilities schedule:
                 randomization improves ex ante expected
                 utility of risk averse individuals.
                                                                                                15.




 is willing to pay, r1          ,    is   defined implicitly by the modified indirect utility
 function


 (1)         Ui(Yi, G, r') =         U'

 where U1 is the level of utility obtainable elsewhere, C is the level of

 public goods, and Y' is his endowment of income." Total land rents are


 (2)        R =


where    T' is the quantity of land consumed by the ith individual.

 Implicit differentiation of (1) yields
              i          I
                   -
                   —   U /dG
                       3U1/r1

But by Roy's formula,


 4          T1 —       ______


Thus



                  —
                  —    U1/3G    1

                       U'/Y     T1



This specifies how much additional rent payments individuals are willing to

make in response to an increase in the supply of a public good.

       The community seeks to maximize net rents; i.e.,


            max R—G


1. Clearly, we could make the individual's income; e.g., his wage, also
    depend on the community in which he lives; it should be apparent that
    this will not alter the analysis.
                                                                                            16.




where, for simplicity, we have assumed that the public good is produced at

constant costs, and we have chosen our units so that one unit of the private

good can be transformed into one unit of the public good.

      Thus, differentiating r1T1 —     G     with respect to G (holding utility

constant), we obtain


(6)        rT1/G) j            + T1(r'/ac)     - 1          =   0




      In equilibrium the total demand for land must be equal to the total supply,

which is fixed, i.e.,


(7)        T1 =    T
           1



Hence, if in competitive equilibrium r1 =          r       for all individuals (all indi-

viduals face the same prices), then


(8)        r1(aT'/G) J =         r(T1/G)       =       0




Substituting (8) and (5) into (6), we obtain



(9)                    =   1
           i Ui/Yi

Note that (9) is the familiar Samuelson condition for determining the Pareto

efficient supply of public goods: the sum of the marginal rates of substitu-

tion must be equal to the marginal rate of transformation (here unity).

      We have been careful to assert that land value maximization leads, under

the stipulated conditions, to an efficient level of supply of public goods;

the equilibrium may still not be Pareto efficient, because the allocation of

individuals among communities may be inefficient, as our analysis below will

confirm.
                                                                                 17.




     There is, however, one set of further restrictions which ensure that the

equilibrium is in fact Pareto efficient. Assume that there is an infinite

number of identical islands, and assume that there is a very large number of

identical individuals. Then1 there is a Pareto efficient allocation in which

in each community, public goods expenditure equals land rents, and all corn—

munities are of identical size.2 This Pareto efficient allocation can be

supported by a local public goods competitive equilibrium.


IV. Inefficient Local Public Goods Equilibrium

     Our earlier analysis identified three important conditions for a local

public goods equilibrium to be Pareto efficient: there must be the right

number of communities; individuals must be allocated correctly among the com-

munities; and within each community, there must be the right supply of public

goods.

     We shall now see why, under quite plausible conditions, the local public

goods equilibrium may be inefficient in all three respects. There are (at least)

five problems encountered in ensuring the efficiency of the local public goods

equilibrium:

     (a) There are often multiple Nash equilibria, some of which are Pareto

inferior to others. These inefficiencies are of two types:

          (1) A homogeneous population is distributed incorrectly among a set

of communities; or




1. Provided there is sufficient !lcongestion that it is desirable to have
    more than one community; see below.

2. This has been referred to as the Henry George Theorem. See Stiglitz (1977),
    Arnott and Stiglitz (1979) and Flatters, Henderson and Mieszkowski (1974).
                                                                                   18.




          (ii) There is a heterogeneous population, which is matched together

into communities (or matched with different islands), in an inefficient manner.

     (b) Pareto optimality requires subsidies from one island to another; it

is not in the interests of any single community to offer these subsidies.

     (c) Because of land capitalization, landowners in each community are

more concerned with providing public goods which are attractive to those who

are on the margin of moving into their community, than they are with the welfare

of intra—marginal individuals in their community.

     (d) Because of rental capitalization (the fact that rental rates reflect

the level of community services offered) renters in each community are more

concerned with providing public goods which are relatively unattractive to the

marginal immigrant than they are with the direct benefits accruing to themselves.

     (e) Attempts on the part of rich communities to avoid redistributions to

poor migrants not only lead communities to engage in indirect (and often costly)

exclusionary activities (which may, still, be consistent with constrained Pareto

optimality), but result in a population distribution which may well not be a

constrained Pareto optimum.


4.1 Homogeneous Population: Inefficiency in the Numbers of Communities and
     the Allocation of Individuals among Communities

     There is a widespread feeling in many countries that the population of

the central city is too large. The central city, because of its size, can

provide many public goods, and it is these public goods which make it so

attractive. It is not in the interests of any single individual to migrate

to some provincial town; but if enough individuals migrated, it would be able

to provide a high level of public goods. The reduction in the crowding in the

central city would make such a change a Pareto improvement. A number of govern—
                                                                                       19.




ments have, on the basis of some such argument, implemented policies to en-

courage greater decentralization. The central part of the argument is that the

initial situation may, in fact, be a Nash equilibrium, but that there exists

another equilibrium which is Pareto superior.

      In Figure 5a we have drawn the maximized value of the utility of the repre—

sensative consumer in a community as a function of the number of individuals

within the community, which we denote by V(N) .         Very small communities can
provide a very low level of welfare, because they cannot provide much of a supply

of public goods; very large communities provide a low level of utility because

of crowding (strict concavity of the production function). In the figure, we

have depicted the total population N as exceeding N*         ,   the optimal popula-
tion, but being less than 2N* .        Pareto optimality requires that there be two

communities. Yet, there is an equilibrium in which only one community is in-

habited, provided V(N) > V(O)      .   Figure 5b illustrates a case where there are
multiple Nash equilibria, all except one of which are inefficient.

      In Figure 5c we depict a situation where the population is equal to 2N*

There is still an equilibrium in which there is only one community.


4.2 Inefficient Matching Nash Equilibria

     The problem here is similar to that in the preceding subsection: there are

inefficient allocations of individuals among islands, but no single individual

has any incentive to move. There are two islands, one with a long beach but no




1.   If output, Q    is a function of the number of individuals in the community,
     Q = F(N) , and if output can be used as either public goods, G , or private
     goods,

              V(N)   max U(c,G)
              s.t. cN + C = F(N)

     where c is per capita consumption, and where U(c,C) is the representative
     individual's utility of private and public goods.
                                                                  19a.




utility


     A




          N1 -
          Figure 5a. Equilibrium at A (all population is iu one
                      island) is stable but Pareto inferior to
                      equilibrium at B.
                                                                             19b.




Utility




     A




                       N1                    N2


          Figure 5b.    Pareto superior equilibrium C is
                        unstable; equilibrium B is stable.




                                     C
utility




                                                             B




          N1                                           N2


          Figure 5c. Equilibria at A and B are both stable, C is unstable.
                                                                             20.



hills, the other with a beautiful hill for skiing but no beach. There are two types

of individuals, skiers and swimmers. For the beach to be usable on the first island

requires an expenditure of resources (e.g., constructing an access road); with a

much greater expenditure of resources, a much less satisfactory beach could be con-

structed on the second island. Conversely, an artificial hill for skiing could be

constructed on the first island; but on the second, only a minimal amount of expen-

diture is required for the development of a ski resort. If, by chance, the skiers

happened to settle on the first island, the swimmers on the second, then there could

be an inefficient Nash equilibrium. Given that the ski resort has not been devel-

oped on the second island, the skiers prefer their artificial hill; and given that

the beach has not been developed on the first island, the swimmers prefer their

little scrawny beach. And given the set of individuals who live within each island,

the allocation of resources among public and private goods is efficient.

    More complicated versions of this matching problem in the version of the model

without land can easily be constructed)



 1. There are two types of labor, doctors and lawyers; there are four possible
     types of public goods, A, B, C, D. There are two types of doctors, with
     utility functions

               =   u(c) +        +
                            GA


           U   =   u(c) + Gc + AGD

      Similarly, there are two types of lawyers, with


           U u(c) +         GA + XGD


           U = u(c)+        Gc + XGB

      If all communities mix type c. lawyers with type c. doctors, and type
      3 lawyers with type      doctors, then there is an equilibrium in which
                                     13

      A is produced in the first community, C in the second. But there is
      another equilibrium in which type a doctors are mixed with type 13
      lawyers, and good B is produced, and type a lawyers are mixed with
      type 13 doctors and good D is produced. If X < 1      ,
                                                              this equilibrium
      will be Pareto inferior to the former equilibrium.
                                                                                      21.




 4.3    The Par to Op imal Alloca tion with Free Migratlo    yRequire SUbsidies
        If   there is a limited supply of "good" islands, and migration cannot be

 restricted,    then individuals from the "poor" islands will migrate to the "good"
 islands until utilities are equalized. This may not be efficient. To see this
 most   vividly, assume there are two types of islands, large islands and small

 islands. All individuals are identical, and are treated identically. Then

 the level of utility on any particular island can be expressed as a function

 of the number of individuals living
                                        on that island (assuming that the level of

 public goods within the island is optimally chosen). The larger island has a

 larger maximal level of utility. Now assume that, although there is a very

 large number of such islands, there are too few to accommodate the entire popu—

 lation, if each island is optimally populated. The
                                                       equal utility equilibrium
will require more than the optimal population in the larger island. But note

that if the larger island subsidizes the smaller island, the utility level

attained at each population size in the representative small island is increased,

and in the representative good island it is lowered, but as Figure 6 makes clear,

the equilibriw level of utility on both islands may be raised: everybody may

be better off as a result of the subsidy. If there are only two islands (which

stretches the plausibility of some of the other assumptions in the analysis),

then it makes sense for the rich (larger) island to subsidize the poor (smaller),

but in the general case, where there are many rich (large) islands, any single

island is likely to believe it will have a negligible effect on the supply of

potential migrants.

       The misallocation of individuals resulting from differences in endowments

of different communities is a problem of some practical importance. If Alberta

decides to use its oil revenues to supply public goods, then it may attract
                                                                 21a.




V (N)                                         Large island




                                                             N


        Figure 6.   If the large (rich) island subsidizes
                    the small (poor) island, everyone's
                    welfare may be increased.
                                                                                 22.




migration, beyond the efficient level. Some of the potential consumer surplus

may he appropriated by owners of land in Alberta in the form of higher land

rents; nonetheless, there is no presumption that the equilibrium level of

migration will be efficient.   Indeed, the major effect of the higher land

rents may be to make Alberta more attractive to those who have a low preference

for consuming land, which need not be in accord with the Pareto efficient allo-

cation of labor. Alberta could, of course, effectively discriminate between

current inhabitants and future migrants, by distributing ownership claims in

the oil to current inhabitants. This would eliminate the source of the

inefficiency. Individuals would no longer have an incentive to migrate to

Alberta to capture a share of the "public" rents associated with the oil.


4.4 Community Developers

     The problems discussed in Sections L.l_L.2 can be alleviated by

introducing town entrepreneurs (community developers). Although there may

well not be an equilibrium with community developers (the core of the economy

may be empty) it is clear that when the economy is at an inefficient Nash

equilibrium there is scope for a community developer to enter, reorganize the

allocation of labor, and appropriate for himself the surplus that is thereby

generated. The critical question, however, is whether the developer will be

able to appropriate a sufficiently large fraction of the surplus to compensate

him. un the non—land based version of the model, a developer might propose

to the members of two (or more communities) a rearrangement that would make

all of them better off. Once they perceive this rearrangement, the developer's

services may no longer be needed; the citizens within the communities simply

appropriate the increased returns for themselves.
                                                                                  23.




     This is, of course, a standard problem: the public good is a public good.

It may be very difficult for any individual to appropriate the returns from

pursuing the public good. Moses led his people to the promised land, but was

unable to enjoy any of the fruits of his public service; and the problem which

beset Moses has beset others who have labored in the public service.

     In certain situations, public good problems can be resolved, or at least

alleviated, by establishing the appropriate property rights. In the case of

what we have referred to as the "land based communities," the landowners as a

group may benefit from improving the efficiency with which public services are

provided and from providing public goods which are more in accord with the

preferences of the inhabitants. Even then, however, each landowner has an

incentive to "free ride" on the efforts put forth by other landowners. In the

next section, we show that maximizing land values will not, in general, lead

to Pareto efficient equilibria. Nonetheless, there are important incentives

for landowners to make sure that public goods are efficiently provided. In

contrast, we show, in the following section, that not only do renters not have

any incentives for ensuring that public goods be efficiently provided, but they

may have perverse incentives, to ensure that the kinds of public goods that are

provided are unattractive to those who might be considering immigrating into

the community.


V.   Land Capitalization

     One of the important implications of free migration is that if there are

differences in communities, in public goods, amenities, or taxes, these differ-

ences should get reflected ("capitalized") back in the value of land This in

turn has important implications for the supply of public goods: individuals

in a community are concerned not only with the direct consumption benefits
                                                                                  24.




associated with any expenditure—tax program, but also with the effects of the

program on land values. Thus., an individual in a community with good schools

who has no children may still be concerned that the schools in his community

maintain their quality, lest property values decline.

     Two questions then arise:

      (1) What implications does this have for the kinds of public goods—taxes

each individual within a community votes for?

     (2) What implications does this, in turn, have for the local public goods

equilibrium?

     The questions here have a clear parallel to those asked in the theory of the

firm: under what conditions will shareholders wish the firm to maximize their

market value? What implications does firm market value maximization have for

the efficiency of market equilibrium?

     In traditional competitive theory, when there is a complete set of markets,

and each shareholder in each firm takes the prices of all goods as given, then

all shareholders will wish all firms to maximize their stock market value, and

in doing so, they will ensure the efficiency of the economy. When there is not

a complete set of markets, as in the traditional monopolistically competitive

model, the prices faced by any (even small) firm may alter as it changes, for

instance, its production decisions. In that case, it can be shown that the

shareholders may not wish the firm to maximize the stock market value, there

will not be unanimity among the shareholders about what the firm should do,

and even if the firm were to maximize the stock market value, the market allo-

cation would not in general be Pareto efficient.   (See, for instance, Stiglitz

(1969, 1972), Grossman and Stiglitz (1977).)

     Exactly parallel results obtain here. In our discussion of Section III,

we considered the case where there is a sufficiently large number of communities
                                                                                   25.




that each community takes the level of utility of each type of individual as

given. If the owners of the land can choose to live in other communities, and

still obtain the rents on their land, it is clear that, since their opportunity

set   is unambiguously increased by having their land rents maximized, they will
wish to choose the level of public goods in such a way as to maximize net rents;
and our earlier analysis established in that situation that the level of public

goods will, in fact, be Pareto efficient.

      But if individuals lose their rights to obtain rents when they emigrate,

then clearly individuals will be concerned not only with land rents, but with

the supply of public goods provided within their community. They will not wish

the community to maximize net land rents.

      More generally, if there are sufficiently few communities that there are

some infra—marginal individuals (i.e., some individuals who would not migrate

were taxes raised slightly or the level of public goods decreased slightly),

then there will not be unanimity among the citizens on what policy the govern-

ment should pursue; not everyone will wish the community to maximize land rents.

Moreover, maximizing land rents will not, in general, be Pareto efficient.

      What is critical to the determination of land values is the valuation of

the marginal person not living in the community. Communities increase their

land values by making themselves more attractive to those not presently living

in them. Thus, if there 15 a large number of communities with populations

identical in characteristics to the given community, then the marginal migrants

are identical to the present inhabitants. Making the community more attractive

to these marginal migrants improves the welfare of the current inhabitants.

      When, however, every community differs slightly from every other one,

then the marginal migrant is distinctly different from the current inhabitants.

This has an important effect on those planning to sell their land. Thus an
                                                                                  26.




 "older voter" more concerned with the value of his land will vote for a public

 goods package which is more attractive to younger potential migrants who are

 on the margin of entering. As a result, the equilibrium will reflect more the

 preference of the median individual within the society than the median indi-

vidual within the community. Not surprisingly, then, the equilibrium which

 emerges is not in general Pareto optimal.''2 (See Stiglitz (1974), Atkinson—

 Stiglitz (1980).)

      It should be noted that the change in land rents does not, in general,

provide an accurate estimate of the benefits accruing, for instance, from an

improved transportation network, a more efficient public administration, or a

better allocation of public goods. (See Arnott—Stiglitz (1980).) Assume, for

instance, that some community discovered a way of producing community services

at lower cost; it could then provide the same public goods services with lower

taxes. This would induce those not living in the community to move in; in




1. Even when individuals differ only by age, and not by tastes, the market
    equilibrium may not be Pareto optimal. Assume, for instance, that there
    were two techniques for producing a public good, one using current re-
    sources, the other using capital resources. Assume that only the young
    benefit directly from the public good (schools); the old only benefit
    indirectly from the effect on market values. Assume, moreover, that we
    cannot differentiate taxes on the basis of age, and that mobility costs
    are sufficiently high that all communities are mixtures of the young and
    the old. The old will then always prefer the capital resource method of
    producing the public good since that is the only way that they can appro-
    priate the returns. This will be so even if it is the less efficient way
    of producing the public good.

2. We have focused on changes within a single community. Should property
    owners support a national program which increases the supply of public
    goods that could be obtained from a fixed rate of property taxes? Such a
    change would increase or decrease property values depending on whether the
    increased effective supply of public goods increases or decreases the
    demand for land. The effect of changes in land rents when all communities
    change, say, their level of public goods are thus markedly different from
    the changes which occur when only one community alters its behavior.
                                                                                  27.




migration continues to the point where land values rise to the point where the

marginal migrant is indifferent to staying in his original community. Thus,

if land values increased by an amount equal to the present discounted value of

the tax savings, and plot sizes were fixed, equilibrium would be restored.

But if plot sizes were variable, the higher value of land would induce indi-

viduals to purchase smaller plot sizes; thus, for any finite tax reduction,

the equilibrating increase in land values exceeds the present discounted value

of the tax reduction.

     The analysis so far has assumed that all land within the community is

homogeneous. In fact, of course, different parcels of land are quite different,

and what is in the interests of one landowner may not be in the interests of

another. For instance, after a set of apartments is constructed near the urban

center, it is in the interests of those apartment owners to pass a zoning law,

restricting further construction of apartments. Such a restriction increases

the wealth of those who presently own land on which apartments have already

been constructed, at the same time that it decreases the wealth of those who

presently own land on which apartments would have been constructed in the

absence of the zoning restrictions. One group of landowners have, in effect,

managed to confiscate part of the wealth of another group of landowners. The

incentives for them attempting to do so are clear, in spite of the fac.t that

there may be significant dead weight losses as a result. (Direct confiscation,

a more efficient way of transferring resources from one group to another, may

not be allowed by the political process.)

     Similarly, renters have an interest in attempting to confiscate the wealth

of the owners of land (and buildings). The means by which they do this, and

the consequences for the nature of the local public goods equilibrium, are the

subject of the next section.
                                                                                       28.




     VI. Rental_Capitalization

         The benefits of public goods are reflected
                                                    not only in land values, but
 also in rents. Since in certain
                                      large cities, renters comprise a majority of
  the population, it is important to understand how various public goods—tax

 programs affect their welfare.

         Consider, first, public goods programs financed by land taxes. (The other

 cases follow along similar lines.) What renters are concerned with in deciding

 to migrate is the wage they receive (after tax), the level of public goods and

 the level of rents. Thus the level of land taxation is in itself of no interest.

 An improvement in the efficiency with which
                                                 public services are provided (keeping
 the level of public services unchanged) leaves renters completely unaffected.

 Thus, they will have no concern for the
                                            efficiency of public services. More-
 over, an improvement in the quality of public services will be
                                                                    immediately
 reflected in the rentals they have to pay, provided there is an infinite number

of potential immigrants identical to themselves.       On the other hand, if there
is     not, the sole concern of the renter in evaluating
                                                           any program is whether it
raises rents by less than it improves his welfare (lowers rents by more than it

decreases his welfare). Thus, a renter who has a less than average aversion to

garbage in city streets will vote for a small expenditure
                                                              on garbage collection;
although he would like more garbage collection, he realizes that any increase

will be more than offset by rent increases.
                                                 Indeed, he may even vote for some-

thing he dislikes, knowing that others dislike it even more.

       Thus, renters have   no incentive to ensure
efficiently,   and have perverse incentives with     regard tothe choice4
and quantity of public goods
                                                                                         29.




VII. Redistribution

       One of the most noted aspects of community formation in the United States

is the important role that income—wealth differences play. This is not sur-

prising: individuals with different incomes are likely to have different atti-

tudes towards public and private goods. There are, however, two important

implications of free migration related to wealth differences.

       First, we noted in our basic result on the optimality of the local public

goods equilibrium that there was effectively no scope for redistribution. Any

attempt by a community to redistribute income away from some group would simply

induce migration. Although the assumptions of that model are extreme, it is

clear that the power to redistribute income_locally with free migration is

severely limited.

       Secondly, in situations where in-migration cannot be restricted, and

discriminatory taxes against the poor cannot be imposed, then there may be

some incentive for the poor to migrate into the rich communities. In the case

of pure public goods, this may be of little concern: there is no extra cost

associated with the poor being (relatively) free riders on the rich provided

that the political structure does not lead to an allocation of resources to

the public good which is different from that which the rich would have chosen

by themselves, and provided there are no congestion effects. If there are,

then the rich may still wish to exclude the poor.

      In the case of publicly provided private goods ——    like   education ——   there
is a real cost to the rich of having more poor individuals within their com-

munity. They will thus attempt to exclude them. There are a variety of

exclusion devices; e.g., requiring large minimum    size   lots, having a very high

tax   rate   (so the poor cannot "afford" to live in the community); or having a
                                                                                     30.




 very low tax rate with a very low level of public services (both the rich and

 poor substitute private for public goods, but the poor can do this less well).

 Although such exclusionary devices clearly create "distortions'1 relative to the

 first best optimum, where poor individuals could be directly excluded or dis-

 criminatory taxation could be imposed, the existence of these exclusionary

 practices does not imply that the local public goods equilibrium is not a

 constrained Pareto optimum, taking into account the restrictions which are,

 in fact, imposed on the set of instruments which the communities can employ

 to discriminate. Moreover, further restrictions on the set of exclusion devices

 (e.g., not allowing certain zoning requirements) may simply lead to the substi-

 tution of less efficient and desirable exclusionary devices.    Such restrictions
 may lead to a Pareto inferior equilibrium.


 VIII. The Decentralizability_of Pareto Efficient Allocations

      The previous sections established that, while there were some extremely

 restrictive conditions under which a local public goods competitive equilibrium

might be Pareto efficient, there was a strong presumption that it was not.

This established that the first of the two fundamental theorems of welfare

economics did not extend to economies in which there
                                                       were local public goods.
We now consider the second theorem: can every Pareto efficient allocation be

decentralized? We show that, in general, not every Pareto efficient allocation

can be decentralized. Since many of the arguments employed to show this are

straightfoard modifications of the arguments we
                                                  presented earlier, showing
that the market allocation was inefficient, our discussion will be very brief.

     There are four problems with the decentralizability of the set of Pareto

optimal allocations with free migration.
                                                                                  31.




     1. There may only be a single community. The fact that with pure public

goods the marginal cost of an additional individual enjoying the public good is

zero leads to a strong presumption that there be a single community. There are

two grounds for forming separate communities.

         (a) The public good is not a pure public good; there is congestion

in its use. (At the extreme, it may be a publicly provided private good, for

which the marginal cost of usage is equal to the average cost.) Most of the

public goods which are presently provided by local communities fall within this

category; education, sewage, garbage collection, etc. And this is the category

of goods which Tiebout seems to have had in mind. Yet, these are not the pure

public goods which Samuelson described in his 1954 paper, and thus Tiebout's

analysis does not provide the resolution of the public goods problems posed there.

         (b) There are diminishing returns in private goods in the formation of

larger coimnunities. This may be either because of diinini$hing returns to pro-

duction (as in the "island" model described above); or because of increased

transport costs as communities in which the public good is provided centrally

become larger.

     Even when there are diminishing returns, it may not be desirable to form

separate communities. There must be sufficiently rapidly diminishing returns.

     Consider a simple economy in which the output of goods is a function of the

number of individuals living in the community. For simplicity, assume all mdi—

viduals are treated the same. Assume, as before, that a unit of output can be

used to produce either a unit of the private good or a unit of the public good.

     Thus, for a fixed population, the production possibilities schedule appears

as in Figure 7. If we increase the population, we can increase the supply of

public goods, but decrease the per capita supply of private goods. Thus, the

production possibilities schedule, the outer envelope of these linear schedules
                                                                                  32.




is convex, as in Figure 7. Whether it is desirable to have a finite or infinite

number of people in the community depends on the utility function for public and

private goods. (Cf. Figures 7a and 7b.)

     These non—convexities have one further important implication. Even when

it is desirable to have more than one community, it is quite likely that there

may not be a sufficiently large number of communities that the utility taking

analogue to the perfect competition model presented in Section III is appropriate.

Rather, the appropriate model is likely to be more akin to a monopolistically

competitive model, as discussed in Sections IV—VI.

     2. The public good must be localized. Obviously, if the level of public

goods provided in one community affects the level of welfare of citizens in

another, we cannot decentralize the provision of public goods. Each community

will undersupply public goods. Again, many of the most important public goods

cannot be localized: the benefits of R&D, much of the programming for TV, etc.,

are all "national public goods." This further limits the scope of the Tiebout

model for providing a resolution to the problems associated with the provision

of public goods.

     3. The Pareto optimal allocation cannot entail subsidies from the citizens

of one community to those of another. The conventional statement of the second

welfare theorem asserts that every Pareto optimal allocation can be sustained

by a competitive economy with the appropriate lump sum redistribution. Thus,

in the present context, the parallel theorem requires that any redistributions

not be contingent upon the individual's choice of location.

    We established earlier that, in the land based model, Pareto optimal

allocations (with free migration) will require inter—island transfers, unless
                                                                          32a.




                                        Indifference     curve




     Prod
                                             uction possibilities curve


                                                   envelope of fixed population
                                             production possibility curves

                                                 C
                                   (private consumption per capita)


     Figure 7a. Optimal to have finite number of communities.




cc




                                   Indifference curve




                                                     C
                      Production possibilities
                      schedule


     Figure 7b. Optimal to have one community.
                                                                                  33.



 all islands are identical. Lump sum taxes and subsidies (which are not dependent

on the individual's location) are not sufficient.'

     4. If the number of individuals is not an exact multiple of the optimal

size of a community, then if there is community entrepreneurship, the Pareto

optimal allocation may not be supported by a decentralized equilibrium. A

community entrepreneur is someone who organizes a new community, with a new

set of rules for the determination of the level of consumption of private goods

as a function of the endowments of factors he brings to the community. Consider,

for instance, the land based model introduced earlier. Then in Figure 5a the

Pareto optimal equal utilities equilibrium entails both communities being below

the optimal size. A community entrepreneur could then propose forming a new

community of the optimal size; he could appropriate as rents a sufficient amount

to make individuals indifferent to migrating. Though this itself would not be

an equilibrium, if there is a competitive supply of entrepreneurs, this does

establish that the Pareto optimal allocation cannot itself be sustained.


IX. Conclusion

     In this paper, I have argued that the Fundamental Theorems of Welfare

Economics do not extend to economies with local public goods: the conditions

required to ensure that every Pareto optimum can be generated by a competitive

local public goods equilibrium (with the appropriate lump sum redistributions),




1. In this situation, a form of "regionalization" may be possible; that is,
    a collection of islands, large and small, in the appropriate proportion,
    can enjoy fiscal autonomy from all other islands. This region is just a
    miniaturization of the economy as a whole. Under more general circum-
    stances, where all islands differ, then even the partial decentralization
    associated with regionalization may not support the Pareto optimal allo-
    cation.
                                                                                  34.



and those required to ensure that the competitive local public goods equilibrium

be Pareto optimal are indeed stringent)

     At a theoretical level, this should not be surprising: the presence of

local public goods introduces a non—convexity, and non—convexities are often

troublesome for competitive theory: (1) competitive equilibrium may not exist;

(2) non—convexities in practice are likely to be associated with various kinds

of imperfectly (monopolistically) competitive behavior; and (3) where there

are non—convexities, it is not necessarily the case that every Pareto—efficient

allocation can be supported by a competitive equilibrium with appropriate lump

sum redistributions.

     Perhaps more significantly, while the conditions under which the effi-

ciency of the local public goods equilibrium can be established are far more

general than those conventionally assumed (admitting, for instance, hetero-

geneity both in skills and tastes), some of the instances of "market failure"

we have observed correspond to important policy issues: we have noted, for

instance, the possibility of equilibria with excessive concentration of

population, and pointed out that, while there are instances where land develop-

ers might lead to welfare improvements there are other instances where market

value maximization does not lead to Pareto optimal allocation of resources.

     More disturbingly, we have noted the absence of appropriate incentives on

the part of renters for voting for efficient tax—public goods packages. (Land—




1. Throughout this paper, I have assumed perfect information on the part of
    consumers about the packages of goods offered by different communities.
    Recent work in competitive equilibrium theory has shown how critical the
    perfect information assumption is to the optimality results that have been
    obtained. The assumption of perfect information about public goods (e.g.,
    schools) of potential migrants seems particularly questionable. (See
    Hannaway and Garner (1982)).
                                                                                    35.



  owners benefit, of course, from better
                                           tax—public goods programs; but there,
  the free rider problem implies that it is not in the interests of
                                                                      any single
  individual to ensure that the public good is done.)'

      The inefficiencies we have noted
                                         in the competitive local public goods

 equilibrj provides some arguments for the role of regional and national

 authorities in the provision of local public goods and in redistribution

 across Communities.

      (The design of optimal interventions is a question I hope to pursue on

 another occasion.)

      Still, I believe that this discussion
                                              vastly underestimates the virtues
 of a decentralized mechanism for
                                    providing public goods.2 Local communities
 can respond to local variability more
                                         effectively than centralized control
 (although it is a moot question whether
                                           centralized control at the state level
is more responsive to local needs than centralized contro. at the national

level). The opportunities for political participation and choice (voice and

exit) provided by local communities
                                      are of value themselves in a democratic
society. Even if voters have limited incentives
                                                   for ensuring that the public




1. In the private market, when a firm is inefficiently run, there
                                                                   may be an
    incentive for a takeover. Although it is conceivable that a community
    organizer would buy all the land in a community, change the management,
    and make a profit, in practice this does not occur.

   Even for the private firms, the efficacy of the takeover mechanisms has
   been questioned. A shareholder, believing that the firm is about to be
   taken over and a more efficient
                                   management installed, might well refuse to
   sell his shares, prefering to realize the capital gain himself.

2. Just as I have argued that the
                                   conventional competitive paradigm does not
    accurately reflect the virtues (and vices) or the market. (Stiglitz
    (forthcoming c).)
                                                                                36.




good is pursued, local administrators have incentives for demonstrating inno—

vativeness and efficiency. (Their incentives are still only loosely related

to the preferences of their constituents; but similar arguments apply to firm

managers.)

     The opportunities for extending the scope of choice and competition

within the public sector have not yet been fully exploited. The question

before us is, recognizing that such competition does not necessarily lead to

efficient resource allocations, how can competition and choice be introduced

to best serve the public interest.
                                    REFERENCES


 Arnott, R. J. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Aggregate Land Rents, Expenditure on Public
      Goods and Optimal City Size," Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 63
      (November 1979), PP. 471—500.

 Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Stiglitz, Lectures in Public Economics (New York and
      London: McGraw—Hill Publishing Company, 1980).

 Bergias, E., "Distribution of Tastes and Skills and the Provision of Local Public
      Goods," Journal of Public Economics Vol. 6, No. 4 (1976), pp. 409—423.

Buchanan, J. and Goetz, "Efficient Limits of Fiscal Mobility," Journal of Public
     Economics (April 1972), pp. 25—43.

Dixit, A. K. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Monopolistic and Optimum Product Diversity,"
     Mierican Economic Review 67 (1977), pp. 297—308.

Flatters, F., V. Henderson, and P. Mieszkowski, "Public Goods, Efficiency, and
     Regional Fiscal Equalization," Journal of Public Economics III, No. 2
     (May 1974), pp. 99—112.

Grossman, S. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Stockholder Unanimity in the Making of
     Production and Financial Decisions," Quarterly Journal of Economics
     Vol. 94, No. 3 (May 1980), Pp. 543—566.

Groves, T. and J. Ledyard, "Optimal Allocation of Public Goods: A Solution to
     the 'Free—Rider' Problem," Econometrica Vol. 45 (1977), pp. 783—809.

Hannaway, J. and W. Garner, "Private Schools: The Client Connection," in Family
     Choice in Schoo1i, Michael E. Manley—Kasimir (ed.), (Lexington Books, 1982).

Kramer, G., "On A Class of Equilibrium Conditions for Majority Rule," Econometrica
     41 (1973), pp. 285—297.

Lancaster, K. J., "Socially Optimal Product Differentiation," American Economic
     Review 65 (1975), pp. 567—585.

Pestieau, Pierre, "Fiscal Mobility and Local Public Goods. A Survey of the
     Empirical and Theoretical Studies of the Tiebout Model," Spatial Analysis
     and Public Services Policy, Program Paper 6, May 1980.

Salop, S. C., "Monopolistic Competition With Outside Goods," Bell Journal of
     Economics 10 (1979), pp. 141—156.

Samuelson, P. A., "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure," Review of Econoniics
     and Statistics (1954), pp. 387—389.

Slutsky, S. M., "A Voting Model for the Allocation of Public Goods: Existence
     of an Equilibrium," Journal of Economic Theory (1977), pp. 299—325.

Spence, A. N., "Product Selection, Fixed Costs and Monopolistic Competition,"
     Review of Economic Studies 43 (1976), pp. 217—235.
Stiglitz, J. E., "Demand for Education in Public and Private School Systems,"
     Journal of Public Economics Vol. 3 (November 1974), pp. 349—386.

Stiglitz, J. E., "Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping," Review of
     Economic Studies Vol. 41 (April 1974), pp. 219—255.

Stiglitz, J. E., "Incentives, Risk, and Information: Notes Towards A Theory of
     Hierarchy," Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science Vol. 6, No. 2
     (Autumn 1975), pp. 552—579. (Presented at Berlin Symposium on Planning,
     August 1973.)

Stiglitz, J. E., "Information and Competition," Oxford Economic Papers
     (forthcoming

Stiglitz, J. E., "On the Optimality of the Stock Market Allocation of Invest-
     ment," Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 86, No. 1 (February 1972),
     pp. 25—60. (Abbreviated version of paper presented to the Far Eastern
     Meetings of the Econometric Society, June 1970, Tokyo, Japan.)

Stiglitz, 3. E., "Public Goods in Open Economies with Heterogeneous Individuals,"
     NBER Working Paper No. 694, Journal of Public Economics (forthcoming ).

Stiglitz, J. E., "The Theory of Local Public Goods," The Economics of Public
     Services, M. S. Feldstein and R. P. Inman (eds.), (London: Macmillan
     Press, 1977).

Stiglitz, J. E., "Utilitarianism and Horizontal Equity: The Case for Random
     Taxation," IMSSS Technical Report No. 214, Journal of Public Economics
     (forthcoming ).

Stiglitz, J. E., "Variety, Equity, and Efficiency and the Theory of Monopolistic
     Competition," Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming ).

Tiebout, C. M., "Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," Journal of Political Economy
     Vol. 64 (1956), pp. 416—424.

Vickrey, W., "The City as a Firm," in The Economics of Public Services, M. S.
     Feldstein and R. P. Inman (eds.), (London: Macmillan Press, 1977).
