NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VALUING PENSIONS (ANNuITIEs) WITH DIFFERENT TYPES
OF INFLATION PROTECTION IN TOTAL
COMPENSATION COMPARISONS

James E. Pesando

Working Paper No. 956

NATIONAL BIJREAtJ OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

August 1982

Professor of Economics, University of' Toronto and Research
Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am Indebted to
members of the Financial Markets and Monetary Economics Workshop at
the NBER for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.
The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #956
August 1982

Valuing Pensions (Annuities) with Different Types of
Inflation Protection in Total Compensation Comparisons

ABSTRACT

Pensions

provided in the public sector are often indexed, while

pensions in the private sector typically are not. To conduct the total
compensation comparisons that ostensibly guide government pay policy,
one must value annuities which differ in their degree of inflation pro-

tection. This paper conducts this exercise from the viewpoint of modern
finance theory, and contrasts the results with those of a representative

government, the Government of Canada. The results suggest that governments may typically understate the value of indexed pensions and overstate

the value of pensions which receive incomplete inflation protection. A
contributing factor is the apparent belief that standardizing actuarial
assumptions is sufficient to ensure comparability, in spite of the fact
that risk is ignored and that interest rate and inflation assumptions are

typically not those of the market.

Professor James E. Pesando
University of Toronto
Institute for Policy Analysis
150 St. George Street
M55 lAl
Toronto, Canada

1. INTRODUCTION
In both Canada and the United States, governments are ostensibly
guided in their pay policies by the principle that total compensation
in the public sector should be comparable to that in the private sector.

Typically, pensions provided in the public sector receive better inflation

protection. The pensions provided to federal government employees, for
example, are fully indexed to the price level, while full indexing is

quite rare in the private sector. If valid comparisons of total compensation are to be made, then fully indexed annuities as well as annuities
which receive incomplete inflation protection must be properly valued.
This problem is made difficult by the fact that fully indexed annuities
as well as those which receive incomplete inflation protection are not
sold in — and are thus not explicitly priced by —

the

capital market.

This paper uses the principles of modern finance theory to value

five annuities which differ in their degree of inflation protection. Each
corresponds in a stylized way to current practice in Canada, and most are

relevant to the United States as well (Table 1). They are:

(1) a fully indexed

annuity; (2) an indexed annuity subject to a cap, either fixed (the maxi-

mum adjustment is limited to x percent per year) or floating (the adjustment equals the inflation rate less

percent);

(3) an annuity which

receives cost—of—living adjustments based on pension fund earnings in
excess of an assumed interest rate;

(4) an annuity which is partially

indexed and receives adjustments equal to z percent of the inflation rate;
and (5) a nominal annuity. The paper contrasts the results suggested by
modern finance theory with those of a representative government, the

Government of Canada. The analysis suggests that governments may typically

2

understate the value of fully indexed annuities and

overstate

the value of

annuities which receive incomplete inflation protection. In part, this
is due to the mistaken belief that standardizing the assumptions used in

actuarial valuations is sufficient to ensure comparability. The fact that
actuarial valuations ignore risk and typically embody interest rate and
inflation assumptions which are not those of the market receives inadequate
attention.

The paper is organized as follows. In the first section, the choice
of a discount rate for fully indexed annuities is discussed. The analysis
focuses on the problem of estimating the expected real rate of return on

the minimum variance portfolio. The second section reviews the problem
of valuing capped annuities. The third analyzes the problem of valuing
annuities receiving cost—of—living protection equal to pension fund earnings

in excess of an assumed interest rate, or by "excess" earnings. The analysis
focuses on the conditions under which these can be reduced to standard
variable annuities (and thus readily valued), as well as the complications
posed by the possible exclusion of unrealized gains and losses from the

measure of fund earnings. The fourth section analyzes the problem of
valuing partially—indexed annuities which receive adjustments equal to a

designated fraction of the inflation rate. The fifth section briefly reviews
the problem of valuing nominal annuities, and draws attention to the account-

ing veil implicit in most actuarial valuations. The total compensation
comparisons conducted by the Federal government of Canada are then reviewed,

in order to contrast the procedures used by a representative government

with those implied by modern finance theory. A suary section concludes
the paper.

3

2. FULLY INDEXED ANNUITIES
The pensions provided to Federal government employees in both
Canada and the United States, and to employees of many other levels of
government as well, are fully indexed to the consumer price index. Since
fully indexed pensions are rare in the private sector,1 the proper valua-

tion of these annuities is essential if the total compensation of public
sector employees is to be properly compared to that of employees in the
private sector.

In a world of no inflation, a life insurance company could perfectly

hedge an n—period, nominal (and hence real) annuity by holding a

portfolio of insured, n—period mortgages. The expected return on such a
portfolio would be the competitive rate at which such annuities would be

sold. If indexed mortgages were available in a world of uncertain inflation,
an analogous result would obtain since a life company could perfectly hedge
an n—period, fully indexed annuity by holding a porfolio of n—period, indexed
mortgages.

In North America, (uncertain) inflation does exist and indexed

debt instruments are not available in the capital market. Prior studies
(Bodie (1976), Pesando and Rea (1977)) have shown that the real rate of
return on a diversified portfolio of common stocks is negatively correlated
with unanticipated inflation, as is the real rate of return on fixed—income

securities. To the extent that a life company is constrained by regulation
or by habit to hold a portfolio that consists of stocks and fixed—income
securities, the life company cannot create a portfolio which is devoid of

inflation risk. Thus the life company cannot perfectly hedge a fully indexed

4

annuity. To minimize its underwriting risk, the best the life company
can do is to hold that portfolio which has

minimum variance and thus the

most stable real return. The expected real return on this portfolio
would be the upper bound on the competitive interest rate at which a
fully indexed annuity would be sold, since shareholders of the life
company would have to be compensated for bearing the residual investment
risk.

Data on the (pretax) real returns to 91—day Treasury bills,
long—term Government of Canada bonds, and common stocks for the period

1953—1980 are presented in Table 2. The annual real return on Treasury
bills averaged 0.82 percent, with a standard deviation of 2.02 percent.
Common stocks are much riskier, with a mean real return of 7.97 percent

and a standard deviation of 17.02 percent. The mean real return on long—
term Canada bonds is actually negative, reflecting the impact of unanticipated (permanent) inflation, and has a standard deviation of 7.60 percent.

The real returns on bills, bonds and stocks are positively correlated,
and all are negatively correlated with the rate of inflation. In the
absence of short selling2, the minimum variance portfolio is a portfolio

comprised exclusively of Treasury bills. This is the portfolio that a
life company would hold if it wished to minimize its underwriting risk
in issuing an n—period, fully indexed annuity.
The expected real return on bills, or about one percent, is the
upper bound on the competitive interest rate at which an n—period, indexed

annuity would be sold in Canada. One percent is an upper bound because
shareholders of the life company would have to be compensated for bearing

5

the residual investment risk, since the real return on bills is not

constant. Note that this is the upper bound regardless of the portfolio
that the life company actually chooses to hold. If the life company
holds a portfolio of cotnon stocks to hedge the indexed annuity, the
higher expected real return is simply the compensation due shareholders

for assuming the additional investment risk. The fact that one percent
is an upper bound is also apparent if one considers the situation of an

individual who wished to provide his own retirement annuity. If he
wished to construct a variable annuity3 which provided the most stable stream
of real annuity payments, he would construct a variable annuity backed by

Treasury bills. The expected real return on this portfolio would be
about one percent, and the real stream of payments —

unlike

those of a

fully indexed annuity — would still be uncertain. If the individual were
sufficiently risk averse that he wished to purchase a fully indexed
annuity, he would have to compensate shareholders of the life company

for eliminating the residual investment risk. He would do so by accepting
a lower interest rate on the indexed annuity than the expected real
return on Treasury bills.

Bodie (1980) reviews similar empirical evidence for the United

States and reaches a similar conclusion. The minimum variance portfolio
is a portfolio consisting (almost)4 exclusively of Treasury bills, and

the expected real return on this portfolio is close to zero. He concludes
that the competitive interest rate at which a life company would sell a
fully indexed annuity in the United States would not exceed zero percent.

The interest rates at which n—period, indexed annuities would
be priced competitively In North American capital markets may appear rather

6

low to many

observers.

In part, this result nay be viewed as a direct

cost of increased price level uncertainty. A life company must hedge
an n—period, indexed annuity by holding a one—period rather than an

n—period debt instrument. Notwithstanding this portfolio response, the
residual investment risk borne by the life company is positive and thus

exceeds that borne by the life company in a world where inflation uncertainty

is absent. Consider, for example, what would happen if indexed debt
instruments were bought and sold in North American capital markets.

Modern finance theory indicates that an n—period, index bond would be
priced to yield a higher expected real return than a one—period, index
bond (or an indexed Treasury bill) if real interest rate risk is non—

diversifiable. If so, a life company could hedge an n—period, indexed
annuity by holding n—period, index bonds (or, more precisely, n—period
index mortgages) and thus earn a higher expected real return than if it

were constrained to hold only indexed Treasury bills. In the absence of
a market for indexed debt instruments, the life company is effectively
forced to hold only bills if it wishes to issue an n—period, indexed

annuity and simultaneously minimize its risk exposure. The opportunity
to bear real interest rate risk by perfectly hedging an n—period indexed
annuity with an n—period, index mortgage is at present denied life companies

in North America, although this opportunity would clearly exist in a

world in which price level uncertainty was absent or in which indexed
debt instruments did exist. Index bonds have recently been issued by
the Government in the United Kingdom. Significantly, their market —

determined yields do rise with their terms to maturity,5 thus providing
evidence that real interest rate risk is indeed non—diversifiable.

7

3. ANNUITIES WHOSE INFLATION PROTECTION IS "CAPPED"

There

are two ways that inflation protection may be capped. The

first, termed a fixed cap, limits the inflation adjustment to x percent
even if the change in the consumer price index exceeds that amount.

The

second, termed a floating cap, provides the annuitant with inflation pro-

tection equal to the change in the consumer price index less y percent.
The Province of Ontario, for example, limits the cost—of—living adjustments

to 8 percent even if the inflation rate exceeds that amount. Fixed caps
also exist in some private sector plans in Canada (Tomenson—Alexander
(1978)), and in both private and state retirement systems in the United

States (Myers (1978)). Anecdotal evidence suggests that at least some
firms in Canada follow a policy of allowing their retired workers to
absorb the impact of (say) the first 3 percent of any increase in the
consumer price index, and then make ad hoc adjustments to offset the

impact of inflation above this amount. In effect, they also provide
annuities subject to a floating cap.
If one assumes that firms whose ad hoc adjustments are based on
the floating cap make such adjustments with certainty, it is easy to value

the annuities so protected. If the floating cap is the inflation rate less

z percent,

then the real value of the annuity will decline with certainty

at y percent per year.6 These payments must be discounted at the risk—

free real rate of interest (if) to yield a net discount rate of if
plus y. At present, there is no asset in the North American capital markets which provides a risk—free real rate of return. The expected real

S

return on the minimum variance or bills portfolio does, however, place

an upper bound on i. Thus i is not likely to exceed one in Canada
and zero in the United States, so that an upper bound can readily be
placed on the net discount rate.
If the inflation rate (Ti) were known with certainty, then the

valuation of an annuity subject to a fixed cap would be straightforward.
If the certain inflation rate is less than the cap (i.e. iT C x) ,

then

the real value of the annuity is constant and the relevant discount rate
is simply

If ii > x, then the real value of the annuity declines

with certainty at a rate equal to Tr—x. When this stream of payments is
discounted at the risk—free real rate of interest, the end result is a

net discount rate equal to (rr—x) plus
If the inflation rate is uncertain, the valuation of an annuity

subject to a fixed cap is far more complicated. Let b0

be the real

value of the annuity payment at the beginning of the current period, let
be the real value of the annuity payment at the beginning of the next

period, and let l be the realization of the inflation process during the

period. If l C x, then b1 = b0.

In

*
If if1 > x, then b1 = b0

a+

<b0.

(1-Hr P

effect, the annuitant has claim to the certain real benefit

and has sold a call option on the rate of inflation with a striking price

equal to x. If C(if) is the relevant measure of risk for option pricing,
then:

b1 = b0

—

CALL(b0,

(1)

x, ci(if))

The value of the call option is an increasing function of

aØf),

and a

decreasing function of x. The important point of (1) is that the valuation

9

of the capped annuity cannot be reduced to the choice of a single and

(approximately) unchanging discount rate. To value (1), one must know
the risk—free real rate of interest (in order to take the present value

of the certain real component of b1) and one must explicitly value the
indicated call option at the beginning of each period. The value of this
option is likely to exhibit considerable variation over time in view of

the substantial serial correlation in the inflation rate. Less formally,
if today's inflation rate is high, then tomorrow's inflation rate Is also

likely to be high. This result is an important input into any attempt to
value the capped annuity, and provides an intuitive explanation as to why
it cannot be assigned a unique and thus unchanging value.

4.

ANNUITIES WHOSE INFLATION PROTECTION IS FROM "E. F.SS' FUND EARNINGS

The lack of formal provisions notwithstanding, most large
in

Canada grant cost—of—living adjustments to

adjustments are apparently financed —

at

retired

firms

plan members.

These

least in part — by pension fund

earnings In excess of the interest rate assumed in the plan's valuation.7
Indeed, future government initiatives are likely to formalize this use for

"excess" earnings (Ontario (1982)). Large firms

in the United States

grant cost—of—living adjustments as well, although these are

typically

less generous and there is less evidence that they are linked to pension

fund performance (Bankers Trust Company (1980)). Many observers, inc'uding
Munnell (1982), have recommended that excess earnings be used by private

plans

pension

The

in the United States to provide inflation protection.

valuation of an annuity whose inflation protection is delivered

through excess earnings is straightforward if the annuity can be shown to

be equivalent to a standard variable annuity. Assume that the plan sponsor
will lower the nominal value of the annuity payment if pension fund earnings

10

fall short of the assumed interest rate, so that there is no nominal floor

on the annuity payment. Assume also that the plan sponsor will apply all
fund earnings in excess of the assumed interest rate to escalate the

annuity payment, even if this means that the real value of the payment

increases. If so, one can proceed as if two separate transactions occur.
First, the plan member receives a lump sum payment at the date of his
retirement equal to the promised pension benefit capitalized at the

plan's assumed interest rate. This first step establishes the assumed
interest rate as the correct discount rate to value the promised stream

of pension payments. Secondly, the plan member uses the lump sum payment to purchase a standard variable annuity, and the assumed interest

rate is used to set the initial annuity payment. This initial annuity
payment is then equal to the promised pension benefit, and rises or falls
as the nominal return on the supporting assets exceeds or falls short of

the assumed interest rate.8 Note that the assumed interest rate is the
correct discount rate independent of the assets actually held in the
pension fund.

There are, however, two potential complications. The first occurs
if there is a floor and/or ceiling on the use of excess earnings. The
second occurs if a non—market measure of pension fund performance is
used

to define excess earnings.
Consider, for simplicity, only the case in which there exists a

nominal floor on the annuity

This possibility is motivated by

stylized fact that the ad hoc adjustments provided by most firms tend

the

to

payments.

be permanent. Once a nominal pension has been increased, it is never

reduced. If these enrichments are financed by excess earnings, the implication is that the plan sponsor absorbs the shortfall when pension fund

11

earnings are less than the assumed interest rate. In effect, the plan
sponsor guarantees that the pension fund will never earn less than the

assumed interest rate in the excess earnings scheme. This is explicitly the
case in the widely—cited Rockefeller Foundation Plan in the United States,

which grants permanent cost—of—living increases equal to the average
prime interest rate for the year less 3 percent (Heaton (1980)).

If the annuitant is provided with a variable annuity subject to a
nominal floor, the use of the assumed interest rate in the excess earnings

scheme to value the annuity will in general understate its value. In
effect, the pensioner receives a standard variable annuity plus a put
option on the nominal investment earnings of the pension fund with a

striking price equal to the assumed interest rate. If A0 is the lump
sum necessary to buy a standard variable annuity, RV is the plan's
assumed interest rate and a(R) the measure of the risk of the nominal
return that is relevant to option pricing, then the lump sum necessary

to buy this same annuity subject to a nominal floor is A such that:
=

A0

+

PUT(A0, RV, 0(R))

(2)

If the assumed interest rate increases, then the put option becomes more
valuable since the probability increases that pension fund earnings will

fall short of this guaranteed rate. A similar result obtains if the
risk of the assets in the pension fund increases. The latter implies,
unlike the case of a standard variable annuity, that the value of the

annuity depends upon the assets in the pension fund. Unless the value
of the put option is zero, the use of the assumed interest rate in the
excess earnings scheme to value the annuities so protected will understate

12

their value. If the annuity provides for a single payment at the end of
the first period, then the value of this option will be zero if the pension fund holds only the risk—free nominal asset (bills) and if the bill

rate exceeds the plan's assumed interest rate. In the more relevant
multiperiod setting, the put option will have zero value only if there is
no probability in some future period that the bill rate will fall beneath
the assumed rate.

If unrealized capital gains or losses are not included in the
measure of fund earnings, as is the explicit practice of the Teachers
Insurance and Annuity Association (TIAA) in the United States, then

intergenerational risk sharing is imposed on plan members. Suppose the
pension fund holds only long—term bonds. If long—term rates rise in
anticipation of future inflation, the resulting capital losses go

unrecorded. Excess earnings remain relatively stable, implying that the
real value of the annuity payments will decline in subsequent periods

when the inflation rate is higher. If it is known that unrecognized
capital losses exist on the date that an individual retires, then the
value of the annuity to him will be overstated, and conversely if unrecog-

nized capital gains are inherited. On average, however, the assumed
interest rate in the excess earnings scheme remains the correct dis-

count rate to be used in total compensation comparisons. So long as
participation is mandatory, so that retired plan members cannot game
againt the non—market measure of fund performance, the exclusion of
unrealized capital gains and losses does not complicate the valuation
problem.9

13

5. VALUING ANNUITIES WHICH ARE PARTIALLY INDEXED TO THE INFLATION RATE
Private surveys often focus on the average degree of cost—of—
living protection provided by ad hoc adjustments as a summary measure
to be used in total compensation comparisons (Tomenson—Alexander (1978)).
For simplicity, it is useful to consider the problem of valuing an

annuity which receives adjustments equal to z percent of the inflation

rate)° The special cases where z equals zero (i.e. the annuity is
purely nominal) and where z equals 100 (i.e. the annuity is real) are
ruled out by assumption.

If these adjustments are made with certainty, then the valuation

procedure is conceptually straightforward. First, one forecasts the
inflation rate (it*)

expected to prevail over the life of the annuity,

as well as specifying its risk characteristics. The real stream of
annuity payments is expected to decline at a rate equal to

(l_z)#iT*

percent per year. The appropriate interest rate to calculate the present value of this stream of payments is the expected real return on that
efficient portfolio which generates a real income stream with the same

risk characteristics. This expected real return, plus (l_z)TT*, is
then the net discount rate to be used to value the indicated annuity.
In practice, it is likely to prove difficult to obtain a precise

estimate of this net discount rate. In large part, this is due to the
necessity of specifying in advance the distribution of future rates of

inflation. In addition, the procedure as outlined invokes the strong

assumption that adjustments equal to z percent of the inflation rate
are made with certainty.

In view of the fact that firms have elected

not to incorporate this provision into their formal pension contracts,
but to proceed on an ad hoc basis, this assumption is clearly suspect.

14

6.

VALUING NOMINAL ANNUITIES WHICH RECEIVE NO INFLATION PROTECTION

At

present, life companies in Canada sell life annuities to

individuals aged 65 at an interest rate of 14 percent. This is obviously
the correct discount rate to value a purely nominal stream of promised

pension benefits. In spite of the fact that pension benefits may be
purely nominal (i.e. the sponsoring firm may have no intention of providing cost—of—living adjustments), annuities due under the terms of pension plans in Canada are typically valued at interest rates which do not

exceed 7 percent (Pesando (1981)). If workers are rational, they presumably see through this accounting veil and value their accruing pension
benefits at prevailing annuity rates in order to make the appropriate wage

concessions. As discussed in the next section of this paper, however,
it appears likely that government officials use interest rates closer
to those assumed by actuaries than those prevailing in the capital market
to value nominal pension benefits.

7.

INFLATION PROTECTION ACCORDED PENSIONS AS AN INPUT INTO TOTAL COMPENSATION COMPARISONS: THEORY VERSUS PRACTICE
It is instructive to contrast the valuations conducted by the

Government of Canada, which are probably typical, with those implied by

modern finance theory. To conduct total compensation comparisons, the
Government must value its fully indexed annuities relative to a composite
of those provided in the private sector.
By combining a nominal interest rate assumption of 6½ percent with
an inflation rate assumption of 3 percent, the Government effectively uses

a discount rate of (approximately) 3½

percent

to value the fully indexed

15

annuities due under the terms of its pension plan. As noted, the risk—free
real rate of interest in Canada is likely to be bounded above by one percent.
Abstracting from the possible political risk that indexing provisions might
be cut back or eliminated at some future date, the Government is clearly
understating the value of its fully indexed annuities.

To value annuities which receive no inflation protection, the Govern—
merit uses its assumed nominal interest rate of 6½ percent. This is far

beneath the 14 percent at which life companies in Canada now sell life
annuities to those aged 65.

To value annuities which receive inflation protection through excess
earnings, the Government uses the interest rate used to define excess earn-

ings. In the absence of floors or ceilings in the excess earnings scheme,
this is the correct procedure.

To value annuities which are partially indexed, the Government first

postulates that adjustments in the private sector typically equal 50 percent of the inflation rate, and proceeds as if each firm made such adjust-

ments with certainty. The Government then uses its assumed inflation rate
of 3 percent to imply that inflation adjustments will equal 1½ percent per

year. This annual rate of escalation of the annuity payments is then subtracted from the assumed nominal interest rate of 6½ percent to yield a

net discount rate of 5 percent. At present, the nominal yield on long—
term Canada bonds exceeds 15 percent, suggesting an implicit inflation

forecast of at least 10 percent. This implies that the expected rate of
decline in the real value of the partially indexed annuity is at least

5 percent per year. Because the real value of these payments is uncertain,
they must be discounted at a rate in excess of the risk—free rate. If

16

a real interest rate of (say) 3 percent is appropriate, this would imply
a net discount rate of 8 percent, which considerably exceeds the 5 percent
used by the Government.
Because the most visible plans in Canada which contain capped index-

ing provisions are in the public sector, the Federal government does not

appear to explicitly value them. The Province of Ontario, in what may be
a representative response, uses an assumed inflation rate which is less
than its 8 percent fixed cap to project its nominal annuity payments, and

then discounts them by an assumed nominal interest rate. In the 1976 valuation (Ontario (1978)), the Province uses a nominal interest rate of 7.25

percent in conjunction with an inflation assumption of 5½ percent. By
implicitly treating these assumptions as certain, the Province implies

that its real annuity payments will be constant. If true, this would
require that they be discounted at the risk—free real rate of interest,

which is less than the real rate of (approximately) lz percent implied

by the inflation and nominal interest rate assumptions. Because
the inflation rate is uncertain, and thus the call option in (1)

has a positive value, it is not possible without more formal enquiry to
establish whether or not the capped annuities are indeed being undervalued.2
To sum up, the Government of Canada employs procedures which under—
state the value of indexed annuities and typically overstate the value of

annuities which receive incomplete inflation protection. In part, this is
due to excessive reliance on standard actuarial valuations, which ignore
risk and typically use non—market interest rate and inflation assumptions.

The fact that the same actuarial assumptions are used to value public and
private sector plans, although touted by practitioners (Martel et. al.

17

(1980), Carow (1981)), is largely irrelevant. Whatever their merits,
standard actuarial valuations do not provide a satisfactory basis for
calculating the value to employees of annuities which differ sharply in
their degree of inflation protection.

Uncritical dependence on standard actuarial valuations is certainly

not unique to the Government of Canada. The Civil Service Retirement System
in the United States was valued in 1979 with an interest rate assumption

of 7 percent and an inflation rate assumption of 6 percent. These assumptions, which the Office of Personnel Management (1981) then used in its
total compensation comparisons, suggest that fully indexed annuities are
valued at a real interest rate of one percent.13 Although Bodie (1980)

argues that a real interest rate of zero may be more appropriate, this

discrepancy is clearly less important than its Canadian counterpart. Of
perhaps more consequence is the apparent use by the Office of Personnel

Management of the nominal interest rate assumption of 7 percent — based
on the assumed inflation rate of 6 percent —

to

value the nominal annuities

provided by most private sector plans. This 7 percent is considerably less
than the then prevailing 9 to 10 percent yield on long—term U.S. Government bonds, and suggests that the value of these nominal annuities was

overstated. As in Canada, there is no evidence that the issue of inflation uncertainty and its ramifications was addressed.

Finally, because pension costs as a percent of payroll are signi—
ficant,14the potential scope for errors in these total compensation compari-

Sons Is large. The Government of Canada uses a real rate of 3½ percent to
value its fully indexed annuities, so that the present value of each dollar
of a 15—year annuity is calculated to be $11.52 .

At an interest rate of

18

one percent, an upper bound on the risk—free real rate, this annuity would

cost $13.86 or 20.3 percent more. The present value of this annuity, when
treated as nominal and valued at the assumed interest rate of 6½ percent,

is $9.40.

At a market interest rate of 14 percent, this annuity would

sell for $6.14 or 53.1 percent less. Thus the Government understates the
value of the indexed annuity that it provides by 20 percent) while overstating the value of the nominal annuity provided in the private sector
by 53 percent.

8. CONCLUSIONS
The procedures suggested by modern finance theory for valuing annuities

which differ in their degree of inflation protection are summarized in

Table 1. These are not the procedures used by the Federal government in
Canada, which are probably representative of those used by governments in

general. In Canada as well as in the United States, inflation protection
is typically far better in public than in private sector pension plans.
The analysis in this paper suggests that governments may typically under-

value pensions provided in the public sector, while overvaluing those

provided in the private sector. The net result is that total compensation
comparisons are seriously flawed. To the extent that these comparisons
guide pay policy in the public sector, and to the extent that total com-

pensation paid in the public sector is not disciplined by competitive
forces,15 total compensation in the public sector may be too high on
this account.

19

FOOTNOTES

1.

In Canada in 1980, 98.3 percent of pension plans in the private
sector (covering 95.1 percent of plan members) had no formal provisions to provide cost—of—living adjustments (Statistics Canada

(1982)). Myers (1978) reports that automatic—adjustment provisions
are also rare among private sector plans in the United States.
The discussion in the text presumes, as appears to be the case, that
nominal annuity payments will be reduced if the inflation rate is

negative. If this is not the case, then the procedures discussed in
the text will understate the value of "indexed" annuities so long
as there is a non—zero probability of deflation in some subsequent
period.

2. If short selling is permitted, the minimum variance portfolio is long
on bills (108 percent), and short on both bonds (minus 7 percent) and

stocks (minus one percent). The mean bond return reported in Table 2
cannot be viewed as an equilibrium return, and a corresponding caveat

is in order. In a portfolio consisting only of bills and stocks,
minimum variance is obtained with a long position in bills (101 percent) and a short position in stocks (minus one percent).

3. Let A0 be his initial capital. Let RV be the assumed interest
rate. Then the base payment B0 of the N—period variable annuity is:
B0 =

RV[l

—

(l+RV)N]l

*

A0

If Rt is the realized nominal return in period t

(Fl)

on the under—

lying portfolio, then the nominal benefit B paid in period t

20

(tl to N) is:

=

(l+R)
(l+RV)

*

Eti

(F2)

4. Bodie (1980) argues that the minimum variance portfolio in the
United States, although comprised mostly of Treasury bills, would

include a small (long) position in a diversified set of commodity
futures.

5. As of 31 March 1982, the 2's of '96 were priced at par to yield
2 percent; the 2's of '06 were priced at 96 to yield 2.32 percent;
and the 2½'s of '11 were priced at 98 to yield 2.58 percent.

6. For convenience, continuous time results are cited here and elsewhere
in the text, unless explicitly noted to the contrary.

7. The pension plans provided by most large firms in Canada and the
United States are defined benefit plans. These are plans in which the
employee receives a benefit equal to a given fraction of his average
or of his final earnings for each year of service, or a fixed dollar

amount for each year of service. If the pension fund earns more than
the interest rate used to value the plan, which range from 4 to 7 percent
in Canada, the plan experiences an actuarial surplus.

8. Let B0 now represent the base pension payment defined by the terms
of the plan. Using the notation of footnote 3, it is as if the retiring

plan member receives the lump sum payment A0:

A0 = B0

RV[l —

(l+Rv)]1

(F3)

He then uses A0 to purchase a standard variable annuity, in which

21

RV is the assumed interest rate. His base pension payment is thus
as required by the plan, and the actual payments are those

indicated by (P2). Note that under excess earnings, the defined
benefit plan is effectively transformed into a defined contribution

plan at the date of the plan member's retirement. This appears to
be an additional innovation in response to the apparent increase in
price level uncertainty, as discussed by Pesando (1982).

9. Since investment opportunities have not changed, this intergenerational
risk sharing does not improve the overall efficiency of risk bearing

in the economy. A potential disadvantage is that retired workers may
fail to realize the implication of (say) a rise in long—term interest

rates which produces capital losses on the bond portfolio. These losses,
although unrealized, require an immediate reduction in real consumption
if expected real consumption is to be stabilized over the remaining
lifetimes of the annuitants (Rea (1981)).

10. In their study of inflation protection in the U.K., Brealey and Hodges
(1980) address the problem of valuing fully indexed annuities provided
to government employees against private sector pensions which are pre-

sumed to receive cost—of—living adjustments equal to 62 percent of the
inflation rate.

11. After the first draft of this paper was complete, the Government of
Canada announced as part of its austerity measures in its (June)
1982 budget that the cost—of—living adjustments to the indexed pensions of civil servants would be limited to 6 percent and 5 percent,

respectively, in 1982 and 1983. Subsequent discussion in the text

22

continues to abstract from political risk, although this caveat is

clearly important. There is no apparent way to quantify political risk,
other than to note that it would cause the risk—free real rate to
overstate the value of the ostensibly indexed annuities.

It should be

noted that the possibility of capping, either temporarily or permanently,
the inflation adjustments due retired Federal government employees has
also been raised in the United States.

12. The procedure used by either level of government to value annuities
subject to a floating cap is not known. Parallel treatment, however,
would be to escalate the projected annuity payments by the assumed

inflation rate less x

percent,

and then discount this stream of pay-

ments by the assumed nominal interest rate.

13. Nunnell(l982) discusses a proposal which would permit individuals,
at the time of their retirement, to purchase a limited quantity of

index bonds from the U.S. Guvernment. These bonds would provide a
guaranteed real return of one percent. This guaranteed rate, which
implies that the bonds would be the equivalent of index Treasury
bills, is clearly an above market rate based on the analysis of Bodie

(1980). Although real Treasury bill yields in both Canada and the
United States are currently well above their historical means of one
and zero percent, there is as yet no persuasive case for arguing that
the expected real return on bills has permanently increased.

14. The Government of Canada estimates that its share of pension costs
for current service is 9.5 percent of salary, compared to 4.5 to 5.5
percent of salary for private sector firms (Nartel et. al. (1980)).

23

As reported by Cajda (1981), employer contribution rates (which
appear to blend current and past service costs) for municipal employees

in the United States may exceed 70 percent of payroll! Note also that
these contribution rates are as conventionally measured and do not
take into account the limitations analyzed in the text.

15. Carow (1981) acknowledges the possibility that there may be longer
queues of workers for federal government jobs in the United States
than for nonfederal jobs, and lower quit rates for civil service

employees. The fact that governments in both Canada and the United
States appear to underprice their fully indexed annuities suggests
that it is not possible to infer that these workers are sufficiently risk

averse to demand fully indexed pensions. This issue is discussed by
Feldstein (1981) and Pesando (1981).

24

REFERENCE S

Bankers Trust Company, Corporate Pension Plan Study:

A Guide for the 1980's

(New York: Bankers Trust Company, 1980).
Bodie, Z., "Common Stocks as a Hedge Against Inflation". Journal of

Finance 31: No. 2 (May

1976):

459—70.

"An Innovation for Stable Real Retirement Income". Journal of

Portfolio Management 7: No. 1 (Fall 1980): 5—13.
"Investment Strategy in an Inflationary Environment". NBER

orking Paper No. 731, June 1981.
Brealey, R.A. and S.D. Hodges, "The Cost of Superannuation Benefits in

the Civil Service and Comparable Private Employment". Paper prepared
for the Scott Committee, 1980.

Carow, R., "Total Compensation Comparability in the Evaluation of Federal
Compensation Policy" in P. Mieszkowski and G.E. Peterson (eds.),

Public Sector Labour Markets (Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute
Press, 1981).

Feldstein, M., "Should Private Pensions Be Indexed?". NBER Working Paper
No. 787, October 1981.
Gajda, A.J., "Municipal Employee Compensation Levels" in P. Mieszkowski and

G.E. Peterson (eds.), Public Sector Labour Markets (Washington, D.C.:
The Urban Institute Press, 1981).
Heaton, H. ,

"Indexing

Pension Payments to Inflation Without Material

Increases in Expected Plan Costs: The Rockefeller Foundation Plan".
Statement to the President's Commission on Pension Policy, Washington,
D.C., January 11, 1980.

25

Martel, Pierre et al., "Pension Plan Measurement and Total Compensation".
Mimeograph, Personnel Policy Branch of the Treasury Board (Canada),
March 1980.
Munnell, A. , The Economics of Private Pensions (Washington: the Brookings

Institution, 1982).

Myers, R.J., Indexation of Pension and Other Benefits (Homewood: Richard
D. Irwin, Inc. for the Pension Research Council, 1978).

Office of Personnel Management, "Total Compensation Comparability: Background, Method, Preliminary Results". Mimeograph, Office of Personnel
Management, July 1981.

Ontario, Actuarial Report: Public Service Superannuation Fund 1976 (Toronto:
Government of Ontario, 1978).

Ontario Select Committee on Pensions: Final Report (Toronto: Government
of Ontario, 1982).

Pesando, J.E., "Employee Valuation of Pension Claims and the Impact of

Indexing Initiatives". NBER Working Paper No. 767, September 1981.
"On Investment Risk, Bankruptcy Risk and Pension Reform in

Canada". Journal of Finance 37: No. 3 (June 1982):
and S.A. Rea, Jr., Public and Private Pensions in Canada:

An Economic Analysis (Toronto: University of Toronto Press for the
Ontario Economic Council, 1977).

Rea, S.A., Jr., "Consumption Stabilizing Annuities with Uncertain Inflation".

Journal of Risk and Insurance XLVII: No. 4 (December 1981): 596—609.
Statistics Canada, Pension Plans in Canada 1980 (Ottawa: Government of
Canada, 1982).

Tomenson—Alexander Associates, On Certain Aspects of the Public Service

Employee Pension Program (Ottawa: Treasury Board, 1978).

type

of Annuity

indexed Annuity

Ii "Capped" Annuity
rixed Cap

Floating Cap

Annuity)

=

=

-

flt

>

X

x

0 <

zc

if

— 1 if

— 1

+t)/(l+RV)

(1+Rt)/(14RV)

0

z

1.9

=f(l

5

1

Table 1

Rt<RV

some

—

y

Cali(b0,

Method of Valuation
(Modern Finance Theory)

if

i1

+

+

RV

RV

Put (A0,
"Stylized"prnctice, private sector
in Canada and the U.S.

*

+ (l—z)Il

rf

i

Private sector, Canada and the U.S.

"Stylized" practice, private sector
in Cannda and the U.S.

Foundation in U.S.

"Stylized" pmctice, private
sector in Canada; Rockefeller

"Stylized" practice, private
sector in Canada

governments, both Canada
and the U.S.

Private sector,

Federal Governments,
Canada and the U.S.;
name other governments

Where Found

PENSIONS (ANNUITIES) WITH D]FFEI4LNT TYPES OF INFLATION PROTECTION

t

y

x if

_

P

Inflation Protection

At

A

At

At

At

At

III Annuity Subject to "Excess" Earnings Escalation
No Floor

(Variable
Nominal Floor

Partially indexed

Annuity

IV
Nominal Annuity

cost—of

t

living adjustment in period t

V

where At =

inflation rate in period

nominal return

x = amount (expressed as a percentage) of the fixed cap
y = amount (expressed as a percentage) of the floating cap
e
on
the pension fund in period t
rate used to value the pennion plan

R

RV = assumed interest

=

rate of interest

of inflation

risk—free nominal

expected rate

expected

z = fraction of the inflation rate that is offset by the partially indexed annuity
= risk—free real rate of interest
b0 = real value of base annuity payment
A = capital sum necessary to purchase variable annuity with same base payn"nt and assumed interest rate
as partially index'd annuity
real return on efficient portfolio iith name risk characteristics

0

i

0' =
=
rf

0(R))

x, 0(U))

By,

Table 2
Real Rates of Return in Canada 1953—1980, Bills, Bonds and Stocks

91—day
Treasury Bills

Year

Long—term
Canada Bonds

Common
Stocks

3.61

2.72
38.46
27.32
8.90
—22.37
28.16
3.04
0.33
32.41
—8.70
13.50
22.96

1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

1.71
0.83
1.32
0.17
1.58
—0.26
3.39
1.83
2.68
2.42
1.70
1.79
1.05
1.39
0.48
2.09
2.50
4.46
—1.41
—1.46
—3.34
—4.13
—1.91
2.88
—1.98
0.23
1.76
1.42

9.20
—0.61
—6.45
4.08
—8.17
—5.84
5.56
9.48
1.42
2.66
4.48
—1.87
—1.92
—5.99
—4.37
—6.47
19.67
5.98
—3.76
—6.78
—12.48
—6.09
11.99
—3.32
—6.56
—11.14
—8.22

Mean

0.82

Standard
Deviation
Correlation
Coefficients

1953.
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Bills
Canada's
Stocks
Inflation

Notes:

Inflation
(C.P.I.)

0.0
0.60
0.30
3.10
2.15
2.52
1.37

1.35
0.13
1.59

—10.28
13.32
17.53
—5.29
—5.01
2.84
21.14
—8.70
—34.76
9.31
4.82
0.43
19.25
31.64
16.83

1.83
1.93
2.90
3.55
4.14
4.09
4.58
1.46
5.04
5.09
9.12
12.46
9.48
5.82
9.50
8.43
9.76
11.21

—0.78

7.97

4.41

2.02

7.60

17.02

3.67

(1)

(2)

3.57

(3)

.526

.216

—

.048

(4)

—.623
.599

—.226
—

Data are drawn from C.G. Canton, D.D. Ezra and K.P. Sharp,
"Canadian Investment Returns and Other Economic Statistics,
1926—1980", where details regarding the calculation of the
individual series may be found. The annual return on Treasury
Bills is obtained by the successive purchase of 91—day Treasury
Bills at the end of each quarter.

