                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           OPTIMAL CURRENCY DIVERSIFICATION FOR A CLASS
              OF RISK AVERSE INTERNATIONAL INVESTORS



                      Jorge Braga de Macedo




                      Working Paper No. 959




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          August 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #959
                                                     August 1982



                         OPTIMAL CURRENCY DIVERSIFICATION
                            FOR A CLASS OF RISK AVERSE
                              INTERNATIONAL INVESTORS


                                     ABSTRACT


     In the framework of continuous—time finance theory, this paper derives the

optimal consumption and portfolio rules for an international investor with constant

expenditure shares c, and constant relative risk aversion l—y in a dynamic context.

The index of value obtained from the consumition rule is used to obtain real

returns on N different currencies in terms of their purchasing power over N goods.

The portfolio rule is expressed in terms of the determinants of the purchasing

powers, namely exchange rates and prices expressed in the numeraire currency. The

optimal portfolio is interpreted as a capital position given by the expenditure

shares and hedging zero net—worth ortolios depending on unnticioated inflation

and risk aversion. It is shown that the minimum variance portfolio is independent

of returns, but depends on expenditure patterns.while the speculative portfolio

depends on risk aversion and real return differentials. When the effect of

preferences on real return differentials is made explicit, it is shown that the mini-

mum variance portfolio is affected by risk aversion. In that case, the effect of

an increase in    on the portfolio proportions x will be positive when relative

risk aversion is greater than one, as generally presumed.

     Actual data from eight major countries is used to compute optimal 'ortfolios

based on real return differentials for different weighting schemes, degrees of

risk aversion and sample periods,when exchange rates and prices are assumed to be

Brownian.

                                                  Jorge Braga de Macedo
                                                  Woodrow Wilson School
                                                  Princeton TJniversity
                                                  Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                  (609) 452—6474
                   OPTIMAL CuRRENCY DIVERSIFICATION
                      FOR A CLASS OF RISK-AVERSE
                        INTERNATIONAL INVESTORS


                          Jorge Braga de Macedo*
                      Princeton University and NBER


     The theory of finance from the perspective of continuous time, due

mostly to Robert Merton, was first applied to international finance under

the assumption that only the domestic good was consumed or, alternatively,

that purchasing power parity obtained, so that again there was only one

good.1 Extending earlier work by Pentti Kouri,2 these assumptions were

relaxed in Kouri and Macedo (1978), where a time—invariant portfolio rule

was derived for an "international investor" consuming in fixed proportions

N composite goods produced in N different countries and holding a port-

folio of the respective N currencies. This paper retains the convenient

assumption of constant expenditure shares and relative risk aversion, also

treats national outputs as composite goods and ignores nominal interest on

currency holdings,3 but derives the consumption and portfolio rules in a

dynamic context (Section I). In Section II, the properties of the dynamic

optimal currency portfolio are indicated and contrasted with the special

cases of perfectly anticipated inflation and purchasing power parity. The
                                                           shares is also
effect of an increase in consumption shares on portfolio

analyzed. Section III presents and interprets portfolios computed under

the assumption of stationarity of the covariance between prices and exchange

rates in eight major countries during the floating rate period.4
                                                         —2—



 I     Consumption and portfolio rules derived

        Consider an individual consuming in fixed proportions                  .   goods
 produced in N countries and holding a variable portfolio of the N respective

 currencies. This international investor takes as given the domestic currency

 prices of the N goods as well as the N—l bilateral exchange rates.
                                                                                           Defining
 currency N as the numeraire,5 we will assume that exchange rates against the

numeraire as well as prices in terms of the numeraire are generated by

continuous stochastic processes of the Ito type:


                  =
                       *.(S1,    P.) dt + a.(S1, P.) dz., i=l,... ,N—l;

 (1)

                  =   p.(S.,     P.) dt + .(S., P.) du., j1,...,N;


            where S. is the price of currency i in terms of the numeraire

                      (so that SN =            1),   P. is the price of the good produced

                   in country j expressed in terms                of   the numeraire,

                               is the instantaneous conditional expected

                  mean proportional change per unit of time of

                                     is the instantaneous conditional variance per

                  unit of time of S(P).

            and   dz1 and duj are Wiener processes.

       By assumption, the individual's instantaneous indirect utility function

V is separable and can be written as the purchasing power of nominal expend-

iture over the N goods:
                                N         °"
(2)               V = E I
                       N
                                ii   P.
                               j=l
                           N
           where EN =      E
                           P X4 is nominal expenditure expressed in the
                            i
                       j=l
                  numeraire, X being the amount of good j consumed and

                  a. being its share in EN.
                                                                —3—



      Similarly, the individual's real wealth W is defined as the purchasing

power of the holdings of the N currencies:
                                   N
(3)                  W= EN.Q.
                               j=l

           where N. are holdings of currency j
                                       N
           and       Q.    =           II (PS.) £ is the purchasing power of currency j over
                                             3
                     the N goods.

      Each instant, the level of real consumption and currency holdings are

chosen simultaneously, so that the rate of real consumption is equal to

income from reshuffling the portfolio:
                        N        N
(4)              —Vdt = EdN.Q. + EdN.dQ..
                                       j
                                                33       j 33
      On the other hand, from (3), using Ito's Lemma, the rate of change

of wealth is:
                                   N                 N        N
                     dW =          N.dQ.+
                                                                j 33
(5)                                                  ZdN.Q. + ZdN.dQ..
                                   jJ  3                 33


      Substituting       from (4), the change in wealth is equal to the difference

between capital gains and consumption. The real return on the holdings of

currency i(r.) is given by the proportional change in its purchasing power.

It is convenient to measure currency holdings as a proportion of wealth,

so that we can use the constraint                              the N proportions x. sum to one to

eliminate the share of the numeraire (x) and express real returns relative

to the numeraire (r,               r. —                  Then, recalling the notation of (1) and
                                                rn).
defining covariances as e.. =                                  (where p.. is the instantaneous
                                           ii        1J 13                  13

correlation coefficient between dz. and du.) and S. = cS. p. ,
                                  1                                   J          J JJ            the rate of
change of wealth becomes:

                         N-i                                          N-i               N
(6)       dW/W       (    ' x.r.           + rN — V/W)dt —                x.a.dz.   —
                                                                                        a.&du.

                 N .Q.
  where   x. =                 ;       i = 1              ,   N -   1
                                                    —4—




                                              N
                     r.=—.+a.2+aj8..
                      1   1  1     1J
                                              J

                             N           N                    NN
             and     r = —a.p. +                        +
                      N      .jj 2.jj


       Ignoring bequests and the discounting of future utility, the individual

seeks to maximize expected utility from time 0 to time T6.                            Instantaneous utility

has a constant relative risk aversion 1 — y and is a Cobb—Douglas function of the

instantaneous rate of consumption of the N goods:
                                              cy
(8)                U = E    IT1N
                              —n     x. (t)        dt   = F       I
                                                                      T
                                                                          (t)dt
                           00 Yj J                            °       °

       where F denotes expectation conditional upon the information available at time 0

                 1
                   N
       and    u = — ft X. cqy
                     yj I
       To solve the maximization of (8) subject to (6), the individual chooses

and x. and the state of the system is described by ., P. and W. Define:
                                                                                  I
                   J(w, Si P.) = max     E    1T            d
       Since U is strictly concave in X., by Bellman's theorem there exist optimal

controls, X' and x, such that F* = 0, F being defined as

(10)               F(x.,         w, S., P.) =       +(J)
         wheredenotes the Dynkin operator.

       Denoting as subscripts the semi—elasticities of the Bellman function J

with respect to its arguments7, and substituting from (6) and (7) into the

differential of J, we get its average expected change per unit of time as:
                                                                    —5—




                                  N-i                                        N-i                   N
(ii)                (J) =    J(     2       x.r.   +   rN —   V/W)+                            ÷



               N-i N-i                  N N                             N-i N                           N-i N-i
+ J(                     x.x.o.. +             c.a.6..      +   2                    x.ct.O..) +
                1   J                   1]                               1       J
                                                                                           -
                                                                                                         1    J       1]


  _ij J
       N   N
                    6..
                            N-i N

                         lJ+:ij s1P
                                        j          e.. —
                                                    i
                                                            N-i

                                                              1s1w
                                                                    J        (
                                                                                 N-i           N

                                                                                               jjlJ-
                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                  J
                                                                                                                       N   N-i
                                                                                                                              .  11]




               Having substituted (11) into (10), the first order conditions are
   obtained by differentiating F with respect to the control variables and

   equating to zero. Take good j:

   (12)                      ----       = y.3      u/x. —     J P.ONIw = 0
                                                        i      Wj
               Add up the N conditions to eliminate y and write the demand function as:

   (13)                      X =
                                        c.EN/Pj
               Substituting (13) back into the utility function to                                     get the separable
   instantaneous indirect utility function in (2), adjusted                                            for risk, we see
   that the purchasing power of the numeraire, adjusted for the marginal utility

   of real income, measures the utility of an extra unit of currency N:

   (14)                      !LVh/Y] =             v          QN
                               aEN

               Take now asset m:

                                                            N-i                      N                 N-i
                                                                                                   —
       (15)                              Jr +                   XOj +

                               N
                             —U               8 O
                               j PW jin
                                                                  —6—


         To obtain the portfolio rule, we write the N—l conditions in

     (15) in matrix form and solve for x, the N—l column vector of portfolio

 proportions. First define adjusted I?semielasticites! of the Bellman

 function with respect to exchange rates and prices:


                              s .
                          —    1                           I =
                   Js.1                                          1,   ..., N—i
                                    1

                              P.2J                2
                                                      JW
                               _______
                   Pj aP.W / 2 j                                 1, •.., N


The column vector of semi—elasticities is denoted by dropping i subscripts

for        and j subscripts for Jr,. and the same applies to the vectors of

a. and
           m
               .   Also,       relative risk aversion is defined as:
 j



                          —T
                              Jww
                                              = 1—y.
                                    w
Finally, the N—i by N matrix of covariances between exchange rates and

numeraire prices,                            (which we denote by 0), can be decomposed into a

matrix of covariances between exchange rates and domestic prices, denoted

by 'F, and an augmented variance covariance matrix of exchange rate changes,

o.., denoted by S:
 1J
                              0 =            — S.
(16)                                    'F


                   where S = [S                       0], S being tbe variance covariance matrix of

                              exchange rate changes and 0 a N—i column vector of zeros.

        Using this notation, the portfolio rule can be expressed as:

(17)                          x =        (I    — S1'V) (a —Jr) +
                                                                           --- (Sr — J5),
                   where I =                 [I        Q], I being the N—i identity matrix.


II Properties of the optimal currency portfolio

         The portfolio rule for the N—i assets in (17) can be related to some

special cases analyzed in the literature and used to find out the effect
                                                   —7—



of changes in         on x.
        Suppose first that purchasing power parity holds continuously and

therefore that relative numeraire prices cannot change. The covariance

matrix between numeraire prices and exchange rates reduces to a vector of

covariances between the domestic good of country N and the N—i exchange

rates. In other words, the 'I' matrix defined in (16) decomposes into:

(18)                       =     —




              where   'i'N =
                                     lNlN        aN_1óNPN_lNj

              and     e is a N column vector of ones.

        Taking (18) into account, and the fact that                 1 is invariant   to   a

change    in all prices, we see that the vector of expenditure shares and
the j     terms drop out:
                      x = S1'Y + —---            [S1r    —   JS ]
(19)                  -       N  l—y
        Since there are no relative price changes, the N goods can be aggregated

into a single good when purchasing power parity holds. If, in addition,

inflation in the Nth country is known (so that 5N =                   o and      =   O),the
portfolio only depends on real return differentials, as in the case analyzed

by   Kouri (1977) in       the framework of a model with a richer menu of assets.8

As shown in Section III, however, using actual data to compute optimal port-

folios suggests not only that inflation is not known with certainty but also

that preferences do matter.

        Indeed,   preferences        also enter real return differentials. Writing

the first equation in (7) in vector form, we have:

(20)                       =   —ir   + Se + Oa

              where   71   = N1                  7rNl]
              and     S                is a diagonal matrix of exchange rate variances
              and          is a N—l column vector of ones.
        Then substitute (20) into (17) and use (16) to obtain:
                                                          —8—



(21)          x =   - L_ (I - Sw) (c J)                    +---
                                                                  (S1Se - S1r   -




           Thus, even when inflation is perfectly anticipated andFis a zero
matrix, the effect of an increase in                        will only be a one to one increase

in x. if risk aversion is infinite, so that, from (17) we have x.
       1                                                        1 =
                                                                                       . 1for
all    1. Otherwise, the effect will be given by

(22)                      xi      —
                          c1            l—y

           In particular, if risk aversion is unity (y =               0) portfolio shares are
insensitive to expenditure shares; if risk aversion is one half, an increase

in o. leads to a one—to—one decline in x1. For the effect in (22) to be

positive we have, therefore, to accept the conon presumption that y < 0.

so that risk aversion is great'er than one.9

           We now derive the portfolio rule for the N assets, recalling that, by

definition,

(23)                      XN• 1—
                    where e is a N—l column vector of ones.

           Using (17) and (23),we define as the vector of minimum variance portfolio

proportions for the N assets, m, the capital position adjusted for the

effects of inflation on utility:

                          m
(24)                          =       (I — ) (     — J)
                where I is the N identity matrix

                                  r —'
                                  I
                                       -e   S'
                                            , —1
                                                        —9—




       The minimum variance portfolio proportions sum to unity. Given that

the cx's are the capital position, inflation is hedged against by zero net

worth portfolios and, in particular we have:

                   e' =              0'

           where 0 is a N column vector of zeros.



       In turn we define a zero net—worth portfolio based on real return

differentials, adjusted for the effects of exchange rates on utility. The vector

of speculative portfolio proportions for the N assets, xS, is constructed by

imposing the requirement that the augmented matrix of own and cross effects

is symmetric. It can be written as:
                       s            1           -
(25)               x

                                r    —1
                                                    —Se
            where Z1S



                   r                                 TN]!
                                [r1

                            =                               —
            and
                                "SI                  N—i

        Since the speculative portfolio proportions sum to zero, we have by

 the symmetry of           that:


                   e'E =            0',     Et = 0 and e'J5 =   0.

       The total portfolio is then given by adding m and

(26)               x =          (I      —   ) (c — J)      +    (r —   J)

       The optimal currency portfolio in (26) can equivalently be interpreted

as showing the difference between expenditure shares and portfolio shares.

Where inflation rates are known                  with   certainty (6 = 0 and the   matrix
                                             —10—

vanishes) and when risk aversion is very large (y                  - r) the   two shares are

equal. Larger variance of inflation and lower risk aversion are the two

factors contributing to the zero net—worth hedging portfolios. Thus o

hedges against the covarianpe of inflation and exchange rate changes, and

is independent of real returns and risk aversion while r incorporates real

return differentials and is scaled by risk aversion. The other determinants

of optimal currency diversification,                      and J, are dynamic adjustments to

the direct effects of price and exchange rate changes on utility. Using

the presentation in (21) , on the other hand, we could define a modified

speculative portfolio based on nominal return differentials, i.,                   for   the

unit risk aversion case (        y         0) and call it the Dernouilli portfolio,

                       B
(25')




                      1=


        and                      (TI       0)

        Note that exB = 1 because e'I = 1.    Using (25'), the portfolio
                                                          P
rule    for the N assets is a weighted average of x anc'. x, with weights

depending on risk aversion, just like in (21):


(26')                 x=
                           l—y
                                   m
                                       +        lx  B



        Rather than analysing the time—variant portfolio rules in (26) and (26')

by an explicit solution of the Bellman function, we will now focus on the

popular Brownian motion case.


III Optimal currency diversification in the Brownian motion case

        If    prices and exchange rates are stationary and lognormaily distri-

buted, so that ,r, lAy       and           and .     in   (1) above are given constants, wealth
                                         —11—

  becomes the only state variable in (9), all of the elements of J and
                                                                            J are
  zero and the rule in (26) can be written as:

  (27)                x =   (I   —   +
                                      l—y
                                            Er.

         As an illustration of the usefulness of a rule like (27), consider an

  international investor who holds a
                                         portfolio of Canadian, French, German,

  Italian, Japanese, Swiss, British and American currencies and consumes the

  basket of goods included in these countries'
                                                  consumer price indices. Using
  the average quarterly percentage changes in the purchasing powers of these

 eight currencies to deflate call money rates and to generate the matrices

   and     in (27) and taking a given capital position, we can compute optimal

 portfolios. This is done in Table 1, using as        weights the share of each
 country in U.S. dollar income in the mid—seventies, for
                                                             two sample periods

and two degrees of risk aversion.

     Table 1 suggests that inflation was not fully anticipated because,

even under the assumption of stationarity, in both sample periods the

portfolios differ from the capital position more than they differ from

each other (given the same degree of risk aversion). Note also that

when risk aversion is infinite the optimal portfolio is the minimum

variance portfolio     but when risk aversion is two (y=—l) it is the sum of

the minimum variance portfolio and one—half of the speculative portfolio

defined on real return differentials. Furthermore, the comparison of

the two sample periods suggests the usefulness of a time—invariant rule

like (27). In fact, except for sterling and lire, where real returns

changed substantially in 1979 and 1980, the shares do not change too

much."
                                 —12—




                               Table 1
                  Optimal   Currency Diversification

        Country             1973; 4 — 198U; 12         1973; 4 — 1978;    4
    (ct Weights %)             Portfolio (%)             Portfolio (%)

                              y=—l        y=—           y=—l        y=—
Canada (5)                       2          17             4             18

France (9)                      12          12            11             12

Germany (13)                    12           9            13             14

                                —5           5             2              6
Italy (5)

Japan (16)                      13          13            11              8

Switzerland (2)                  6           2             7              0

United Kingdom (7)              14           9             5              9

United States (43)              46          33            47             33




Source: End of month exchange rates, consumer price indices and call

money rates from IFS. Matrices in (27) reported in Macedo (1982) forthe

1973; 4 — 1978; 4 period and available from the author for the 1973;4 —

1980; 12 period.
                                     —13—



        Now if inflation were perfectly anticipated, an increase in the

 share of goods from country I in expenditure would imply an equal increase

 in the share of currency i in the minimum variance portfolio. The larger

 the variance of inflation relative to the variance of excharge rate

 changes the less an increase in c. will be reflected in an increase in
                                  1
  m
 x..
   1

        Furthermore, the effect of the covariance of inflation and exchange

 rates can be estimated from the elements of : if risk aversion is two,

 for example, 3x./a1 =     i../2   while if risk aversion is four, 3x./ci. =

 Using the same data as in Table 1, left panel, we can thus estimate the
 size of the effect before it is scaled down by risk aversion, provided that

 risk aversion Is larger than one. It turns       out   that about half of the

 entries of the computed     matrix are less than .1 in absolute value, but


that the effects of the Japanese share on the Canadian dollar and on the

U.S. dollar shares, the effect of the British share on the French franc

share or the own effect of Italy are larger and should not be neglected.11

       This suggests that even national infinitely risk—averse investors will

hold a diversified currency portfolio,                            so that the

usual presumption that the domestic currency is the "preferred monetary

habitat" should be used with caution. On the other hand, as risk aversion decreases,

the effect of consumption preferences on optimal currency diversification

also decreases, until   it vanishes when relative risk aversion is unity.
                                 —14—


 Conclusion

      This paper has derived the optimal consumption and portfolio rules for

an international investor with constant expenditure shares    and constant

relative risk aversion l—y in a dynamic contest. The index of value

obtained from the consumption rule was used to obtain real returns on

different currencies in terms of their purchasing power over goods. The

portfolio rule was expressed in terms of the determinants of the purchasing

powers, exchange rates and prices expressed in the numeraire currency. The

optimal portfolio was interpreted as a capital position given by the expend-

iture shares and hedging portfolios depending on unanticipated inflation and

risk aversion. It was shown that, when exchange rates and prices are Brownian

motion there are only two zero net worth portfolios, the minimum variance

portfolio independent of risk aversion and real return differentials but

depending on expenditure patterns and the speculative portfolio independent

of preferences and inflation, but depending on risk aversion and real

return differentials. When the effect of preferences on real return differ-

entials (and hence on the speculative portfolio) is made explicit,

this separation is blurred and the minimum variance portfolio is affected by

risk aversion. In that case, the effect of an increase in c. on the
                                                           1
portfolio proportions x. will be positive when relative risk aversion

is greater than one, as generally presumed.

     Actual data from eight major countries is used to compute optimal

portfolios based on real return differentials for different weighting

schemes, degrees of risk aversion and sample periods and thereby show

the empirical usefulness of this application of the theory of international

finance from the perspective of continuous time. In particular, the results

presented cast doubt on two popular hypotheses, purchasing power parity

and the preferred monetary habitat.
                                             —15—



                                            Notes

*Earlier versions of this paper were presented in seminars at Princeton,
the IMF and the Second Latin American Regional Meeting of the Econometric
Society in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). Comments from the participants and the
referees, as well as financial support from the Ford. Foundation are grate-
fully acknowledged. Errors are my own.

1.     See Solnik (1974). A survey of Merton's work can be found in Merton
       (1975) and in Chow (1979).

2.     Kouri (1976) derived the forward premium in a two—country model with
       different consumption preferences in each country and exchange rate
       and price changes generated by Brownian motion. He also used Poisson
       processes to analyze the adjustable peg regime.

3.     The case where national outputs are not composite goods and where
       assets yield a known nominal return is analyzed in Macedo (1982).


4.     Dornbusch (1980a)             has a survey of the Brownian motion model.


 5.     The definition of the nuineraire is,of course,arbitrary. Also, the
        analysis could equally well be conducted expressing the prices of the
        N goods in domestic currency rather than in the nutneraire. See
        Meerschwam (1982)

 6.     A bequest function with elasticity 'y' with respect to terminal wealth
        would not change the results. It would also be easy to introduce a
        discount factor on instantaneous utility. Finally, we take T to be
        "very large" so that we have an approximately infinite horizon.

 7.     For example, J =    WJ/W and J = SP.2J/S1aP.
                                     ij
 8.     See also Fatna and Farber (1979) and Hodrik (1981).

9. On the presumption about y see Macedo (1980), rrran (1981) and,
    relaxing the assur:ption of constant expenditure shares, Stulz
      (1981).


10.     See further discussion of weighting schemes and relative risk aversion
        in Macedo (1981). A five—currency portfolio for a Bernoulli
        international investor is reported in Kouri and Macedo (1978).
        Dornbusch (1980b) computes an optimal doir ai:. D—mark portfolio.

11.     Systematic evidence on the time—invariance of ccrruted portfolios can be
        found in Macedo, Goldstein and Meerschwam (1982).


        These effects are xA/czJA =                          =   .4;    = .2 and
12.
                                                   'US''JA
        xT/actIT =   .8   (so that      =   .2).
                                        -16-



                                    References


 Chow, C., "Optimum Control of Stochastic Differential Equation
                                                                Systems,"
      Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1979; 1.

Dornbusch, R. (1980a), Exchange Rate Risk and the Macroeconomics of
                                                                    Exchange
     Rate Determination, NBER Working Paper No.493, June.

Dornbusch, R. (l980b), "Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand?"
     Erookings Papers on Economics Activity, 1.

Fama, E. and A. Farber (1979), "Money, Bonds and Foreign Exchange,"
     American Economic Review, September.

Hodrik, R. (1981), International Asset Pricing with Time—Varying Risk
     Premia,              Journal of International Econoinicsç December.

Kouri, P. (1976), The Determinants of the Forward Premium, Institute for
     International Economic Studies Seminar Paper No.62, University of
     Stockholm, August.

Kouri, P. (1977), "International Investment and Interest Rate Linkages
     Under Flexible Exchange Rates," in R. Aliber (ed.) The Political
     Economy of Monetary Reform, Macmillan.

Kouri, P. and J. Macedo (19Th), "Exchange Rates and the International
     Adjustment Process," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Krugman, P. (1981), Consumption Preferences, Asset Demands and Distribution
     Effects in International Financial Markets, NBER Working Paper No. 651,
     March.
                                                                           International
Macedo, J. (1980), Optimal Currency Diversification for a Class of Risk—Averse!
     Investors, Econometric Research Program Research iiemorandum No. 273,
     Princeton University. November.

Macedo, J. (1982), Portfolio Diversifications Pcross Cmrrencies, in R. Cooper
     et al. (editors), The International Monetar ystem under Flexible
     Exchange Rates, Ballinger.

Macedo, J., J. Goldstein and D. Meerschwam (l9E2), International Portfolio
     Diversification: Short—Run Financial Assets and 'old, International
     Finance Section Working Paper in Internatior1 conomics No. G—82—01,
     Princeton. University, January.

Meerschwam, D. (1982). International Portfolio I'iversification, draft,
     Princeton University, March.

Merton, R. (1975), 7The Theory of Finance from the Perspective of o Continuous
     Time," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, December.

Solnick, B. (1974), "An Equilibrium Model of the International Market," Journal
     of Economic Theory, August.

Stulz, R. (1981), The Demand for Foreign Bonds, revised draft, University
     of Rochester, April.
