                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              PENSION WEALTH AND HOUSEHOLD SAVINGS:
                       TESTS OF ROBUSTNESS


                       Louis Dicks-Mireaux

                          Mervyn A. King



                      Working Paper No. 962




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           August 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER 's research programs
in Pensions and in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #962
                                                    August 1982




         Pension Wealth and Household Savings: Tests of Robustness




                              Abstract




     A substantial literature exists on the impact of pension schemes,

both public and private, on the level of household saving. Yet there

is no clear consensus on the impact of pensions on private saving. In this

paper we show how beliefs about this displacement effect are modified by

prior beliefs both about variables which n.ght be relevant in an equation

for private savings and about the magnitude of the displacement effect.

Using data for 8,279 Canadian households, and estimates of pension wealth

(both private and social security) which we construct for each household

in the sample, the estimated displacement effects are found to be relatively

robust with respect to both types of prior belief.




Louis Dicks-Mireaux                                  Mervyn A. King
National Bureau of Economic Research                 University of Birmingham
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                            Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  P. 0. Box 363
                                                     Birmingham, B15 2TT
(617) 868—3930                                       England

                                                     021—472—1301, x 3427
                  Pension Wealth and Household Savings:

                               Tests of Robustness



1. Introduction

    There is, by now, a substantial literature on the impact of pension

schemes, both public and private, on the level of household savings.'
Feldstein's (1974) time—series study of the impact of social security wealth

in the US spawned numerous empirical studies using both time—series and cross—

section data. Yet there is no clear consensus on the impact of pensions

on private saving. In part, this results from the fact that theory does not

yield unambiguous predictions about the response of household savings to the

existence of pension wealth. At least four possible influences may be identified:

(a) If pension wealth is seen as a substitute for private

accumulation there will be a displacement of the latter when the former is

introduced or Increased. In the limit, If other assets were perfect

substitutes for pension wealth, the offset would be tone_for_oneU, an

implied displacement of unity.

(b) There may be an induced retirement effect which would tend to raise

household savings in order to finance consumption over a longer period of

retirement (Feldstein 1974).

(c) Concern about future generations, upon whom the cost of meeting the

pension commitment of unfunded schemes falls, may result in additional

private savings for higher bequests in order to offset the increased tax

burden. (Barro 1974, 1978). Alternatively, unfunded schemes may result

in intergenerational transfers with both a wealth and a substitution effect.

Cd) Imperfections in the capital market may undermine the relevance of
                                    —2—


the life—cycle model, at least to the behaviour of a minority of households

(Diamond and Hausman 1982, King and Dicks—Mireaux 1982).

    These ambiguities in the theoretical effects of pensions on private

saving mean that we must turn to empirical evidence. It is clear, however,

that the interpretation of existing evidence suffers from two defects.

First, the absence of clear cut theoretical predictions does not mean

that we examine and interpret the evidence free from the influence of prior

beliefs. Theoretical introspection rarely leads to a completely diffuse

prior. But since prior beliefs differ, we need to understand how important

any given set of empirical results is for a range of priors, and it is useful

to summarise the evidence in terms of a mapping from prior to posterior

beliefs. Secondly, there is the suspicion that reported results may (for

a variety of reasons which include the priors of referees and journal editors

as well as space constraints) be reported selectively and may not be robust

to minor changes in the specification of the model.   In this paper we present

some evidence on the displacement effect of pension wealth on private net

worth, in the light of these two concerns, using data for 8,279 Canadian

households.

    We estimate the displacement effects for two types of pension, social

security and private pension wealth, and this natural two—dimensional aspect

allows us to present a geometric interpretation of the results. This

diagrammatic representation is useful in any problem in which we are concerned

mainly with the estimates of a pair of parameters, and may be of more

general interest than the present context.
                                    —3—


    The basic model and our research strategy are set out in section 2

and the data employed in this study are described in section 3. The main

results are presented in section 4. In section 5 we consider the effect

of alternative estimates of pension wealth for these results. Our conclusions

are summarised in section 6.   We should be clear from the outset that we

are not concerned here with the implications of social security for the total

level of savings and investment because these depend upon the extent to which

social security is funded.2


2. The Basic Model

    We shall estimate a model for the behaviour of household net worth

over the life cycle and its dependence, if any, on pension wealth.   There

are several strategies upon which such an investigation could be based.

First, we could pursue an ad hoc approach of estimating alternative sped-.

fications and report the "best results" according to some criterion such as

goodness of fit.   This raises the problem of selective reporting. Secondly,

we could estimate a very general model (which, in practice, would mean

including a large number of ecplanatory variables) and use various statistical

criteria to reduce the model by gradually eliminating some of the independent

variables until a parsimonious representation is achieved. We call this a

"contracting search". But, as with ad hoc regression strategies, the process

of model selection entailed by a contracting search does not, in general,

lead to inference under classical statistical theory.3   Thirdly, we could

construct the full Bayesian mapping from a given set of prior beliefs into

a posterior distribution for the parameters of the model.
                                    —4—


   Although the Bayesian approach probably corresponds more closely to

the way in which we absorb the results of empirical studies, it gives no

feel for the sensitivity of the posterior distribution to changes in the

prior. This is unfortunate because it is implausible to suppose that the

consumers of the output of a research project would all agree on a precise

specification for the prior.   A more flexible approach is required. One

of the contributions of Learner (1978) is to show that we can say a good

deal about the posterior distribution even though the prior distribution

is not fully specified. Our research strategy is to examine the sensitivity

of the displacement effects of pension wealth to changes in the type and

amount of prior information we are willing to specifly.   These range from

beliefs about which are the relevant explanatory variables to prior beliefs

about the magnitude of the displacement effects. The posterior estimates

of the displacement effects depend upon both the prior and the information

in our data set, and we shall try to disentangle the relative contributions

of the two for our conclusions about the impact of pension wealth on household

net worth.

    The framework for our analysis is the life—cycle model of household

consumption (Modigliani and Brumberg 1954, Modigliani and Ando 1957). For

a cross—section of households, the life—cycle model implies a nonlinear

relatio'nship between the ratio of wealth to permanent income and age.

Permanent income is defined here as normal annual earnings. We condition on

this variable because of the correlation between age and the other determinants

of potential net worth, such as education and the differences in the lifetime

prospects of different cohorts.4   The life—cycle model itself places few
                                    —5—


a priori constraints on the function describing the age profile of household

net worth, apart from a presumption of a "hump-shaped" pattern, once we

allow for uncertainty about length of life, future earnings and rates of

return.5 There is, therefore, a good deal of latitude in the specification

of the functional form to be estimated, and there are no convincing a priori

grounds for choosing among alternative approximations to the true relation-

ship. If we assume that households experience a period of retirement during

which they expect to receive little or no labour income, then formost

plausible earnings profiles we would expect the ratio of net worth (excluding

the present value of future earnings) to permanent income to first increase

with age and then to decline after retirement. Support for this stylised

view is given by Figure 1. This shows the average ratio of wealth to

permanent income for each 5—year age group over the life cycle for our sample

of households. Wealth is defined as the value of non—human assets plus the

present value of pension wealth.   The construction of variables for pension

wealth and permanent income, and details of the sample, are described in

Section 3 below. Two profiles are shown in Figure 1 corresponding to total

net worth (TW) and net worth excluding the value of equity in owner—occupied

housing (TW'), respectively. A clear life—cycle pattern can be observed.6

    To approximate the true age profile of wealth holdings, we shall use

the nonlinear piecewise function employed in our earlier study (King and

Dicks—Mireaux 1982) which consists of six pieces corresponding to pre—determined

age ranges. It is then possible to estimate the model by the following linear

regression
                                                —6—


                                7
      1TW. =                  + a.v.. +u.1
                      a
                          0          jJ1                                             (1)

         I                          j=l

where

      TW.       is the total net worth of household i
           1

      Y.        is the perrnar.ent income of household I

      v., j = 1        ...    7, are age variables for the head of household i which
      are defined in Appendix 1. One of the variables (corresponding to the

      age range 60—75) is quadratic in age so that the data may determine

      whether or not there is a maximum for the level of household net worth.

      The value of a0 is the natural logarithm of the ratio of wealth to

permanent income at age 15; which is approximately the lowest age at which

working life could begin. The values of a1 to a7 measure the average annual

rates of accumulation of wealth in the various age ranges.

      Equation (1) relates to total net worth including both social security

and private pension wealth.                We shall assume, however, that pension wealth

is an exogenous variable beyond the control of an individual household.

Although this is true of social security wealth, it may             be   possible to change

the level of private pension wealth by choosing an occupation which offers an

appropriate retirement compensation package.                We shall ignore this possible

source of endogeneity and take net worth excluding pension wealth as the

dependent variable. Pension wealth becomes an explanatory variable thus

enabling us to estimate displacement effects.                Since pension wealth is an

imperfect substitute for other forms of wealth, we assume that total wealth

may   be       expressed in terms of net worth excluding pension wealth (W), social
                                           —7—


security wealth (SW) and private pension wealth (PW) by a loglinear

approxirnat ion.




    in        =    in [] +           in {-J + a2 D in [}                 (2)


where D = 1    if the household is eligible for a private pension plan, zero

otherwise. From (1) and (2) we have




    in {}
              =a     +       a.v..     -     in        a2
                                                            D in []   + u. (3)
                                                  []

    The setThf true explanatory variables is likely to be larger than those

contained in equation (3). Unless these are orthogonal to pension wealth,

their inclusion or exclusion will affect the estimates of the displacement

effect. We divide these additional variables into two types. The first

comprises variables that we would wish to include in the basic specification

on a priori grounds. In this category we include permanent income (to test

for homotheticity) and the number of persons in the household with life

insurance coverage (because the data on net worth exclude the value of insur-

ance policies).     The second consists of variables which are less obvious

candidates as explanatory variables, but which we are unwilling to exclude on

a priori grounds. Since we regard (3) as a linearisation of the true

relationship, we include in the second category higher order age terms, as

well as regional and area dummies, the number of adults in the household,

the number of persons in the household who are unemployed, and a farm family
                                     —8—


dummy.7    The full list of variables in both categories is shown in Appendix 2.

Although the distinction between the two categories is not clearcut, it

represents our prior view about which are likely to be the relevant explanatory

variables, and corresponds to Learner's (1978) distinction between "focus" and

"doubtful" variables. In section 4 we shall examine the robustness of the

estimated displacement effects to alternative specifications of equation (3).

    The second set of prior beliefs we shall examine concerns priors about the

actual magnitudes of the displacement effects. The interpretation of

published results is likely to be influenced by prior beliefs. Such priors

may originate from a distillation of previous empirical evidence or from a

theoretical model. To examine formally the sensitivity of conclusions to

prior beliefs we consider two priors namely (a) a zero displacement effect

for both social security and private pension wealth, and (b) a displacement

effect of unity (a one—for—one effect) for both types of pension wealth.8

This will allow us to examine the sensitivity of posterior beliefs about the

displacement effect to various degrees of belief in the prior. How confident,

for example, would we have to be in either of these priors not to modify

significantly our beliefs about the impact of pension wealth on household

savings?

    The choice of the two priors is a deliberate attempt to set up "straw

men" that encompass the full range of viewpoints which have been expressed

about the size of the displacement effects. Empirical studies have produced

differing estimates of the effect of pension wealth on savings. Cross—section

studies in the U.S. by Kotlikoff (1979), Feldstein and Pellechio (1979)
                                         —9—


and Feldstein (1980) found this to be greater than 0.5. In contrast,

magnitudes of less than 0.5 have been found by Nunnell (1976) and Diamond and

Hausman (1982); in the former study this was true also for private pensions.

In one of the few studies using Canadian data, Boyle and Murray (1979) using

aggregate time—series data found no significant impact of social security

on savings.

      The mapping of the coefficients       and cz2 into displacement effects is

given by



      ____                                                                    (4)
      (SW)
                —
                —
                    1   SW J



      ____                W
      (PW) =—c2D                                                              (5)

      For the prior of zero displacement, c1 and       therefore take values of
zero.       Imposing unitary displacement effects, computed at sample means

at age 65, gives a prior for         and a2 equal to minus the reciprocal

of the mean net worth to pension wealth ratio for the sample of all 65 year

olds and those eligible for a private pension respectively.

      In section 4, we examine the posterior distributions of the displacement

effects corresponding to the three Sets of priors described above, namely

a prior about which are the relevant explanatory variables, a prior of zero

for the displacement effects, and a prior for the displacement of unity at

age   65.
                                     —10—



3.   The Data

     The data used in this study refer to 8,279 Canadian families in 1977,

and are taken from the Statistics Canada micro—data tape "Income (1976),

Assets and Debts (1977) of Economic Families and Unattached Individuals"

which   contains data collected as a supplement to the 1977 Survey of Consumer
Finances.9 A household is defined as a group sharing a common dwelling and
related by blood or marriage. The data on net worth refer to market values
in May 1977 and the income data to the calendar year 1976. The survey data on

net worth exclude pension wealth (which we discuss below), consumer durables

other than cars, equity in life insurance policies and other "assets" such

as the expected value of future inheritances and support from relatives or

children.

     There are 12,734 households in the data base. This number was reduced

to 8,279 in two stages.    First, we excluded all households headed by a

woman. A substantial fraction of such households were headed by elderly

women, probably   widows, for whom permanent income is determined primarily
by the life—time earnings of the deceased husband on which no information
was available. Permanent income was computed as a minimum—variance estimate

of normal age—adjusted annual earnings using the method proposed in King

and Dicks—Mireaux (1982) to which the reader is referred for further details.

This exclusion reduced the number of households to 10,118.10 At the second

stage a further 1,839 households with net worth less than $2,500 were excluded

thus bringing the sample used in estimation down to 8,279. The reason for

this exclusion is that in our earlier study (King and Dicks—Mireaux 1982) we

found evidence of different types of savings behaviour among different groups
                                   —11—


of the population, and the truncation adopted here corresponds to that of the

earlier paper. To correct for the truncation bias thus induced we used the

two—stage procedure suggested by Heckman (1976, 1979) which involved

estimating a probit model for low wealth—holdings (less than $2,500) and

including the inverse of the Mills' ratio as an additional explanatory

variable in the second stage regression for the ratio of net worth to

permanent income. The results for the probit model are reported in our earlier

paper (op. cit., Table4).

    The most important component of wealth for which we do not have direct

observations is the value of the right to future private pensions and old

age social security payments. Social security wealth is defined as that accruing

from the public retirement income system, and comes from five sources:

Old Age Security (OAS), the Guaranteed Income Supplement (CIS), the Spouses'

Allowance (SPA), and the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans (CQPP). The OAS

provides flat—rate benefits which are taxable, and were equal to $1,634.34 in

1976 to those aged 65 and over. Eligibility for GIS is based on receipt of

OAS, and those who have no income other than OAS receive the maximum benefit

of $1,146.30 and $2,035.80 (in 1976), for single and two—pensioner families

respectively. The SPA is payable to a pensioners' spouse, provided he or she

is 60—64 years old and would, except for age, qualify for OAS and the GIS at

the two—pensioner family rate. Both these benefits are reduced, at different

rates, if income is received from sources other than OAS. These benefits

have been fully indexed to increases in the consumer price index (CPI) since

1972, and are all financed from general tax revenue.
                                      —12—


    The Canada and Quebec pension plans, which are virtually identical

with automatic transferability of benefit credits, were established in 1965

and cover almost the entire labour force. Both plans are contributory and

earnings—related. Contributions are paid by individuals aged 18 to 70 years

and not receiving plan benefits, at a rate of 3.6% shared equally by employers

and employees and paid in full by the self—employed, on earnings between a

lower and upper bound.     Both plans provide three types of benefits:

retirement pensions, survivors' benefits, and disability benefits. Since

1976 the eligible age for receipt of retirement benefits has been sixty—five.

The benefit level is calculated as 25% of adjusted career average earnings

(ACAE), multiplied by    the average value of the yearly maximum pensionable
earnings   (YMPE) in the final three working years. The ACAE is the mean
value of the ratio (with a maximum value of one) of earnings to YNPE in
the best 85% of earning years. The intent of the system appears to be to

index the YMPE to the average wage and salary index, although in practice

it has on occasion failed to achieve this. Benefit payments are indexed

to the CPI. Survivors' benefits include death benefits, surviving spouses'

pensions, disabled widowers' pensions, and orphan benefits.     The surviving

spouse's pension, (the one of most concern to us), is 60% of that which would

have been paid to the deceased contributor if the spouse is 65 years old or

older, plus a flat—rate component if aged 45 to 65.      For those of age less

than 45 the pension level is determined by age, the number of dependent

children, and disability.

    The recent nature of the plan, and the transitional arrangements used

to introduce it, has added a further source of variation in the value of
                                      —13—


pension rights across individuals. Those persons aged 55 and less in 1966

were to be eligible for full pensions at age 65; in effect the closer an

individual was to age 55 in 1966 the greater the "bonus" or net benefit

received. Those of age 56 or more, contributing for less than ten years

would receive a pro rated pension.

    Tocalculate the benefit level of CQPP the eligibility rules described

above were applied to individual age—earnings profiles.    The profiles are

those estimated for the purpose of constructing our measure of permanent

income. The benefit accruing in each year of retirement was multiplied by

the individual's probability of surviving until that year. To convert these

survival—adjusted benefits into a present value the nominal discount rate

was chosen to be equal to the rate of change of the wage and salary index.

In other words the real discount rate was assumed to be equal to the rate

of productivity growth. The age—earnings profile and so also the estimated

benefit levels are in 1976 dollars.     Therefore, because the yearly maximum

pensionable earnings are effectively indexed to the nominal discount rate,

for years up to retirement, a discount factor of one was applied to the

survival—adjusted benefits.   With benefit payments indexed to the CPI,

for post—retirement years we use the real discount rate set at 2.5%.      For

wives allowance was made for non—participation in the labour force at various

stages of the life cycle by adjusting the level of the age—earnings profile

in a fashion identical to that used in estimating permanent income. In

addition to the retirement pension only the surviving spouses' pension,

for those over 45, was included in the calculation. In computing the flat—rate

components of social security wealth everyone of at least 65 years of age
                                    —14—


was assumed to receive OAS. No allowance for SPA was made because the age-

earnings profile implicitly assumes that spouses effectively work until

they are 65. Current and future eligibility for the GIS was determined

using the appropriate needs test.

    In estimating the present value of private pension wealth, actual

receipts were used for retirees, and an expected pension was imputed for

those in pension plans who were below retirement age, (assumed to be 65).

The imputation, expressed in 1976 dollars, was based on a regression for

pension receipts of retirees in terms of permanent income, age and occupation.

To allow for sample selection bias the inverse Mills' ratio computed from

a probit model of positive pension receipts for retirees, was included as

an explanatory variable. The pension was adjusted by survival probabilities.

For the present value calculation it is necessary to make some assumption

about current and future pre—and post—retirement indexation. Indexation

provisions vary widely across pension plans and any assumption, (although

we do take notice of what evidence is available), applied uniformly across

households will only be an approximation. The heterogeneity of the pension

plans across occupations will be captured to some extent in the imputation

of pension receipts. We assume that prior to retirement, benefits are

effectively indexed to the rate of growth of wages and salaries. Therefore,

as was done for CQPP benefits,a discount factor of one is used for years

pre—retirement. Post—retirement we assume the level of indexation is 60%

of the CPI and also the rate of inflation to be 5%. This yields a discount

rate for post—retirement years of 4.5%. With the information available, it

was difficult to incorporate survivors' pensions. The procedure used assumes

that any living spouse will be entitled to one—half of the households' pension
                                            —15—


income, regardless of whether he or she is widowed.

    A more detailed description of the Canadian retirement income system,

and of the construction of the wealth estimates is presented in

Dicks—Mireaux (1981 b). Mean values of wealth in these various forms in

the sample of 8,279 households were the following; for net worth recorded

in the survey $65,821, social security wealth $74,363, and for the

3,832 households with private pension wealth $61,349.


4. Robustness Analysis of Displacement Effects

    We now turn to an analysis of the robustness of the estimated dis-

placement effects. The model of equation (3) augmented by additional

explanatory variables may be written as




    in [-f]     = Z1y1     + Z2y2 —
                                      l   ln[J —   2D   in {} + u           (6)



where Z1 is an N x J matrix of J basic explanatory varibles for the N

households (listed in column 1 of Appendix 2) and l is the associated

parameter vector. Z2 is an N x K matrix of K "doubtful" variables (listed

in column 2 of Appendix 2) and            the associated parameter vector. The
                                                           2
disturbances u are assumed to be distributed N(o,a I). To simplify

notation rewrite (6) as


    Y=x         +u                                                          (7)
                       w
    where Y       in

              X is the N x (J + K +2) data matrix

                is the (J + K + 2) x 1 parameter vector (y1,y2, l'
                                               —16—



    Estimation    of (6) yields consistent estimates of , which we denote by

b, and of the sample data precision matrix H11. Given the normality of u,

the estimator 8 is asymptotically normally distributed and we shall assume

that our sample size (8,279) is sufficiently large that we may ignore

deviations from normality. Suppose also that we have a multivariate normal

prior   for 8 of b* with prior precision matrix H*. Then the location of the
posterior mean of 8 is given by the following matrix—weighted average of the
prior location and the regression estimator (Chamberlain and Learner 1976).

        = (H   + H*) 1(Hb + Hb*)                                             (8)

    Clearly,    if we     have specified both b* and H*, there is a unique posterior
mean and implied preferred estimates for the displacement effects. But it

is unlikely that we would be willing to specify fully a prior distribution

for 8. Nevertheless, even in this case, the posterior can be shown to lie

within a certain region, the size of which depends upon how fully the prior

distribution is specified.

    The first case is where we know the sample estimates of 8, b, and the

sample precision matrix H.          But, although we are willing to specify a

prior location for 8, b*, we wish the prior precision matrix to be completely

arbitrary. Then from Learner (1978, Theorem 5.11) we know that the posterior

mean of $ must lie in the ellipsoid

    (8* —   c) 'H(8*       £) <   .(b
                                        —
                                            b*) 'H(b — b*)                   (9)

    wherec       (b   + b*)
                      2

    Equation (9) defines a region within which the posterior mean is located

and can be used to provide extreme bounds on individual parameter values. Our
                                           —17—


interest, however, lies not in the whole ellipsoid but only in the restrictions

it implies on the posterior means of the displacement effects. This

natural two—dimensional feature of our study means that we can exploit an

appealing geometric representation of our results. Instead of computing

extreme bounds we may    plot   the projection of the ellipsoid given by (9)

into displacement effect space. This projection, in terms of the (a1 a2)

coefficient space, is an ellipse described by the following equation.



    (a —   c)'Z(a — c)    =   :(b   —
                                        b*)'H(b   —   b*)                 (10)

where a is the vector (—a1, —a2), c the subvector of c corresponding to

the pension wealth variables, and Z is the matrix (R) the inverse of

the 2 x 2 submatrix formed      by taking the rows and columns of the inverse of
H corresponding to social security and private pension wealth. Using (4)

and (5) we may convert (10) into an ellipse for the displacement effects,

and we plot this ellipse for each of the three sets of prior beliefs

described in section 2.

Prior 1

    The first type of prior information we examine is a belief about which

are the relevant explanatory variables. In section 2 we argued that these

included the variables in the Z1 matrix, in addition to the pension wealth

variables, with the doubtful variables in the Z2 matrix. Our prior for

is, therefore, the regression estimates for l' a1 and a2       from the model with

Z2 excluded (which implies a prior for 2 of zero))2 These estimates are

shown in column 1 of Table 1. The priors for the displacement effects

obtained from the restricted model are 0.171 for social security wealth
                                     —18—


(an extra dollar of social security wealth reduces household net worth by 17.1

cents) and 0.508 for private pension wealth. The regression estimates from

the augmented model (including all the doubtful variables) are shown    in
column 2 of Table 1. They impiy   displacement   effects of 0.208 for social

security wealth and 0.276 for private pension wealth.

    Using these estimates, we plotted the feasible ellipse corresponding to

the first prior and this is shown in displacement effect space in Figure 2.

The two sets of estimates are clearly close to each other, but, because they

are matrix—weighted averages, the posterior means do not necessarily lie

between the prior and the data points. This can be seen in Figure 2 in which

the feasible ellipse contains values outside the range between the prior and

regression estimates, particularly in the case of social security. The

extreme bounds on the displacement effects defined by the ellipse in Figure 2

are 0.107 to 0.273 for social security wealth and 0.272 to 0.512 for private

pension wealth.

    We have interpreted the ellipse in Figure 2 as defining a feasible

region for posterior beliefs about the displacement effects given a set of

prior beliefs and a set of regression estimates for equation (6). An

alternative interpretation is that it represents the locus of displacement

effects implied by the regression estimates of (6) subject to linear con-

straints on the parameter vector of the form



    R( — b*) = 0                                                        (11)
                                       —19—


    Given constraint of this type (i.e., a matrix R), the estimate

of (6) subject to the constraint lies on the boundary of the ellipse shown

in Figure 2.13 When R =    I   we obtain the prior and when R = 0 we obtain the

regression estimate (shown as the point DATA on Figure 2).      Different R

matrices trace out the ellipse and correspond to regression estimates for

differing linear combinations of explanatory variables. In this way, the

ellipse summarises the estimated displacement effects for a whole family

of regressions.

Prior 2

    The second prior is that the displacement effects are zero. With this

prior the feasible ellipse for the posterior, means of the pension wealth

coefficients is given by


    (—)'Z(c—) =k                                                        (12)


    where a is the vector of regression estimates of       and c2, and the

constant K can be determined by the condition that the ellipse must pass

through the prior and the data points. It is, therefore, unnecessary to

specify a prior for the other parameters of the model if we are projecting

the feasible ellipsoid into two dimensions. The feasible ellipse for the

second prior is shown in Figure 3 denoted by F. The bounds on the values

of the posterior means for the displacement effects are —0.034 to 0.244

for social security wealth and —0.064 to 0.340 for private pension wealth.

The introduction of prior information about the location of the parameters

widens the bounds for the displacement effects compared with the case when

prior beliefs concerned the set of explanatory variables.      To narrow
                                   —20—


the range we need to know how much weight to place on the sample evidence

and how much on the prior information. The information about displacement

effects contained in the data may be summarized in the iso—likelihood

contours. In pension wealth space these data confidence ellipses are

defined by


    (—   a)'Z(a—     = ,,2                                              (13)



    Similarly the iso—prior density contours lie on the ellipses


    (cx— a*)'Z*(cz_ a*) = p2                                            (14)


where Z* is the matrix (II*l)s and a* is the prior vector for cz, and

    For any given prior density we could ask the question "which parameter

values xnaximise the probability that they are consistent with the observed

data?". The answer is the locus of points of tangency between the prior

ellipses and the confidence ellipses, christened the Information contract

curve by Learner (1978). It Is defined by minimizing £ for a given value of

p, and in two—dimensions Is the following hyperbola


      = (Z + AZ*)(Za + AZ*a*) 0      A                                  (15)



    As A varies from zero to infinity we trace out the information contract

curve moving from the data point to the prior location. Given a prior

covariance matrix (which we need to specify only up to a scalar multiple)

the contract curve is defined. For the prior covariance matrix of displacement

effects we choose a block diagonal matrix with the subtnatrix corresponding
                                        —21—


 to the two pension wealth variables given by

         2    1   rk
                                                                          (16)
              rk k

       Because private pension wealth, as measured here, probably has more

 unobservable attributes than social security wealth, we take our prior

 standard error for the private pension wealth displacement effect to be larger

 than that for social security wealth. In the calculations below we assume that
 k =   1.5.    Beliefs about the magnitude of one of the displacement effects

are likely to be highly correlated with those about the others. For example,

it would be unlikely that many people would have a prior belief of zero

for one effect and unity for the other. We take a value for the correlation

coefficient, r in (16), of 0.75. The contract curve is independent of

the value of the scalar a, but to calibrate the prior density ellipses

we take a prior standard error for the social security displacement effect

of 10 cents. In other words, for a given prior location the prior 95 per cent

confidence interval is equal to the location plus or minus 20 cents.

       The contract curve, CC, corresponding to the prior location of zero and

prior covariance matrix (16), is shown in Figure 3 together with the 95 per cent

data confidence ellipse, D, and 95 per cent prior density ellipse, P. The

contract curve joins the prior location and the regression estimates)4

Although the two 95 per cent ellipses Intersect, the prior mean of zero is

not contained in the confidence ellipse for this data set. Figure 3 shows

that, in this case, the bounds on the displacement effects implied by the

contract curve are only a little tighter than those given by the feasible

ellipse. An alternative approach is to place a limit on the extent to which
                                   —22--



we wish to deviate from the estimates implied by the data. For example,

suppose that we consider only those values of the displacement effects

which lie within the 95 per cent data confidence ellipse, then the posterior

location must be in the intersection of the feasible ellipse and the 95 per

cent confidence ellipse. This is shown as the hatched area in Figure 3'.

Prior 3

    The final prior we consider is that the displacement effect is unity

for both types of pension wealth. The feasible ellipse, the 95 per cent

prior density and data confidence ellipses, and the contract curve are all

plotted in Figure 4. With this prior the bounds on the displacement effects

implied by the feasible ellipse are rather uninformative; they are 0.143

to 1.066 for social security wealth and —0.032 to 1.308 for private pension

wealth. The data and the prior are well separated, and the 95 per cent

prior and confidence ellipses do not intersect. The contract curve provides

much tigher bounds than the feasible ellipse for the private pension wealth

displacement effect. Tighter bounds still are obtained by looking at the

intersection of the feasible ellipse and the 95 per cent confidence ellipse

(the hatched area in Figure 4), and, in effect, this gives much greater

weight to the data than to the prior. Alternatively, we might choose points

on the contract curve which attach a specific weight to the prior. For example,

if we wish to remain within the 95 per cent prior ellipse, then the point

which maximises the likelihood of the observations from our sample (the

intersection of the 95 per cent prior density ellipse and the contract curve)

is 0.728 for social security wealth and 0.633 for private pension wealth.
                                     —23--



      We may summarize the role of prior information as follows. If we

specify only prior values for the displacement effects, we know that our

preferred (posterior) estimates lie in the feasible ellipse. This is shown

in Figures 2, 3 and 4 for the three sets of priors which we have examined.

If we are prepared to specify our relative prior uncertainty about the

displacement effects (equivalent to defining a prior covariance matrix up

to a scalar multiple) then we obtain the contract curve. A fully specified

set of prior standard errors leads to a unique point on the contract curve.

The uncertainty about the size of the displacement effects is summarised

in Table 2 which shows the bounds on the two effects arising from different

sources of uncertainty. First, we show the range of estimates resulting from

sampling uncertainty in terms of the upper and lower bounds of the 95 per

cent confidence interval for each effect. Secondly, we give the bounds

determined by the feasible ellipse. Finally, we show the bounds which

result from taking the intersection of the feasible ellipse and the 95 per

cent confidence ellipse. In the case of the first prior concerning the choice

of explanatory variables to be included in the model, sampling uncertainty

is far greater than specification uncertainty. For the second prior the

differences between the prior and data points result in uncertainty about

the displacement effects of the same order of magnitude as the sample      confidence
interval. The overall picture is that the estimated displacement effects

are rather robust with respect to the specification of the model. Moreover,

if   we restrict ourselves to estimates in the 95   per   cent confidence ellipse,

differing   prior beliefs about the magnitude of the displacement effects do
                                      -.24—



not   lead to radically different posterior beliefs, particularly in the case

of social security. The evidence suggests that there is a small but

significant displacement effect of pension wealth on private saving.

      We conclude with some caveats about the assumptions underlying our

methodology. The priors for the displacement effects were assumed to be joint

normally distributed. With this assumption the posterior is a matrix—weighted

average of the prior and regression estimates.     But prior beliefs may not

be symmetrically distributed around their mean. For example, if the prior mean

for the displacment effect is zero, we may not wish to attach equal

probabilities to the effect being positive as to it being negative.    In

these circumstances an asymmetric prior distribution, such as the Beta

distribution, might be more appropriate. It is no simple matter, however,

to compute the convolutionof a normal and Beta distribution, and the use

of matrix—weighted averages is very straightforward. The issue of the

appropriate prior distribution raises the question of full—scale Bayesian

estimation. If we specified a purpose for the estimated displacement effects

then we could write down a loss function in terms of estimation errors and

use the appropriate estimator rather than a regression estimate.


5. Sensitivity of Displacement Estimates to the Measurement_of Pension Wealth

       The accuracy with which pension wealth is measured will affect the

estimates of the displacement effects implied by the regression model of

household net worth. In this section we examine the sensitivity of our

estimates to alternative measures of pension wealth.
                                    —25—


     We consider three potential sources of measurement error. Firstly,

there may be an error in the imputation of private pension benefits. In

section 3 it was assumed that before retirement these benefits are

indexed to wage and salary growth. This may not be true for several

reasons. One is that even final earnings plans have an earnings base

of several years which means that there may be substantial pre—retirement

erosion of benefits by inflation. Another is that wage growth may not be

exogenous, and the growth of pension benefits and wages may be inversely

related. Finally, even if benefits are vested immediately, firms do not

index pensions of terminated workers before retirement. The benefits

imputed to pre—retirement pension plan members are based on an econometric

model of the benefits received by current retirees, which predicts the

level of benefits in terms of several socio—economic characteristics of

the recipient. If one assumes that the nature of pension plans, including

the features mentioned above, remains unchanged then the model of benefit

levels captures these aspects. That is, given the structure of pension

plans and the characteristics of plan members, the model does in fact

impute the real value of the pension at age 65 that the recipient expects

to receive. Because of their statutory nature, it is likely that any

error in the construction of anticipated social security benefits will be

small.

     The two remaining possible sources of error reside in our choice of

the real discount rate and the expected rate of inflation. Altering the

assumed value of the real discount rate will change the discount factor

used for both pre— and post—retirement years. Because social security
                                     —26--



is fully indexed, different values of the expected inflation rate will

change only the discount factor for private pension wealth. In Table 3

the displacement effects based on regression estimates of the augmented

model (given in column 2 of Table 1), are shown for different

assumptions about the real discount and expected inflation rates. The

first row, "Standard Assumptions," corresponds to the data point in

Figure 2. Rows 2 and 3 show the effect of lowering or increasing the real

discount rate given the "standard" expected inflation rate. Similarly,

rows 4 and 5 show the consequence of alternative expected inflation rates

given the "standard" real discount rate. These alternative assumptions

lead to only small changes in the displacement effect for social security

wealth. For private pension wealth this is true also of the different

expected inflation rates, but not of the real discount rate. At a real

discount rate of 4 per cent per annum, the estimated displacement effect

is small and negative, although insignificantly different from zero. With

this exception the estimated effects seem rather robust to deviations from

the standard assumptions. Since the effect of these alternative

assumptions on the structure of the relevant subinatrix of the sample

covariance matrix was also found to be minor, the analysis of section 4

appears also to be robust with respect to the construction of the data.


6. Conclusions

     In this paper we have shown how estimates of the displacement effect

of pension wealth on household net worth are affected by prior beliefs of

different types. The estimated effects are robust with respect to the

specification of the model, and, even for very different prior beliefs
                                   —27—


about the magnitude of the displacement effects, the posterior means

suggest a small but significant impact of pension wealth on private

saving. We have also shown that if there are two parameters of principal

interest, then the results can all be presented succintly in a diagram.

This allows the reader to observe the complete set of results rather than

a table of a subset of points selected by the investigator. The projection

of the ellipsoids (feasible, prior, and confidence) into two dimensions

is simple to calculate and requires only six numbers, the priors for the

two parameters, and the four elements of the appropriate submatrix of the

prior precision matrix in addition to the regression estimates. For this

reason we hope that the geometrical approach used here may have a wider

application.
                        Appendix 1: Age Variables Employed in the Study



We define the following dummy variables where the age of the head of the

household i is A.
                          1


                  d.ii = 1         if A. <
                                       1     30,             zero otherwise

                  d.     = 1       if 30 A < 40,                      zero otherwise
                   2i
                  d.     = 1 if 40           A. <                50, zero otherwise
                   3'                            1

                  d.     = 1 if 50           A1 < 60,                 zero other wise
                   4'
                  d.     = 1 if 60           A.               75, zero otherwise
                   5'                            1

                  d.     = 1 if 75 <                         zero otherwise
                   63.                       A1,


We now define the following age variables for each household


                                                 6
    V .
        li   =d     (A. - 15) + 15
                  ii i
                                             j=2
                                                              '
                                                         6
    V         =dlii
                 A            — 15) 2 + 225
        12i
                                                     j   =2
                                                 6
    V21 =d 2i
            (A1 —3O)+10 d
                                             j=3
                                                             6
                                    30)2 + 100 d
    V22. =        d2•(A
                               -
                                                      j=4
                                                                  ji
                                                     6
    V3. = d31(A — 40) + 10
                                                 j=4
                                                             6
              =       (A - 40)2 + 100 d
                  d3 i i
                                    j=4ji
                                                 6
    V4 =           (A — 50) + 10
               d4 ii
                                             j=5
                                             .
                                                         d
                                                             ji
                                                             6
    V421
              =
                  d(A1
                               —
                                    50)2 +   100                  d
                                                                  ji
                                                         j=5

    V51 = d51(A1              —
                                   60) + 15d61
                  ppendix 1: Age Variables (continued)



V6i =            — 60)2 + 225d61
        d51(Ai

V7 =    d6
                 Appendix 2: Variables Used in the Study



          Basic Variables                                Doubtful Variables


1. Constant                                 1. V12

2. V1                                       2. V22

3. V2                                       3. V32

4. V3                                       4. V42

 5. V4                                      5. DIFF = Age of head of house-
                                                      hold minus ageof spouse
 6.
                                            6. (DIFF)2
 7.
                                            7. REG 1; dummy equals 1 if region
8. V7                                                  of household in Quebec,
                                                       zero otherwise*
 9. mY
                                            8. REG 2; dummy equals 1 if region
10. Number of Persons with Life                        of household is Ontario,
     Insurance                                         Prairies or British
                                                       Columbia, zero otherwise*
11. in
                                             9. AREA; dummy equals 1 if area
12. ln (y)                                                of household is rural,
                                                          zero otherwise**
13. Inverse of Mills' ratio
                                            10. Farm Family Dummy

                                            11. Number of Persons Unemployed

                                            12. Number of Adults in Household



  * The default region is Atlantic.

 ** The default areas are large and small urban areas.
                               FOOTNOTES


  This study was prepared f or the NBER/SSRC Conference on Microdata and
Public Economics, Oxford, June 1982, and was funded by NSF grant no.
SES 7914209 and the SSRC Programme Grant HR 4652 on Taxation, Incentives,
and the Distribution of Income. Neither the NSF, SSRC, nor NBER are
responsible for the views expressed in the paper. We are grateful to
A.B. Atkinson, R. Blundell, J. Hausman, S.M. Kanbur, and N.H. Stern for
helpful comments, and to D. Reitman for help with the computation of the
pension wealth series. They should not be held responsible for any
errors that remain.

    brief survey of the US literature may be found in Danziger, Haveman,
and Plotnick (1981); for a more comprehensive survey see Dick—Mireaux
(1981a).

 2Funding of social security does not require a separate fund into which
contributions are paid. Rather it refers to whether the benefits paid
out could have been financed from the contributions and accumulated
income.

 3Another problem with this approach is the lack of an obvious criterion
for the process of model selection. In contrast with time—series data
where tests of dynamic misspecification may be used to generate the
most parsimonious representation consistent with white noise error, cross—
section data offer no such clear choice. In the former case it is
conventional to assume a small and given number of exogenous variables
and achieve parsimony by reducing the number of lags required to model
the data generation process. With cross—section data there is no such
natural ordering of variables.

 4For further discussion of this point see King and Dicks—Mireaux (1982).

 51n the case of certainty, and for particular assumptions about the
utility function of households, the function relating net worth to age
Is very tightly parameterised and is determined by the optimal consumption
plan (Blinder et al, 1980). But with uncertainty it is possible to
obtain an explicit function for net worth only in special cases.

 6The "hump—shaped" profile holds also for the behaviour of net worth
excluding pension wealth.

 7A farm family is one in which any member receives more than 50 per cent
of his income from self—employment In farming. Such a variable is
Important in a country like Canada where farms are substantial and asset
valuation problems particularly severe.

 8These do not, however, represent the extremes of feasible values.
A negative displacement effect is possible if pension wealth alerts
people to the need to save for retirement (Cagan 1965, Katona 1965).
A displacement effect in excess of unity could occur if the introduction
of an unfunded pension scheme were announced well in advance.
 9All computations on this data base were carried out by the authors and
should not be attributed to Statistics Canada. Further details of the
data may be found in Statistics Canada (1979).

1-°Also excluded were 139 "special family units," primarily those with high
incomes, for whom data on age and other characteristics were not recorded
on the tape to protect their identity. These families accounted for 7.3
per cent of the total value of assets held by the complete sample (using
population weights to compute the share).

11These are derived from the two—step procedure described in section 3
with the corrected covariance matrix for such an estimator (Greene 1981).

'2For   an application of the "doubtful variables" approach to other
empirical problems see NcManus (1980) and Cooley and Le Roy (1981).
'3To show this, simply substitute the expression for a constrained
least—squares estimate into equation (9) defining the ellipse; see
Learner (1978, Theorem 5.1).

-4Points on the contract curve need not, in general, lie between the
prior and regression estimates because ct, as defined by (15), is a
matrix—weighted average of the two estimates. The ellipse shown in
Figure 3 is the hull of all possible contract curves for different
choices of Z*.
        TABLE 1. NET WORTH REGRESSIONS: TRUNCATED SAMPLE W $2500

                      (standard errors in parentheses*)

                                                W
                          Dependent Variable in v

                                                    (1)       (2)

Constant                                          4.592      5.468
                                                 (0.734)    (1.094)

V1                                                0.073     —0.010
                                                 (0.011)    (0.084)

V2                                                0.042      0.121
                                                 (0.007)    (0.026)

V3                                                0.032      0.043
                                                 (0.007)    (0.020)

V4                                                0.002     —0.003
                                                 (0.007)    (0.028)

V5                                                0.013      0.034
                                                 (0.021)    (0.022)
                                                 —0.002     —0.003
V6
                                                 (0.002)    (0.002)

V7                                               —0.062     —0.027
                                                 (0.127)    (0.117)
in Y                                             —0.501     —0.595
                                                 (0.067)    (0.094)
Number of Persons with                            0.036      0.065
Life Insurance                                   (0.015)    (0.014)
      Social Security Wealth                     —0.192     —0.234
in
                                                 (0.058)    (0.083)
     Private Pension Wealth                      —0.125     —0.068
in
                                                 (0.029)    (0.026)

V12                                                          0.003
                                                            (0.004)
                                                            —0.009
V22
                                                            (0.003)

V32                                                         —0.0001
                                                            (0. 002 6)

V42                                                         —0.00002
                                                            (0.00269)
             TABLE 1. NET WORTH REGRESSIONS (continued)


                                               (1)            (2)

DI FF                                                       —0.006
                                                            (0.003)

(DIFF)2                                                      0.00008
                                                            (0.00004)

REG 1                                                        0.082
                                                            (0.043)

REG 2                                                        0.476
                                                            (0.036)

AREA                                                         0.105
                                                            (0.033)

Farm Family Dummy                                            1.040
                                                            (0.061)

Number of Persons Unemployed                                —0.034
                                                            (0.027)

Number of Adults in Household                                0.043
                                                            (0.017)

Inverse of Mills' Ratio                      —1.223         —1.080
                                              (0.051)       (0.048)

Standard Error of Equation                    1.132          1.031
                                              0.411          0.495

Degrees of Freedom                            8266           8254


*These are the corrected asymptotic standard errors appropriate for a
 two—step estimator (Greene, 1981).
                  TABLE 2:    BOUNDS ON DISPLACEMENT EFFECTS



                                SOCIAL SECURITY WEALTH PRIVATE PENSION WEALTH

                                LOWER UPPER DIFFERENCE LOWER UPPER DIFFERENCE

1. Sampling Uncertainty          .064   .352   .288      .067   .485   .418
    (data point      l.96a)

2. Posterior Means
      Prior 1                   0.107 0.273 0.166       0.272 0.512 0.240
      Prior 2                  —0.034 0.244 0.278      —0.064 0.340 0.404
      Prior 3                   0.143 1.066 1.209      —0.032 1.308 1.340

3. Intersection of 95%
    Confidence and
    Feasible Ellipses
      Prior 1                   0.107 0.273 0.166       0.272 0.512 0.240
      Prior 2                   0.008 0.244 0.236      —0.013 0.340 0.353
      Prior 3                   0.147 0.566 0.419       0.079 0.408 0.329




Source: Own Calculations.
 TABLE 3: DISPLACEMENT EFFECTS FOR ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF PENSION WEALTH

                         (standard errors in parentheses*)


                  Assumptions                             Displacement Effect
           Real           Expected Rate              Social                Private
     Discount Rate (%)   of   Inflation (%)      Security Wealth        Pension Wealth

1. Standard Assumptions
            2.5                  5.0                   0.208                 0.276
                                                      (0.074)               (0.107)
2.          1.0                  5.0                   0.207                 0.344
                                                      (0.0 67)              (0.080)
3.          4.0                  5.0                   0.196               —0.095
                                                      (0.079)               (0.134)
4.          2.5                 3.0                    0.209                 0.293
                                                                    :
                                                      (0.074)               (0.103)
5.          2.5                 8.0                    0.206                 0.245
                                                      (0.074)               (0.111)




*These are the corrected asymptotic standard errors approriate for a two—step
 estimator (Greene, 1981).
                             REFERENCES


Barro, R.J. (1974) "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of
     Political Economy 82, 1095—1117.

Barro, R.J. (1978) "The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving:
     Evidence from the US Time Series," American Enterprise Institute,
     Washington D.C.

Blinder, A.S., Cordon, R.H., and Wise, D.E. (1980) "Life—Cycle Savings
     and Bequests: Cross—Sectional Estimates of the Life Cycle Model,"
     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 619.

Boyle, P., and Murray, J. (1979) "Social Security Wealth and Private
     Savings in Canada," Canadian Journal of Economics 12, 456—468.

Cagan, P. (1965) The Effect of Pension Plans on Aggregate Saving:
     Evidence from a Sample Survey, Columbia University Press, New York.

Chamberlain, C., and Learner, E. (1976) "Matrix Weighted Averages and
     Posterior Bounds," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B38,
     73—84.

Cooley, T.F., and LeRoy, S.F. (1981) "Identification and Estimation of
     Money Demand," American_Economic Review 71, 825—844.

Danziger, S., Haveman, R., and Plotnick, R. (1981) "How Income
     Transfer Programs Affect Work, Savings and the Income Distribution:
     A Critical Review," Journal of Economic Literature 19, 975—1028.

Diamond, P.A., and Hausman, J.A. (1982) "Individual Retirement and
     Savings Behaviour," paper presented at the NBER/SSRC Conference on
     Microdata and Public Economics, at Oxford, England, June 1982,
     rnimeo.

Dicks—Mireaux, L—D.L. (l98la) "The Effects of Social Security and
     Pensions on Saving: A Survey of Time—Series and Cross—Section
     Studies," aarvard University, mitneo.

Dicks—Mireaux, L—D.L. (198lb) "Canadian Retirement Wealth: Legislation
     and Construction," Harvard University, mimeo.

Feldstein, M.S. (1974) "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and
     Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy
     82, 905—926.

Feldstein, M.S. (1980) "Social Security Benefits and the Accumulation
     of Preretirernent Wealth," National Bureau of Economic Research
     Working Paper 477, and in The Determinants of National Saving and
     Wealth, Proceedings of a 1980 International Economic Association
     Conference, F. Modigliani (ed.), forthcoming.
Feldstein, M.S., and Pellechio, A. (1979) "Social Security and Household
     Wealth Accumulation: New Microeconomic Evidence," Review of Economics
     and Statistics 61, 361—368.

Greene, W.H. (1981) "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error:
     Comment," Econotnetrica 49, 795—798.

Heckxnan, J.J. (1976) "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of
     Truncation, Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables
     and a Simple Estimator for Such Models," Annals of Economic and
     Social Measurement 5, 475—492.

Heckman, J.J. (1979) "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,"
     Econoinetrica 47, 153—162.

Katona, G. (1965) Private Pensions and Individual Saving, Survey Research
     Center, University of Michigan.

Kotlikoff, L.J. (1979) "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life
     Cycle Accumulation," American Economic Review 69, 396—410.

King, M.A., and Dicks—Mireaux, L—D.L. (1982) "Asset Holdings and the
     Life Cycle," Economic Journal 92, 247—267.

Leaiuer, E.E. (1978) Specification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference with
     Nonexperitnental Data, John Wiley, New York.

McManus, W. (1980) "Bayesian Estimation of the Deterrent Effect of
     Capital Punishment," UCLA, mimeo.

Modigliani, F., and Ando, A. (1957) "Tests of the Life Cycle Hypothesis
     of Savings," Bulletin of the Oxford Univers Institute of
     Economics and Statistics 19, 99—124.

Modigliani, F., and Brumberg, R. (1954) "Utility Analysis and the
     Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data,"
     in Kurihara, K. (ed.) Post—Keynesian Economics.

Munnell, A.H. (1976) "Private Pensions and Saving: New Evidence,"
     Journal of Political Economy 84, 1013—1032.

Statistics Canada (1979) "Evaluation of Data on Family Assets and
     Debts 1977," Ottawa.
                                                                                                                                                   AGE
80           75       70              65   60          55       50               45                  40          35          30          25   20     15
1            I        I                        I                                                                     I           I            I
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                              o
 \,      a



                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                              LU
                                                                                                                                                              -j
             a
                                                                                                                                     /
                                                                                                                     /       /
                                                                                                                                                     -   5—   =
                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                              I-
     —
                                                                                                                         /
                  a
                                                                                                             /                                                LU
                                                                                                         I                                                    E
                                                                                             I,
                                                                                                                 /                                            za:
                                                                                                                                                               zLU
                          a
                                                                                                             /                                       —   7—
                                                                                                                                                              z
                                                                                                                                                                I-
                              a
                                  \                                          -
                                                                                 /
                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                     /                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                              LU
                                                                        /                    /                                                       8—-
                                                                    I
                                      \            /
                                                            I
                                                                                     /
                                                                                         S
                          a                                                      S
                                           -
                                                                             /                                                                       9—-
                                                                    /
                                                                         I
                                                                I
                                      \ /              F—-—                                                                                          10—-
                                                                                                                                                     ii—-
                      INCOME PERMANENT TO WEALTH OF RATIO THE OF PROFILE AGE j: FIGURE
                       2:    BOUNDS FOR DISPLACEMENT EFFECTS    :    PRIOR i
              FIGURE
      .52


              -
      49—

=             -
I-    .46
-J
a:
w
              -
z0    43—
 II
 U)
w             -
0     4O
w
I—
a:
>             -
      .37—
0
0
Li
I-    34
C-)
w
U-
U-
w
zw
w             -
C)    .28
cc
-J
0
U)
0
                             I          I          I             1               I    I    —I
            .09             .12       .15        .18           .21             .24   .27   30
              DISPLACEMENT EFFECT FOR SOCIAL SECURITY WEALTH
                                                       :
               FIGURE
               -
                      3: ELLIPSES AND CONTRACT CURVE       PRIOR 2
        .7—




        •   5— -

-J
cc
w
z0      .3—
 '-4
Cs)
 zw                                                                      D
a-
w
        •   1— -
cc                                     P
'-.1

a-
0
La
I—     —.
C.)
w
U-
w
zw             -
       —.3—
w
C—)
cc
-J
a-
C/)
                             I               I                  I
       —.5— -
                             1               I                  I            -1
            —.5            —.3             —.1                       3       .5
               DISPLACEMENT EFFECT FOR SOCIAL SECURITY WEALTH
               FIGURE 4: ELLIPSES AND CONTRACT CURVE   PRIOR 3
       1.5—


       1.3—


-J     1.1
cc
w
z0
         9—
zw(0
0
w
cc       7— -
>
'S
a-
               -
0       .5—

C-)
w                     p
               -
Li..    .3—
w
I—
zLii
E
lii
C-)     .1—
cc
-J
a-
U)
0                                        I
       —.1                                       __
                       *                                           I     I
             —.2       o       .2       .4       .6       .8     1.0   1.2   1.4
               DISPLACEMENT EFFECT FOR SOCIAL SECURITY WEALTH
