                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             GOVERNMENT DEBT AND PRIVATE LEVERAGE:
               AN EXTENSION OF THE MILLER THEOREM



                       Robert L. McDonald




                     Working   Paper No. 965




              NATIONAL BTJREATJ OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA O213

                          August 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #965
                                                   August 1982




                Government Debt and Private Leverage:
                  An Extension of the Miller Theorem



                              ABSTRACT




     This paper shows how government financing decisions can influence the

corporate decision to use debt or equity finance. In particular, it is

shown that an increase in the stock of taxable government debt reduces the

equilibrium quantity of corporate debt, and that an increase in the stock

of tax—free government debt reduces the equilibrium quantity of corporate

equity. The effects of inflation rate and tax rate changes are also con-

sidered.



                                  Robert L. McDonald
                                  School of Management
                                  Boston University
                                  704 Commonwealth Avenue
                                  Boston, Massachusetts 02215

                                  (617) 353—2038
                           "GOVERNMENT DEBT AND PRIVATE LEVERAGE:

                            AN EXTENSION OF THE MILLER THEOREM"

INTRODUCTION

       This paper shows how government borrowing decisions can influence the

corporate decision to use debt or equity finance. In particular, it is shown

that an increase in taxable government debt reduces the equilibrium quantity

of corporate debt, and that an increase in tax-free debt reduces the

equilibrium quantity of corporate equity. This provides a possible

explanation for        the post-war increase in the corporate debt-to—equity     ratio,

and    may explain the constancy of the debt—to—GNP ratio noted by Friedman
(1981).
       It   is   well-documented that U.S. corporations have made increasing use of
debt finance in        the post-World War II   years [Ciccolo (1981),   Gordon and

Malkiel      (1981), and Holland and Myers (1978)]. The reason for this rise in
the    corporate debt-equity ratio is not well documented.

       The most compelling explanations are micro—economic. For example, Gordon

and Malkiel argue that corporate leverage is determined by a trade—off between

bankruptcy cost and a tax advantage to debt, and that a burgeoning belief in

the stability of the economy lowered the estimated probability of bankruptcy,

and hence raised optimal leverage. Friedman (1981) notes that the aggregate

nonfinancial debt—to—GNP ratio has been roughly constant the last thirty

years, but does not explain why corporations have increased their use of debt

over   this period.
       In view of the typical micro—economic approach to corporate leverage

decisions, the seminal paper by Miller (1977) takes an ingenious twist in

showing that the aggregate leverage ratio may be determinate even if leverage

at the level of the individual firm       is   not determinate. The Miller model thus
                                         2

raises the possibility that macro—phenomena may have something to do with the

post—war increase in corporate leverage.     In addition, because the Miller

model explains aggregate leverage, it offers some hope of explaining the

constancy   of the debt-to—GNP ratio.   If the wealth-to-GNP ratio is
approximately constant, then Friedman may merely have measured a constant
debt—to—wealth ratio.
    The basic point of Miller's paper is that the tax treatment of both the
suppliers and demanders of assets affect the equilibrium configuration of
asset    supplies. For example, interest payments on debt are a tax-deductible

expense for corporations, while payments to equity holders are not.
Considering only the supplier, tax laws favor debt over equity. On the other

hand, debt returns are taxed more heavily than equity returns at the personal

level, so considering only the demand side, tax laws favor equity over debt.

    This paper shows that in a model like Miller's, an exogenous increase in

government debt will reduce the (endogenously determined) supply of similarly

taxed,    privately—supplied assets.1 This result will hold as long as the
distribution of wealth across tax brackets is approximately unchanged by the
increase in government debt.
                                                                 it
    This argument is presented analytically in Section 1, where' is assumed

that equity is riskiess. The argument is not particularly sensitive to

assumptions   about whether government debt is or is not net wealth. Much of
this    paper is devoted to analyzing the above argument in a model where it is

assumed that there is risky equity, and three riskless assets: tax-free

municipal debt, federal debt, and corporate debt. There is a progressive

income tax, with a lower tax on equity income than on debt income, and a

corporate income tax. There are no bankruptcy or other costs to issuing

debt.2 The principal conclusions are that
                                         3

       1) An increase in taxable government debt always reduces the supply of

corporate debt but has an uncertain effect on the quantity of equity; an

increase in tax-free government debt reduces the supply of corporate equity

but has an uncertain effect on corporate debt.

    2) Changes in the inflation rate have no effect on the equilibrium

aggregate   debt—to—wealth or corporate debt-to-equity ratio, despite the
taxation and deductibility of nominal rather than real interest payments.
This   assumes that there are no costs to debt finance. If there are bankruptcy

or other debt costs, increases in the inflation rate raise leverage.

    Section   2 introduces the model under uncertainty, and Section 3 derives
the comparative static results discussed above. Section 4 explores the
implications of government debt   not being net wealth, and shows that

government debt issues can have real effects in this model even if future tax

payments   are capitalized. Section 5 discusses one implausible predicion of
the model and Section 6 concludes.
    Before presenting the argument explicitly, it will prove useful to examine

some historical time series which bear on the theory. The argument is that

increases in taxable government debt are associated with reductions in the

private supply of taxable debt.

    The first column of Table 1 presents the market value of taxable debt

outstanding as a fraction of total wealth.3 This series is not completely

constant   during the post—war years, but it appears reasonably constant. This
series   is more striking when examined in conjunction with Column 2,   in which
the federal debt-to—wealth ratio is displayed. Despite a substantial
reduction in federal indebtedness, the total taxable debt-to—wealth ratio in

the seventies was at about the same level as in the fifties.
                                          4

      Figure 1 plots the ratio of taxable debt--excluding government debt—-to

wealth (the rising curve) against the ratio of taxable government debt to

wealth (the falling line). Again the inverse relationship is dramatic.

      Figure   2 depicts the market-value—of-debt to firm-value ratio for the
business sector as a whole. This has risen throughout the postwar period.          It
is not perfectly correlated with the debt—to-wealth ratio in Figure 1 because
the latter includes household issues of debt, and also because the firm
value—to-wealth ratio has changed over the period.4 It appears clear that
Figure 1 is potentially useful in explaining Figure 2.


1.    EQUILIBRIUM UNDER CERTAINTY

      This   section develops Miller's model under certainty and demonstrates that

an increase in taxable government debt lowers the corporate debt to equity

ratio. The purpose is heuristic, so the model is as simple as possible.

There are three assets: equity, which is untaxed, and corporate and

government debt, both of which are taxed. There is a progressive tax at the

rate u on interest income, where i indexes the tax bracket. Within each

tax bracket, there are n1 identical individuals, each with wealth W..

Corporate income is taxed at the rate e, and interest payments are a
tax—deductible expense.      It is assumed that       0<

      Because all assets are riskless, individuals choose   among assets solely on

the   basis of after-tax return.    This model is exactly that of Miller (1977),
but with the trivial addition of government debt as an additional asset.


1.1 Demand Equilibrium
      Let a be the return on equity, and let r be the gross-of-tax return on
debt.    It is easy to see that individuals will hold equity if a > (1   -
                                                                             u)r
                                                    5

and they will hold debt if the inequality is reversed. Define u, the

marginal tax bracket, by

             a   = (1 — u*)r                                            (1)

In equilibrium, the quantity of assets supplied must equal that demanded:

             E =
                 U> U


             F + B                  =   D(u*)   ;       D' > 0         (2)
                        u <u*
                            value
where E is the market           / of equity, F is the market value of federal
government debt, and B is the market value of corporate debt. The notation
u >   u   means that the summation is taken over all investors in tax brackets

greater    than u*.


1.2 Supply Equilibrium
      Take   the quantity of government debt as given. The advantage to a firm of
using debt instead of equity finance is given by a - r(1 — e). Fl-ms are
indifferent between debt and equity finance only if
             0a_r(1_e)r(1_u*)_r(1_e)r(e_U*)                            (3)
Miller's important insight was that if u < e, firms will find debt finance
cheaper and they will issue more debt and use the proceeds to retire equity.
From (2), we can see that if E falls and F + B rises, u will rise. Thus
there   is a natural mechanism ensuring that u* = e

      The equilibrium conditions (2) and (3) are graphed in Figure 3, where the

vertical line at e =       u*   represents (3), and the line OB represents the demand

for debt as a function of u*, which is given by (2). Equilibrium occurs at

point A, where B =          - F.
                                            6

1.3 Changes in Government Debt

      Suppose now that the government issues additional debt, increasing F to

F'. In general, this will change interest rates and savings behavior, as

investors absorb the debt issue in their portfolios. The important point,

however, is that as long   as investors    all   change their   savings behavior in the

same way, so that          is not changed, then the debt-to-total wealth

ratio will not be changed. By direct calculation,

                               n.W.
                                1   1
             B + F   — U<U
           E+B+F

and we know that u* is unchanged, since by (3) it must equal the corporate tax

rate, e. Thus, as long as the distribution of wealth across tax brackets is

unchanged, the debt—to—wealth ratio is unchanged.         If the government

debt—to—wealth   ratio rises, the corporate debt-to—wealth ratio falls. This is
a consequence of maximizing behavior by both investors and firms.


1.4 Comments
       i) This analysis has ignored the issues which arise when government debt
is not net wealth. That interesting case is treated in Section 4.
       ii) In writing the equilibrium conditions (2) we implicitly imposed a no
short—sale constraint on investors. If short-sales were allowed, there would
be    no equilibrium because high tax—bracket investors would       issue debt, deduct

the    interest payments, and use the proceeds to buy equity, earning a positive
return on a zero net investment.        This is known as tax arbitrage, and would be

pursued infinitely by investors.        In a model like this, it is necessary to

assume (as does Miller) that only corporations can borrow.5
                                              7

         ifl) When there is municipal debt, the analysis is similar, except that

municipal debt becomes a perfect substitute for equity, since both are

untaxed. Auerbach and King (1981) analyze the certainty case with taxable

equity, taxable debt, and tax—free debt. They show that in equilibrium, there

will be three clienteles, with investors in the top tax brackets holding only

tax-free debt, investors in middle brackets holding only equity, and low

bracket investors holding only taxable debt.



2.       EQUILIBRIUM WITH UNCERTAINTY

         This section presents a model similar in spirit to that in the previous

section, but with more realistic assumptions. Specifically

         i) Equity returns are assumed to be risky and taxed at the rate

     <
          u.
         ii) There is perfectly anticipated inflation at the rate ii, and the tax

system is not indexed.

         iii) There is tax—free municipal debt, M, with a real safe rate of return,

p.


         iv)   All investors may short—sell equity.   Investors in high tax brackets

may not sell taxable debt, and those in low tax brackets may not sell tax—free

debt.

         It is still assumed that corporate and federal debt are riskiess and that

they receive the same tax treatment. Note that there is no safe asset which

receives the same tax treatment as equity. Thus, Auerbach and King's (1981)

spanning condition does not hold. Markets are incomplete in the sense of

Taggart (1980).
                                                8

2.1 The Model

      To simplify the expostion, assume that there is a single, price—taking

corporation.       The analysis is concerned only      with investor demands for risky

as opposed to riskiess assets. The composition of demand across risky assets

is an interesting question in its own right, but it is a subsidiary issue in

this paper.6

      We will introduce uncertainty by using the model of intertemporal

consumption and portfolio allocation introduced by Merton (1971). This has
the   dual advantages of allowing investors to have arbitrary utility functions,

and yet resulting in a mean-variance model of asset pricing.              In addition, the

intertemporal nature of the problem imposes multiple sources of uncertainty on

the investor, and Merton's continuous—time asset-pricing model provides a

convenient way to handle this analytically.            It is assumed that the

corporation generates a gross real cash flow, the dynamic behavior of which is

given by the stochastic process7

           dg = Gdt +                                                       (5)
                         agdZ

where G is the instantaneous conditional mean cash flow,               is the

instantaneous conditional variance of cash flow, and dz is a Wiener process.

      Bondholders are paid a nominal return of r +         r, which   is a tax-deductible

expense   for the corporation. The real, after-tax cost of debt finance is thus
           (r + ir)(1 — e) — ii = r(1 — e) — eir                                (6)
The   real gross cash flow dg     is   taxed at the rate e. After taxes, the net real
return   available to equity holders is given by

           dE = (1 — e)dC —     (r(1   —   e) — ew)Bdt + V'dZe
               =   aEdt + yEdz + vEdze

where
                                                     9

          a
               — (1 — e)G —       (r(1   -   e) — er)B


                  (1   — e)cig
                                         ;


and B is the quantity of debt issued by the firm.                    The   dZe term in (7)
allows   for   the possibility of capital gains and losses on equity for reasons

other than unexpected current cash flow. Note that a,                      y,   and v depend on

leverage. In addition, a depends on the inflation rate as well as the

gross—of-tax real bond rate, r.

     We can also calculate the expected real after-tax returns to investors on

                                                                                            —
debt and equity. The after-tax real return on equity is (1 —                        c)a
                                                     —
and that on taxable debt is (1 —               u)r       U1W,
                                                                while that on municipal debt

is   simply p, with no inflation distortion because the returns are untaxed.
     The safe assets are distinguishable only by tax treatment.                       Investors will
never hold both taxable and tax-free debt, unless they are in the marginal tax

bracket u*, defined by

            (1_.u*)r_u*ir=p                                                           (8)

Investors with tax rate u are indifferent between taxable and tax-free debt,

Investors for whom u >           u will hold municipal debt, and those for whom u < u
will hold taxable debt. A change in r will generally require a change in p if

(8) is to be satisfied.

      To ensure that an equilibrium exists, we must constrain high—bracket

investors not to issue taxable debt, and we constrain low—bracket investors

not to issue tax—free debt. There will be no other constraints, however; all

investors are free to short-sell equity and the one kind of debt they are

permitted      to hold.
                                                         10

2.2   Asset Demand

      Following Merton (1971), the investor chooses , the fraction of his

portfolio invested in risky assets, so as to maximize



           Et
                7       e_S_t)       u(Ct)ds
                                                                                         (9)
                t


subject to

           cM =W[(a* -            r*) + r*]dt    -   Cdt +      (1-c)tW(dz
                                                                             +
                                                                                 VdZe)

where C is consumption, W is the investor's wealth, A is the rate of time

preference, a* and r* are the after—tax, real expected asset rates of return,

and Et is the expectation as of time t.

      There are other sources of uncertainty besides equity returns, however.

If the government issues additional debt (taxable or tax-exempt) it is

simultaneously endowing future tax liabilities (to be denoted L) upon

investors. In general, this also induces a change in equilibrium interest

rates. The rational investor will take into account this uncertainty, and

will treat L and r as additional state variables when choosing an optimal

consumption path.         I assume that L and r are random and evolve according to

                              +
           dL1 =        adt        bdz
           dr       =   cdt   +
                                    fdzr
      With three state variables--W, L, and r—-it can be shown (Merton, 1971)

that maximizing (9) is equivalent to maximizing

           I = etu(Ct) +                 + JW[W((a* - r*) + r*) - C]                           (10)


                    +   Jc    +
                                  JLa + rr           +        JLLb +

                    + J4bR               (l_c)   +J           d4fR (1_c) +JLfbRLr
                                                              11

where      =
               -, etc.,            a2         = y2 + v2 + 2yVC0V(ZZe) R1 is the correlation

coefficient between the unexpected changes in i and j,


           J(t, W)         =
                                 Et   ;           e_S_t)       u(C5)ds
                                          t


and C5 is the expected consumption path which maximizes (9), conditional

on information at time t.                        Equation (10) is really just the investors Bellman

function as approximated by a Taylor expansion.

      The first—order conditions for optimal C and                           are

                 =    u'    -           = 0                                                        (ha)

                 =    jwW(a* - r*) +              Jwwa4(1_c)2 + WLI4L +
                                                                                                   (hib)
                                      8
which may be rewritten

           W
                     [A •i2       (a* — r*)         —(
                                                         JwbRw L   +   ___                         (12)


where



               1W
is the inverse of the investor's coefficient of absolute risk aversion. The

terms          and              can be interpreted by differentiating (ha):

                           ,,dC                    ,,dC
                     —
                                                'wrF —



Since an increase in future tax liabilities constitutes a reduction in current
net   wealth, it is reasonable to suppose that                           =         where M

(0<M<l) is      the fraction                  of true tax liabilities which are perceived by the
investor. Thus WL = '\                                    can be positive or negative. For our
purposes, it will be necessary to assume either that                               is   zero, or
that Wr'WW is insensitive to changes in W, L, and r.                               With this
                                                      12

assumption, most of the analysis to follow will be as if wealth were the only
state variable.
2.3 Asset Supplies
    The purpose of this section is to derive an expression for the value of
the firm, which will enable us to see how the Miller equilibrium is
characterized     under uncertainty. Equation (12) tells us the investor's dollar

demand for the risky asset. We will now use (12) to solve explicitly for the

market value of the firm; this will permit us to solve for the equilibrium u*,

given the assumption that firms maximize their market value. By aggregating

across investors, we obtain the equilibrium condition comparable to (2) in the

certainty case:


            E =




                 = u nA1                      (cz —       rV +                 nD                            (13)
                                   a2(1—c)2
where

                    JWLbL 'rr          -
            0. = - ________ — ________ — bRWL —
                                                                           Wrr
                                                                           1
             1
                                         WW



                                                           + v2 +
    Now multiply (13) by a2E, and recall that a2E2 = E2(y2                                            2yvCov(z,ze))
is a constant. For ease of notation, let 02E2 y .Substituting in the

definitions of a (equation (7)) and p (equation (8)) at the same time gives

    2                                         e)G -       (r(1     —   e) — eir)BJ   —
        =
                   N ((1 — c)[(l         —
                                                                                         c1rE)               (14)



                                                                                                      n.D.
                                              u.)r
                                                                                                       1

                                                           u.ir)       +              +
                    —   [          N. ((1 —
                                    1          1
                                                      —
                                                            1
                                                                                N.pJE
                                                                                 1               (1
                            u<u*                                                             u


where Ni =       nA(1       —
                                CjY2.
                                                                     13

    Solving (14) for E yields
       E =   [(1- e)G - (r(1 -                      e)    -     elT)B]    -       -I

                                                                                                          (15)
where



                                            U
                                                        N1(1—c)
                                                                                                          (16)
                     N.[(1 —
                      1
                                   u.)r
                                    1
                                                    —    (u.1    —
                                                                      c)lr]   +    N.[p
                                                                                    1
                                                                                          +   c.ir]


The market value of the firm is thus

           E + B = [(1 - e)G - (2 4(1'1) N(1-c1))']                                                      (17)


                                   + B(1 -                      [r(1 - e) - eli])

Note that if all     taxes and inflation are zero, and if                              wealth   is the only state
variable   in the investor's maximization problem, then (17) becomes

                           2
                     G -
                                        1
           E + B =
                               r
                                                1
                                                                                                          (17')

which   is the usual expression for the value of the firm in a mean—variance
model [Jensen (1972)]. For future reference, note that the value of a                                        firm

behaves like a consol when the interest rate changes.

    In a model such as this, with distorting taxes, investors usually will not

be unanimous about the choice of financial policy. Auerbach and King (1981)

show that if the firm's financial policy has any effect on investor's

opportunity sets——as it will unless investors can undo on personal account any

action the firm takes-—then investors will disagree about financial policy.

Nevertheless, I assume that the (competitive) firm                                will    choose financial
                                                                     14
                                                                           10
policy so as to maximize its market value.

       The expression multiplying B in (17) is crucial to the analysis.                                                  (17)

implies that the firm will be indifferent about financial policy only if

                         —       e)r   —   eitJ = 1                                                                       (18)

By using the definition of                            and collecting terms in it and r, (18) can be

rewritten to show that

0 =    (r   +   it)[(1       -   e)         N.(1 -
                                             1
                                                       c.)
                                                        1
                                                                -         N.(1   -   u.)
                                                                                      1
                                                                                           -           N.(1
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                              -   u*)]
                                                                                                                          (19)

By choosing u to set the bracketed expression equal to zero, the right-hanc

side expression is set to zero, independently of the level of the inflation

rate. This demonstrates that changes in the inflation rate leave unaffected

the condition for the firm to be in financial equilibrium. Since financial

equilibrium is unaffected by inflation rate changes, I henceforth assume that

it   = 0.


2.4 Market Equilibrium

       Regardless of the inflation rate, (19) is satisfied when11

                             (1 —      e)        N(1
                                                            —
                                                                c)
                                             U
                                                                                      =1                      (20)
                         N.        (1 —
                                            u)   +    (1 — u*)              Ni
                u<u*
                             1
                                                                     u>u

It is easy to see that, given A1 and n1, and hence N1 there will be only one u

for which (20) holds.                       (The expression on the left—hand side is strictly

increasing in u. )                     The interpretation of (20) is clearer if we assume that
                                                                                     12
                 have constant r-elative risk aversion.                                    Then A1 =     R4       where
4nvestors                                                                                                     ,
R    is the inverse of the relative risk aversion coefficient.                                           (2Q) then becomes
                                                                                                 SI
                                                                                 -
                                                                      I                      I
                             I)    —
                                        (9
                                                   fl
                                                              L
                                                                      I)     —
                                                                                         L                                    —

                         I)MU
                                          —
                                                  (fl                                        T)MU
                                                                                                           —
                                                                                                                   (fl        — I
                                                                                                                                                                        I

                                                                  +
                                 z(D—I)       L                                                                L




unAqj.[nb3 su.P3qo                      ALU0            U314M              [flD31Pd                        UO2DPJJ JO                S.AO3SOAU!. s4QJe.Ad


9aLJ—XP3 03 eqPXP                       3q9p                 a2o           '3Pt13                SP   U 13           A3U.P3AeD 'aSPD               S3      UOj3DPJJ

si.   'paxi..j     papAoJd 3P3 9q3                           3[PM                    59JP115 JO S.AO3SeAU                            U    2U3ABJJ!.PXP2

s3apP1q          su.Pwa.A         pex.j

       31    S     ,c.APSSeD9U          3P42                 eq           iitus A3PLJ                              02    fl    AO J(43 03 35X3                  P


n     tpjiM      saios1o)                         31     s        OSP            £APsseDeu                 3P3           e 30U      eq    ,,'e6I,I       9DUS       (0)
sanbe..                      pa3q5.eM                   a5aAP                jo       juosad                   x se nbe                      eq. a3PJodA0D xP3

3PA JI                  = 0 A0J                         'L    P       fl     <       9       LLM 9ALOS (O)                           JI      =
                                                                                                                                                  'fl
                                                                                                                                                         9A9112


LLM     q     OU      UOJ3flLOS               .AO S1fl. 'UOSP.A                                   I   LIJM         IIflSS       21J3         S     'LLPWS 03

aa3uP..4pn6 3PLfl.           P    fl S3SCO                   03 eAloS                    £T(0)
       6uwnssy 3P2                 fl     seop           '3sJ.Xe             I       LLM MOU MOS                 33 eAL3L3adwoD                         uuLj.


0At4eq           SPP9[ 02            (O) 6u.eq                    pss                                 aqj      uonu s aq. :6uojoj                                    j.t


      s     003 'MOj         uat                        uw                soseu e                              6upjoi           jdpunw qep woj
'(LI)       SUUj..J   LUM                     UP        aAuezu                       o.          anss      e..iow        '.qap       pu                 nbe             sy

96P..ieAel       'sesaui                                              e..a       pLss 02                            poq .iejws              s3unoui       o     Aj.nbe

u     aq         'oLiojod               aus              eq.                                           o jop                        jo    Anbe seseou 3M
e64oAe1             sy   sosau                     poq            e..ow          qap pu sse                             Ai.nba       u             'SO!.Lo43JOd

eq. Xjddns jo            Led3unw .qap                             s        peqosq                     Xq           e1Lews           UODZ o              's..oseiu

pun          sas...i     u                    03        u.uj.uJ wnqj..inbe                                              sqj     sseDoJd sdo.s            uaq        n   SPq

uas cq           q6noua          o     .JS4PS '(o)                           Os 3Lfl                  SwJ           e.AP      ej.flpu .u3 SpAMO3                1eq3n4

a6PAa[           Se5U14D

       S.L4j     sseDoJd          u       eq       p.otdep                   jjDqd5                                 sy                    'da.s    i    [LM     MOL4S


        eq       .unowP      o                           papuwep Aq esoq. OqM                                           os      pjoq Ldp!.unw .qep                  su
                                                                                    16

increasing function of the total amount of equity issued by the firm.                                                                               Let

EH denote the amount of equity held by high tax-bracket investors (those for

whom u >   u*).     From (12), we have

                                                                                                                              n.D.
                                                                                                                                   11
         EH =           N.(a(1           —       c.)      —           r(1       —       u*))    1
                                                                                                            +
                u>u*
                         1                        1
                                                                                                c'•                 U>U       LCJa

            =                   N.
                                     1
                                             [(1 -            e)(1              -       c.)[G
                                                                                         1
                                                                                                    -       r(B      + E)J                          (21)
                  y u>u*

                                                                                                                                        n.D.
                            -    rE(1            -   u            -    (1       -       e)(1    -       c.))J
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                      +   E    L           1

                                                                                                                                          —ci


      Differentiating (21) gives


                =
                            _                            N [r(1 — e)(1                                  —
                                                                                                                c)            aE



                                     +   rNl              —       u*)       —       (1    —    e)(1             —
                                                                                                                     c))J                           (22)



In the vicinity of equilibrium,
                                 •               .                a(B+E)                  =    0,       and if C1 is small,
                                                                       aE



                  N [1 —             u       —       (1       —       e)(1          —
                                                                                         c1)]
                                                                                                    <       0                                       (23)
           u>u*


since u > e even if c. =                     0,       and u becomes larger as                                                           increases
                                                     H
(see footnote 13). Thus, .— > 0.

      Figure 4 shows how equilibrium is determined. Lower case letters

represent the asset—to—total wealth ratio, i.e. ,                                                                   in = MM,       etc. where

W =   M + F + B + E.        Also let


                        *
                                                                                                                                                    (24)
                            N1
                    U


and remember that w is fixed independently of changes in the composition of
                                            17

assets.     The d(e) schedule is a graph of


            d(e) =      + eh(e);             e' >

We saw that increases in the quantity of equity raise the demand for equity by

those who also hold municipal debt; this is why the d(e) schedule is

upward—sloping.      If the system were at point A, u would be too high, and

firms would have an incentive to issue additional equity, from (17). This

increase in the supply of equity leads to additional equity demand by

municipal debt holders, who in turn sell some of their municipal debt. This

lowers u, and leads to a greater fraction of investors holding municipal

debt. The process stops at A.



2.5 Effects of Tax Rate Changes

       The equilibrium condition (20) allows us to infer ininediately what will be

the effects of tax rate changes on financial equilibrium. Any general tax

rate change will induce an offsetting change in equilibrium u in order for

(20) to be satisfied. Previous arguments have shown that if u rises,

corporate leverage rises, and if u falls, corporate leverage falls.

       Therefore, increases in the corporate tax rate e or in the equity tax rate

   will raise private leverage, while increases in the personal tax rate or

ordinary income will lower private leverage. While it is common to speak of

u* as    the marginal    tax bracket, changes in rates in   inframarginal   tax brackets

will    affect u. The Miller model under certainty predicts that changes in
only the maximum tax rate will leave financial equilibrium unaffected; under
uncertainty this is no longer true.
                                          18

3.   COMPARATIVE STATICS

     I will consider two comparative static experiments: a change in the

quantity of taxable government debt outstanding (municipal debt may be treated

analogously) and a change in the scale of the firm.      I will assume that w

remains unchanged, i.e. ,   that   the distribution of wealth across tax brackets

is constant, and that government debt behaves like a consol in response to

changes in the interest rate.       I will also assume throughout that consumption

is unaffected by interest rate changes, i.e. that         is zero.

     To perform the comparative static calculations it is necessary to make an

assumption about the effect of government debt issues on saving. To

understand the importance of this, it is necessary to digress briefly on the

implications of whether or not investors perceive future tax liabilities.

     When the government uses debt finance instead of tax finance to pay for

current expenditures, it obligates itself to collect taxes in the future to

pay off the debt. With perfect capital markets and no distorting taxes, the

present value of these future tax collections is equal to the value of the

current debt issue. The current value of an investor's wealth is lowered by

expected future tax liabilities.       If individuals are aware of these future tax

liabilities, Barro's (1974) argument implies that in equilibrium, investors

will purchase the newly-issued government debt in proportion to their

endowment of future tax liabilities.14 The increase in government debt is

absorbed entirely through new saving; given a level of government spending,

gross aggregate wealth will rise by the amount of the debt issue, and each

individual's net wealth will be unchanged by the use of debt finance in lieu

of tax finance.   In effect, when capital markets are perfect, investors are

indifferent between paying taxes now and paying taxes later. This implies

that interest rates are unchanged by a new issue of government debt.
                                               19

     Suppose on the other hand that investors do not perceive future tax

 liabilities. When the government issues additional debt the price of bonds

 falls because the increased demand for bonds (if any) is insufficient to meet

 the increase in supply. The interest rate increase lowers the price of assets

generally. The most extreme case would occur when wealth was unchanged in the

new equilibrium. The increase in debt would have then been completely

absorbed through an increase in interest rates.

     I will use s to measure the extent to which aggregate wealth rises when

there is an increase in the stock of (taxable or tax-free) government debt. 15

  = 0 signifies that aggregate wealth is unchanged, and that the increase in

debt has been absorbed into the economy through an increase in interest

rates.       o =   1   signifies that the debt issue has been absorbed through an

increase in saving, and that interest rates have not changed. The use of                    is

a device which makes use of Barro's elegant insights and avoids complicating

the analysis needlessly.

    It is assumed throughout that tax rates are unchanged. The increase in

government debt can be viewed as resulting from increased government spending

oras due to a reduction in a lump—sum tax, but not from a change in the

personal or corporate tax rates. Money is excluded from this model, so the

possibility of an inflation tax as a third means of finance is ignored.

    The main results are that an increase in the stock of taxable government

debt always reduces corporate debt, but has uncertain effects on the quantity

of equity. There is ambiguity only when the market value of the firm changes

due to an interest rate increase, i.e., when               1.          =
                                                       <        When       1, a reduction
in corporate debt implies a corresponding increase in equity. An increase in

the stock of tax—free debt reduces the stock of equity, but has an uncertain

effect on the stock of corporate debt.          (Again, this is ambiguous only when

  < 1.   )
                                                 20

    Before performing the comparative static calculations, I will explain the
strategy to be used. Suppose that the government issues dF in new taxable

debt. Private saving will change, and total wealth will increase by a

fraction o of the government debt issue. Thus, c14              6dF.16 Extensive use

will be made of the condition that the total demand for assets by investors in

high   tax brackets must equal the total wealth of high—bracket investors, i.e.
that
           EH(E,r) + M(r)        =


Given r, W, M, and w, and remembering that EH is an increasing function of

E, this equation implies an equilibrium quantity of total equity. If we

totally   differentiate thisequation, we obtain

           w* -w- *o— dM               dEH —   3EH    dM dr
                                               (___+).,+—.—.
                                                              3EH dE



This   may be solved for dE/dF to give

                          H1               H

           dF
                 =
                     aE
                                (wo - (Lar+ .±i)
                                              dr .a!.)
                                                  dF                             (25)


Equation (25) can be used to examine the question of how equilibrium supplies
of equity and debt change when the Federal government issues more debt. The

only problem in evaluating (25) is calculating ., which can be shown

to equal17

           dr —      (1 — o)r                                                    (26)
            dF       V+M
We are now in a position to calculate (25).

       Finally, in what follows we will make use of the fact (from (21)) that




            3EH_E 3EX             EH
                                                                                 (27)
                                                         21

This expression is positive, as may be seen by evaluating the elasticity of

EH with respect to E, using (22). Doing so yields
                                                                               -
                       3EHE         -         E      .




where the bracketed term is positive. Hence the elasticity is greater than

one.




3.1 Increase in Taxable Government Debt18

       With (25), we are now in a position to ask what happens to the quantity of

corporate equity and debt when there is an increase in the stock of taxable

government debt.

       A.   The Quantity of Corporate Debt

       An increase in the quantity of taxable government debt reduces the

equilibrium quantity of corporate debt.

       To show this, we will compute

             dB — dV      dE
                                                                                   (28)


Inserting (25) into (28), we obtain

                                        —1
                - dV dr            aEH                        3EH     dr
             dB —
                           - (-—,            (w* 6   - ( dM+ p—)      -            29)

and substituting and rewriting, it can be shown that the right-hand side of

(29) is equivalent to

                H
                               -             (1 - M+E) +      w   +   (M+EH)(16)   (30)

Every term within the square brackets is positive. Hence, increases in the
quantity of taxable government debt always reduce the equilibrium quantity of
corporate debt.
                                                 22

    B.   The Quantity of Corporate Equity

    An increase in the quantity of taxable government debt has an ambiguous

effect on the quantity of corporate equity.

    Evaluating (25), we obtain




                  H
             =           (wo +    ___            - EH(     - 1)]               (25')



               H
In evaluating .—,     using   (21), it is helpful to notice that r(B + E) is

independent of r when ir = 0.

    The sign of (25') is ambiguous, since the elasticity of EH with respect

to E is greater than one. When o is close to one, f-will be positive.

o close to one implies that the increase that the increase in government debt

is absorbed by saving. Consequently, interest rates do not change much, the

market value of the firm does not change much, and the unambiguous drop in the

quantity of corporate debt implies that there must be a concomitant

unambiguous rise in the quantity of corporate equity.



3.2 Increase in Tax-Free Government Debt

    Similar results may be derived for changes in the quantity of municipal

debt. An increase in municipal debt always "crowds out" equity, but has an

ambiguous effect on debt, except when a is close to 1.

    A.   The Quantity of Corporate Equity

    An increase in the quantity of tax—free government debt reduces the

equilibrium quantity of corporate equity.

    In the same way that (25) was derived, we can obtain

                                             H
          dE.,aE
            —    ,,
                  W0-               -   aE       dr   <0
                                                              23
                                                                     H
The inequality follows since 1 > wo and .—                                and       are both positive.

      B. The Quantity of Corporate Debt
      An increase in the quantity of tax-free government debt has an ambiguous

effect on the quantity of corporate                   debt.
      We can calculate

                                                               -1
                                                          H
            dB = dV - dE =                  dr                        *             aEH dr-
                                      (V)         1aE                W6         1



Using (27), this becomes

                          —1
            dB -                            *    (1   -       a)(V    -   E) 1aE1     -
                                                                                          EH(l - o)
                                                          V+F                               V+F

                                                      = 1.           In that case,          >   0, which
The sign is ambiguous except when

is sensible since when s =              1, interest rates do not change and the market
value of the firm is unaffected by the increase in the stock of tax—free

debt. Thus, a decrease in the quantity of equity outstanding will imply an

increase in the quantity              of debt.


3.3    Changes in the Scale of the Firm

      If government debt is net wealth, then a rise in the stock of taxable or

tax—free government debt will in the short run increase interest rates. Given

the stock of capital, the value of the corporate sector will fall. The

corporate sector will in turn reduce investment, and in the long run the

capital stock will fall, causing a change in the mean and variance of cash

flows. The value of the firm will fall further as the capital stock drops

(real crowding out occurs). What is the effect on the quantity of equity and

debt as the scale of the firm changes?
                                                        24

    Suppose that the value of the firm changes by dV. The equilibrium change
in EH will then be dEH = w*d4 = w*dV assuming that interest rates and
hence the market values of taxable and tax-free government debt do not change

and hence that d4 = dV.                Then,



                 ir v
                           —1
         dE =                    dEH
        v       (3E)                                                                  (32)


                                -1
                       H

                =(-.)                w*>O

The effect on the quantity of debt is less clear, since

         dB_1 dE
         v_   -iv-
(32) can, however, be rewritten as

                                     -1 1M
         dE
                '' 1B+M+F
                1aEH E                         E




The elasticity in parentheses is greater than 1.             As an empirical matter, the

quantity of municipal debt outstanding is small relative to the total of

corporate and federal debt outstanding, so it seems likely that
M    B + M+F
                 in which case                 >   0.

    When the capital stock can change what will be the long—run effect on B of

a change in outstanding taxable government debt? If               =   1, changes in
government debt have no real effects, so consider the case where                  0, and



suppose that      is       positive.
                                        25

      The increase in taxable government debt lowers B, from (29). As interest

rates have risen, the firm will invest less and for any given interest rate, V

will fall. The fall in V lowers B still more. The initial drop in B is

reinforced by the later decrease in the scale of the firm. The net long—run

effect   is greater than would be suggested by calculating (28) alone.


4. WHAT IF GOVERNMENT DEBT IS NOT NET WEALT}

      The implications of the model developed in Sections 2 and 3 hinge on the

important   assumption that the distribution of wealth across tax brackets is

unchanged by changes in the composition and level of government debt. This is

a plausible assumption (or at least a reasonable approximation) when

government debt is net wealth, since every individual has a fixed rate of time

preference, and individuals have identical utility functions. If there are

tax clienteles for government debt, however, then the Barro theorem can be

false.19

      If all future tax liabilities are endowed upon those who are in the

clientele which holds government debt, the Barro result still holds. In this

case, however, the results in Section 4 do not hold——increases in government

debt will have no effect on corporate leverage. High bracket investors will

have unchanged portfolios, and low bracket investors will completely absorb

the   increase in government debt.
      To examine the other extreme, suppose that all   future tax liabilities are

endowed upon those who hold only tax-free municipal debt. A possible

equilibrium    would be for those in high tax brackets to nevertheless hold the
new taxable debt, but this would conflict with the principle that the same

investor never hold riskiess assets with different after—tax    returns.

Instead,   high bracket investors in the aggregate would try to increase their
                                                       26

holdings of tax-free debt, and low—bracket investors would be left to absorb

the increase in taxable debt. The market return on tax-free debt would fall

and that on taxable debt would rise. From (8), u would rise. Corporations

would then retire debt and issue more equity, taking advantage of the relative

inexpensiveness of equity. The process would halt eventually, with a new u

greater   than the u that existed in the beginning.20 The aggregate equity
to wealth ratio would rise.
    It   is possible to show in this model, however, that individuals in

inframarginal      tax brackets will have their utility changed by changes in
corporate    leverage. To see this, consider equation (10) in which, for

simplicity, wealth is the only state variable.                                I will show that leverage

changes necessarily affect the utility of investors in inframarginal tax

brackets.

    Equation (11) defines the optimal portfolio weights. Substitute (11) into

(10). This gives

            L =
                  e_Atu(Ct)
                              +         + J(r4          — C)       +
                                                                        JW1( - r*)i
Hold consumption and wealth fixed. Utility will then be unchanged with

changes in aggregate leverage only if the expression tW(a* -                                           r*)
                                                                                            21
is independent of leverage,where                      is optimally chosen.                        This

expression may be rewritten

                                            (3.W.
                              —   r*)   =             (1 - c1)(l          -    e)(G — r(B + E)) +

                                                    + rE((1    —       e)(1    —
                                                                                   c)   -    (1   —
                                                                                                      u1)))   (34)



If the investor is in portfolio equilibrium, (12) holds.                                         (12) may be rewritten
                                                                     27

              .W.
              i   i     2       =           -               -   e)[G - r(B       +     E)]
                                    A[(1            c1)(1

                                                     +   rEU1    —    e)(1   —         — (1 —           (35)
                                                                                 c1)            u1))]

Equation (35) shows that low—bracket investors (for whom

(1 —   e)(1   —
                  c1)
                            —   (1 —   u)       <    0) will demand a smaller fraction of total

equity as corporate leverage decreases (E rises, for a given B + E).

Expression (34) shows that utility is independent of leverage only if the

equity share rises as corporate leverage decreases. Thus, I have shown that

with a progressive tax system, changes in leverage will in general affect
                                                                                                               22
investor utility, even though corporations are indifferent about leverage.

       Several comments are in order:

       1) The comparative static analysis in Section 4 ignores the kind of effect

I have just discussed. Even if future tax liabilities are distributed in such

a way that all investors change their wealth proportionally, there can still

be real effects operating through the portfolio decision. The case in Section

4 where       = 1 (increases in government debt are fully absorbed by increased

saving) is therefore at best only an approximation to the case where

government debt is not net wealth.

       2) The result that changes in the level of government debt have real

effects is not surprising since the structure of the model prohibits investors

from    having Hcomplete access" to capital markets.                                     If all investors could buy
and sell unlimited qualtities of all assets,23 government debt would have no
real effects, and               it is certain             that the        model would not yield a plausible

equilibrium (see the previous comments about the need for constraints which

prohibit tax arbitrage).
                                         28

5.    PLAUSIBILITY OF THE MODEL

      In this section 1   wish to consider a prediction of the model which
appears to be false: that the tax rate at which investors are indifferent

between taxable and tax—free debt is greater than the corporate tax rate.

While this conclusion is troublesome for the model, I will argue that there

are   mitigating circumstances in practice so that the main conclusions of the
model could nevertheless be basically correct.


5.1    The Predicted Marginal Tax Rate

      Whether or not there are capital gains taxes, we have seen (see footnote

11) that the model predicts that u >      e, i.e. , the tax rate at which
individuals   are indifferent between taxable and tax-free riskless debt exceeds

the corporate tax rate. Gordon and Malkiel (1981, Appendix B), however, show

that the actual marginal tax bracket is around 25 percent,24 which is

substantially less than the statutory corporate tax rate of 46 percent.

      The condition u* > e will be an equilibrium property of any Miller-type

model. To understand this result, one can think of firms as being a conduit

for equity holders, who do their borrowing through the firm. Because of the

interest deductibility, firms can offer a higher interest rate on debt and

still find borrowing profitable relative to the cost of issuing equity.      In a

certainty world, borrowing will be profitable for the firm until the return on

debt has been increased by the full amount of the saving due to the interest

deduction—-only then will the firm be indifferent between debt and equity

finance. The model in this paper shows that the same kind of result holds

even when there is uncertainty-—in fact, uncertainty raises u above e, even

when there are no capital gains taxes.
                                              29

       An increase in corporate leverage raises u, so that if u' in the real

world is lower than theory predicts, it can be because firms             issue   less debt

than the theory predicts, which would occur if there were costs to issuing

debt.     One relevant piece of empirical evidence along these lines is            provided

by Cordes and Sheffrin (1981)         who use Treasury data to show that, on average,
for    U.S. firms an additional dollar of interest expense results in only Z.33
of additional tax deductions. This is without taking account of tax
carrybacks and carryforwards, but Cordes and Sheffrin show that inability to
use tax credits tends to persist among relatively unprofitable firms. This
minimizes the value of the carrybacks and carryforwards.
      Another possibility is suggested by the results of Skelton (1980) who
finds that for short—term taxable and tax-exempt debt, the marginal personal

tax rate is close to the corporate tax rate, while for long—term debt, the

marginal personal tax rate is lower. This finding may allow a reconciliation

of the empirical finding of Gordon and Malkiel that the marginal personal tax

rate    is low, and the theoretical prediction of this and other Miller—type
models that the marginal personal tax rate should be close to the corporate

tax rate.

5.2     Inflation and Leverage Revisited
       If there are costs to debt      finance, as there   must be to   reconcile the

Gordon and Malkiel finding with the implications of this modeL, then a change

in the inflation rate will have an effect on corporate leverage.

      When there are costs to debt finance, the firm's equilibrium condition

becomes

            o   - d(E   + B) = a(E + B)
                                        + a(E
                                              + B) dx
                   dB            aB           ax
                                           30

where x =      x(B) represents the dependence of some parameter in the valuation
equation on the level of debt, i.e., x is the cost of issuing debt.23 If

x =    0,   then (20) is still the first—order condition for optimal leverage.   If

x $    0, however, then (20) does not hold and the inflation rate does not drop
out.

       Inflation leaves leverage unchanged when there are no debt costs because

the tax advantage to debt finance vanishes in equilibrium. When the inflation

rate changes, it affects the after-tax costs to borrowing and returns to

lending in the same way, and thus has no effect, because there is no marginal

tax advantage to debt.

       When there is a cost to debt finance, the marginal tax advantage to debt

finance (the negative of the first term in (36)) is equated to the marginal

cost of debt finance (the second term in (36)), which is greater than zero.

Hence there is a positive tax advantage to debt in equilibrium,24 and when

the inflation rate changes, it lowers the after—tax borrowing cost by more

than it raises the after-tax return. Hence the tax advantage to debt for any

given interest rate is increased by a rise in the inflation rate, and it

follows that if there are costs to debt, firms will use more debt finance if

there is an increase in the inflation rate.



6. CONCLUSION

       This paper has shown that government financing policy has important

implications for private financial decisions. Two important facts about the

postwar U.S. economy——the constancy of the debt-to—wealth ratio and the rise

in the corporate debt—to—equity ratio-—are consistent with the predictions of

the model. An important caveat is that the results were derived in a model

where financial intermediation is ignored. At the very least, intermediaries
                                         31

have the potential to transform the tax and risk characteristics of the asets

they hold, and thus could affect the conclusions of this model in an important

way.

       The model presented here, if developed more fully, may also provide a

useful way to think about severa] other issues, such as the effect of

government debt policy on investment and output, and the commingled effect of

inflation and taxes on investment.

       With respect to the latter issue, this model has the implication that,

despite the deductibility of nominal interest payments on corporate debt,

changes in the inflation rate need not affect the corporate after-tax

borrowing rate, because there is no tax advantage to debt in equilibrium.
                                                   32




                                          Data Appendix

     The following asset stock data, all from the Flow of Funds Sector Balance

Sheets (annual, year—end outstandings) were used:

     F: Net financial Liabilities of the U.S. government, excluding state and

local holdings of federal debt.

     M: Net financial liabilities (non—financial sector) of state and local

governments, plus holdings of federal debt.

     B: Total credit market instruments (includes bonds, loans, mortgages,

etc. )    issued by non—financial corporate and non—corporate business.
     E:    Market value of corporate equity, excluding investment fund shares,
plus equity value of non-corporate business, valued at replacement cost.
     HH: Liabilities issued by households. Mortgages valued at estimated
market value; other liabilities at book value.
     W:     Total wealth (F +     M   + B +   E   ÷ Household tangible assets).
     ,:     Annual fourth quarter to fourth quarter percentage change in the

personal consumption expenditures deflator.

     The long—tern debt was all crudely adjusted to market value by assuming

that     the annual rate of retirement of book debt was four percent; that the
weighted     average maturity of the debt was 15 years, and that market value

equaled book value in 1947.26 It was assumed (based upon a breakdown in the

1980 Economic Report of the President) that 55 percent of federal government

debt     and 75 percent of business debt was long-term. Equity was valued at
market, and tangible assets (for the household and non-corporate business
sectors) were valued at replacement cost.
                                        33

                                   FOOTNOTES

    1This crowding out" is financial, and should not be confused with real

crowding out (which may or may not occur), where government purchases of goods
and services lead to a reduction in private investment.

    2The model in this paper is essentially an extension of that in Auerbach

and King (1981).

    3Federai debt is measured here as net financial liabilities of the

federal government-—thus excluding agency holdings of federal assets——less

state   and local government holdings of federal liabilities. The idea is to
present a measure of the stock of federal libailities which must be absorbed
by the private sector. By the same token, Column 3 displays the tax-free

government debt—to-wealth ratio, and this is measured as net financial

liabilities of state and local governments, plus state and local holdings of

federal debt instruments. Again, this is a more accurate measure of the state

and local debt which must be absorbed by the private sector than net state and

local financial liabilities would be.

    4Financial intermediaries are conspicuous by their omission in Table 1.

It is reasonable to ignore intermediaries and to take seriously the movements

between private and government debt in Table 1 provided that we take either of

two views of financial intermediaries: that they are a "veil," so that

households view the assets held by intermediaries as if the households held

them directly (see Friedman (1981) for a discussion of this view);

alternatively, we can view intermediaries as independent economic actors, with

asset demands that respond to exogenous changes in much the same way as the

asset demands of other sectors.

    5Auerbach and King (1981) contains an exhaustive treatment of the need

for borrowing constraints in Miller—type models.
                                                            34

      6Even if all risky assets were taxed at the c., investors different

tax brackets would hold different risky portfolios unless (1-u)/(1—c1)

were constant across tax brackets.

      7See Fischer (1975) and Merton (1971) for a discussion of this

assumption, and for additional references.

      81f there were several risky assets, and if wealth were the only state

variable, the ratio k'j would be given by
                                         1 — U.

           (a   - r*)         ak
                                   -(1 - c1)r*
                          =
                    r*)
                              a lc               u.
                -                        1   —
                                   — (

which in general is not independent of the investor's tax bracket. Hence

investors will hold different risky portfolios. The assumption of a single

risky   asset is not completely general, since there is no mutual fund theorem.
      91n the usual one-period treatment, G has the interpretation of being
profit plus the liquidation value of the firm and r is then replaced by
(1 + r).    In this model, G is simply profit.
      10The assumption that the firm                      is competitive means that when the firm

changes its financial policy, it ignores any induced changes in the marginal
tax   bracket, u.
      %'Jhen there is only a single capital gains tax rate c                     and a single

income tax rate u, (20) can be written

                               (1—e)(1—cL.            1
                                    1-u

This    corresponds to Miller's (1977) condition for leverage indifference.
       12.The following statements would be true if investors exhibited
 linear risk tolerance, i.e. if -/J = a + . Constant relative
 risk aversion is a special case, with a = 0.
                                                               35

    131f c. = 0, (20) may be rewritten
                    N. (u* — e) =
                        1
                                                     N.(e      - u
                                            u<u*1
This can be satisfied only if u*>e. If c. =                                           the condition becomes
                                                                            Aui,
                   N. (u* — e —
                    1
                                      xu.(1
                                        1
                                                 —       e))   =                N.((1
                                                                                  1
                                                                                         —   e)xu.1   + e —    u.) 1
                                                                         u<u*
Increases    in A       require   increases in u to maintain the equality, soit is

still the case that u>e when there are capital gains taxes. For A near                                                      (1,


both sides are positive, and the left hand side expression is equivalent to
                   N. [(1 -    e)(1    -   c.)
                                            1
                                                     -    (1   -    u*)]    > 0
         u>u*1
which is the expression in (20) which I take to be positive.
    14This is the only equilibrium configuration of debt purchases

consistent       with the proposition that changes in the level of government debt
(given government spending) have no real effects.
    15   is obviously related to the parameter ii                                 introduced in Section                2.      It

will be seen in Section 4 that even if                               =    1, so that all tax liabilities are

fully perceived, it is unlikely that                               = 1    exactly. The reasons pertain to

distributional (across tax brackets) effects from future tax liabilities, and

to tax distortions affecting investors in inframarginal tax brackets.

    16dF is to be interpreted as the net change in the market value of

government debt outstanding, not the gross issue of government debt.

    17As an identity, we have

         ci4 =      dF + dV + dM = odF

Hence

            dV + dM = - (1 - )dF
The interest rate           change required to bring about this change mW                                     is       given

implicitly by

            dM      dY dr = — (1 - '5)                                                                  (in)
         (-a-- +
                                                            36

As noted earlier, the value of the firm behaves like a consol, so that


                                                                                            (2n)
              dr         r


and, by assumption,


              dr
                   =            =-           (1 - u*)   =   -r                              (3n)
                       dpdr             p


since p     = (1    —   u*)r.       Substituting (2n) and (3n) into (in) gives (26).

       181n the analysis to follow, I will assume for simplicity that investors

have constant absolute risk aversion, so that A is independent of wealth.

Assuming constant relative risk aversion would reinforce the qualitative

resul ts.

       19The argument that Barro's result fails in the presence of non lump—sum

taxes is also made by Tobin (1980, Chapter 3).

    20From (20'), if the relative wealth of high—bracket individuals rises,

u must rise to reattain equilibrium.

    211f W. and C. are held fixed, then only the last term in (33) can

be affected by leverage changes.

    22Frorn (34) and (35), if all taxes are zero or if

(1 —   e)(1   —
                   c)    = 1    —
                                    u       for every investor, then a change in leverage

will have no effect on utility.

    23Recall that high bracket investors are allowed to buy and sell

unlimited quantities of equity and municipal debt, and low bracket investors

can buy and sell unlimited quantities of taxable debt and equity. Government

debt has real effects because there are investors in inframarginal tax

brackets in this model.

    24Gordon and Malkiel compare the yields on bond issues by the same

firms, with the same indenture provisions, except that one issue is tax exempt

and the other taxable. This is as pure a measure of u as could be asked.
                                      37

    25Debt costs must be a convex function of B in order for (41) to define

an optimal leverage position.

           argument was made by DeAngelo and Masulis (1980), who did not,

however, explore the implications of inflation for leverage policy.

    27Appropriate interest rate series were obtained from the Troll Citibank

database to use in adjusting the debt to market value. All business debt was

adjusted using the average yield to maturity on all ong-ten corporate debt

outstanding; federal debt using the yield on government bonds with a maturity

in excess of ten years; municipal debt using an average yield on high quality

municipal issues, and household mortgage debt using a mortgage rate.
                                          38

    *1 would like to thank Lawrence Summers for extremely helpful
discussions.  I am also grateful for comments from Fischer Black, Stanley
Fischer, and to Alex Kane, Alan Marcus and participants in the B.U. finance
semi   nar. This is based on a chapter in my M. I. T. Ph. 0. dissertation.
Research support from the National Science Foundation and the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston is gratefully acknowledged.
    After this paper was written, I learned that Robert A. Taggart, Jr. had
independently reached similar conclusions in an unpublished paper.



                                     References

Auerbach, A.J. and M.A. King, 1981, Taxation, portfolio choice, and
debt-equity ratios: A general equilibrium model, unpublished.

Barro, Robert, 1974, Are government bonds net wealth. Journal of Political
Economy 82 (6).

Ciccolo,John J. , Jr. , 1981, Changing balance sheet relationships in the U.S.
manufacturing sector, 1926—77, NBER Working Paper No. 702.
Cordes, Joseph J. and Steven M. Sheffrin, 1981, Estimating the tax advantage
of corporate debt, Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the Treasury,
mi meo.


DeAngelo, Harry and Ronald Masulis, 1980, Optimal capital structure under
corporate and personal taxation, Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 3—29.

Fischer, Stanley, 1975, The demand for index bonds, Journal of Political
Economy 83(3), 509—34.

Friedman, Benjamin M., 1981, The relative stability of money and credit
velocities    in the United States: Evidence and some speculation, NBER Working
Paper No. 645.

Gordon, Roger J, and Burton G. Malkiel, 1981, Corporation finance, in: H.
Aaron and J. Pechman, eds., How taxes affect economic behavior (Brookings
Insti tution),

Holland, Daniel M. and Stewart C. Myers, 1978, Trends in corporate
profitability and capital costs,' Sloan School of Management Working Paper No.
99 9- 78.


Jensen, Michael C. , 1972, Capital markets: Theory and evidence," Bell Journal
of Economics and Management Science 3, 357-398.

Merton, Robert C. ,1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a
continuous—time model, Journal of Economic Theory, 3(4), 373—413.
                                        39

Miller, Merton, 1977, Debt and taxes, Journal of Finance, 32, 261-75.

Skelton, Jeffrey L. ,   1980, The relative pricing of tax—exempt and taxable
Debt, University of California, Berkeley, unpublished.

Taggart, Robert A. ,Jr. , 1980, Taxes and corporate capital structure in an
incomplete market, Journal of Finance, June.

Tobin, James, 1980, Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity (University of
Chicago Press).
                               Table 1
         Debt-to-Wealth Ratios fo
                 B+F+HH                    F             M



 1945              .431                  .304          .013
 1946              .419                  .283          .011
 1947              .394                  .246          .011
 1948              .385                  .225          .013
 1949              .393                  .224          .014
 1950              .365                  .190          .016
 1951              .344                  .167          .016
 1952              .348                  .161          .017
 1953              .356                  .161          .019
 1954              .343                  .150          .022
 1955              .331                  .132          .023
 1956              .320                  .118          .023
 1957              .329                  .117          .025
 1958              .312                  .108          .025
 1959              .313                  .102          .026
 1960              .324                  .100          .029
 1961              .316                  .094          .029
 1962              .341                  .096           .032
 1963              .340                  .089          .030
 1964              .342                  .085           .030
 1965              .339                  .078           .029
 1966              .344                  .076           .030
 1967              .329                  .071           .027
  1968             .317                  .065           .025
 1969               .322                 .059           .025
 1970               .334                 .062           .028
 1971               .344                 .064           .029
 1972               .347                  .060          .028
 1973               .361                 .057           .027
 1974               .371                  .057          .024
 1975               .365                  .065          .023
 1976               .372                  .068          .025
 1977               .384                  .067          .025
 1978               .372                  .061          .022
Source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Data are described in
         detail in Data Appendix.
                                      Figure 1

                    —      Taxable Debt Ratios, 145—1978


0.35




0.25




0.15




0.05


   1945      1950          1955     1960         1965   1970     1975      1980



   Declining figure: Ratio of net feceral liaoiiities (market value less
                     state and local holdings) to wealth.

   Rising figure:       Ratio of household plus business liaoilities (market
                        value; corporate plus noncorporate (including farm))
                        to wealth.

   Source: Feceral Reserve Board of Governors; see appendix for
            cescriptions of data and market—values adjustment.
                                    Fi9ure 2

                Debt to Firm Value Ratio, All Business, 1945—1978


0.320




0.280




0.240




0.200




0.160

        1945     1950      1955      1960      1965     1970        1975   1980



  Ratio of credit marKet instruments issued by business (corporate plus
  non—corporate) divided by sum of corporate equity, corporate debt, and
  replacement value of tangibles owned by non—corporate business.

         Adjustment to market value described in appendix

  Source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
                                                  A
               OE-4
                   U,




               C
                                              e

                        MARGINAL PERSONAL TAX RATE, u




                                   FIcI.TRE   3

      Under certainty, fInancial equilibrium is obtained when the

marginal personal tax   rate   equals the corporate tax rate. The aggregate

quantity of debt equals the total wealth of investors in low tax

brackets.
                                             m + eh(e)




                      WEALTH OF INVESTORS WITH u   >   u
                              TOTAL WEALTH




                              FIGUF 4

        Under uncertainty, financial equilibrium is obtaIned when

the aggregate demand for assets by high tax—bracket investors,

m +   eh,   equals the wealth of high tax—bracket investors, w.
