NBER \ORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FISCAL FRAMFMORK OF MOFETARY POLICY

Martin Feldstein

Working Paper No. 966

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

August 1982

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #966
August 1982

The Fiscal Framework of Monetary Policy

ABSTRACT

This paper illustrates the importance of the fiscal framework for
monetary analysis by discussing three separate issues.

I begin by examining

how the fiscal framework changes the macroeconomic equilibrium associated

with different steady state rates of money growth. This includes a summary
of research that I have presented elsewhere and comments on several additional
aspects of the way in which the fiscal structure destroys the neutrality of
monetary policy.

The second section deals with the short—run impact of changes in

monetary policy. Here again the fiscal structure complicates the economy's
response to monetary policy.

The final section looks at the effect of the fiscal structure on

the central bank's choice of monetary policies. Because fiscal structures
affect the costs and benefits of monetary policies, they are likely to
influence the policies adopted.

Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 868—3905

The Fiscal Framework of Monetary Policy
Martin Feldstein*

I am very honored by your invitation to present this lecture. I
will use this occasion to discuss a subject that has been an important focus of
my own work in the past decade and that lies at the boundary of nacroeconomics

and public finance: the fiscal framework of monetary policy.
The failure to deal explicitly with the fiscal framework of monetary

policy is a serious shortcoming of modern monetary theory. My purpose in this
lecture is to advocate that the theory and practice of monetary economics devote
more attention to the ways in which the tax structure influences the impact of
monetary policy.

I find it very strange that virtually all studies of' monetary policy,

empirical as well as theoretical, ignore the system of tax rules within which

monetary policy has its influence. Ignoring taxes was no doubt justifiable when
tax rates were very low. Fifty years ago, most individuals paid no income tax
at all and the median tax rate among those who did pay tax was less than 5 per-

cent. By contrast, in the 1910s individuals could pay tax on investment income
at rates up to TO percent and taxes took more than two—thirds of the real income
of nonfinancial corporate capital.

A

particularly important aspect of the tax system is its failure to

distinguish between nominal and real magnitudes. Monetary policies that alter
the

price level or the rate of inflation therefore change effective tax rates

and alter the incentives to engage in different types of activities. Thus, even
if the conditions required for the neutrality or superneutrality of money would

*professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was presented as the Distinguished
Lecture at the 1982 annual meeting of the Western Economic Society, July 16, 1982.

011682

—2—

be satisfied in the absence of taxes, the fiscal framework would effectively
destroy both neutrality and superneutrality.

To avoid misunderstanding, let me say at the outset that I am not
arguing
of

that

every

a full description of an econonr's fiscal structure should be part

study of monetary economics. Including even a rudimentary description

of the fiscal framework would obviously increase the complexity of any study.
In some cases, such complexity can obscure the particular subject of'

without changing anything of fundamental

importance.

interest

I do believe, however,

that those who would ignore the fiscal framework must bear the burden of

arguing that such simplification is not misleading. Empirical studies that
ignore taxes are particularly suspect.

To illustrate the importance of the fiscal framework for monetary ana-

lysis, I will discuss three separate issues. I will begin by examining how the
fiscal framework changes the macroeconomic equilibrium associated with different

steady state rates of money growth. This will include a summary of research
that I have presented elsewhere1 and comments on several additional aspects of
the way in which the fiscal structure destroys the neutrality of monetary policy.
The

second section of rrr,y remarks will deal with the short—run impact

of changes in monetary policy. Here again the fiscal structure complicates the
economy's response to monetary policy.

The final section looks at the effect of the fiscal structure on
central

the

bank's choice of monetary policies. Because fiscal structures affect

the costs and benefits of monetary policies, they are likely to influence the
policies adopted.

Feldstein (1982) brings together 12 of my papers on this subject.

—3—

1. Tax Rules and Monetary Equilibrium
An increase in the stock of money

induces

a corresponding increase in

the level of prices. Similarly, a permanent increase in the rate of growth of
the money stock induces a corresponding increase in the rate of inflation.

These basic steady—state properties follow directly from the proportionality of
money demand to the price level and are not affected by the econonr's fiscal

structure. However, the interaction of tax rules and price inflation does
change the equilibrium of the real econony in a wide variety of ways. This section first comments briefly on the non--neutrality of one—time changes in the
money stock and then discusses in riore detail the effects of sustained increases
in the growth of money.

The most widely understood effect of inflation on tax liabilities is

the result of the progressive structure of tax rates. A general rise in the
level of prices and incomes shifts taxpayers into higher tax brackets and

thereby raises the overall effective tax rate. With the existing structure of
U.S. tax rates, a 10 percent increase in money incomes raises tax revenue by 16

percent, thereby raising the effective tax rate by about 6 percent. Moreover,
the shift of individuals to higher tax brackets raises marginal tax rates and
thereby lowers the net of tax wage rate and the net of tax rate of interest.
Thus, a one—time increase in the stock of money is far from neutral in our economy.

To simplify the discussion in the remainder of this paper, I will
ignore the bracket creep effect of the progressive structure of taxes. I will

assume instead that the tax brackets are fully indexed. I will, however, comment on the implication of the fact that individuals do face different tax rates
and, in the third section, I will discuss the effect of nonindexation on the
determination of monetary policy.

——

Even if tax brackets are fully indexed, the tax system is very sensitive to inflation because it fails to distinguish between real capital income

and nominal capital income. Recall for comparison what happens in an econori
without taxes when a permanent rise in the growth rate of money causes an

increase in the steady state inflation rate. If the demand for money is completely
interest inelastic, the nominal rate of interest rises by the rate of inflation.

This leaves the real rate of interest and all other real magnitudes in the eco—

nonr unchanged. This is the superneutrality property that we associate with

Irving Fisher. As

Tobin

(1965)

and

Mundell (1963) have emphasized, this super—

neutrality is lost if the demand for money is interest sensitive. The rise in
the nominal interest rate then causes a reduction in the demand for money and a

substitution of real capital for money in individual portfolios. The resulting
capital deepening in production reduces the real rate of interest. Although
this effect

is

theoretically correct,

it

is likely to be very small in practice.

Since Ml, which is a broader measure of money than is appropriate for the

Mundell-Tobin theory, is only five percent of total private wealth, the scope
for

portfolio substitution is extremely limited. I shall therefore

effect

ignore this

and assume a completely inelastic demand for money in order to contrast

the tax effects

with the superneutrality that would otherwise characterize

e gui 1 ib rium.

One of

taxable

the most important features of the

U.S. tax system is that

income reflects nominal interest receipts and expenses instead of real

interest receipts and expenses. Before looking at other complexities of the tax
system, it is helpful to consider an econorrr in which taxable income is

correctly measured in all respects except that nominal rather than real interest

—5—

receipts and expenditures are included.' Assume for the moment that savings are
not affected by the rate of return that savers receive and that all saving is

absorbed in private capital formation. This is sufficient to insure that the
steady state capital intensity remains constant and therefore that the real
marginal product of capital, f', is unchanged.
The equilibrium condition for a competitive firm is that the real net—
of—tax marginal product of capital, (l—t)f' where t is the corporate tax rate,
is equal to the real net—of--tax rate of interest. If the nominal rate of
interest is i, the net—of—tax nominal rate is (l—T)i and the net of tax real
rate is (l—T)i—1r, where ii is the rate of inflation. It is important to note

that the tax law permits deduction of the nominal interest rate so that the tax

deduction is TI. The equilibrium condition is thus

(1—r)f' = (1—T)i — 1'.

(1)

Solving for the rate of interest yields:

i=f'+

(2)

it

l—T

The individual lender who provides capital to the firm must, of
course, pay tax on the full nominal interest rate. The real net return received
by the individual, rN, is thus equal to the real interest rate, i—it, minus the

tax on the nominal interest rate, Gi, where 0 Is the marginal rate of personal

income tax. Thus,

1This is the case examined in Feldstein (1976) which appears as Chapter 3
of Feldstein (1982).

—6—

r =

(3)

Substituting

(1—0)1 — ir.

equation 2 for i yields

r = (1—0)f'

(1k)

+

_______

fl.

The real net interest rate received by the individual lender is thus affected by
inflation unless the corporate tax rate and the individual tax rate are equal,
i.e., unless the benefit that corporations get from deducting the full nominal
interest payment is offset exactly by the penalty to individuals that arises
from paying tax on the full nominal interest receipt.

Since individuals have different personal tax rates, they will be

affected differently by inflation. Equation 1 shows that individuals with low
marginal tax rates (0 <
sion funds (0 =
nal

tax

t) and

tax exempt investors like universities and pen-

o) will benefit from

rates (0 >

T) will

inflation

while investors with high rErgi—

find that inflation lowers their real rate of return.

If we now drop the assumption that saving is not sensitive to the real

net rate of return that savers receive, we see that a change in the rate of

monetary expansion will lead to a change in capital intensity. To see the
importance of this, consider for a nment the extreme case in which all personal
tax rates are equal and the supply of saving is infinitely elastic at the real
net interest rate (1—0)f'0 where f'0 is the marginal product of capital in the

absence of inflation. With inflation at rate it

the

marginal product of capital

must adjust to a level f'1 that maintains the same real net return to savers:

(5)

(1—0)f'0 =

(1-0)f'1

+

______

—7—

or,

(6)

r'i =

'o

—

1— 8

___________

(l—T)(l—8)

If T is greater than 0, inflation reduces the equilibrium marginal product of
capital and therefore increases the capital intensity of the economy.

Although these simple calculations are sufficient to illustrate the
important non—neutrality of a sustained (and therefore anticipated) monetary
expansion, let me warn you not to take the specific results seriously because we

have not yet considered other important ways in which tax rules affect the

economy's monetary equilibrium. Among the most significant of these is the tax
treatment of depreciation and inventory costs.

Existing tax law bases depreciation allowances on the original or
"historic" cost of an asset with no adjustment for the increase in the price

level since the asset was acquired. When the price level increases, the depreciation component of costs is understated. Taxable profits are therefore
overstated and the effective tax rate rises. Similarly, the use of the first—
in—first—out (FIFO) method of inventory valuation also causes an understatement

of costs when there is inflation and therefore an overstatement of taxable

income. These effects are very large; a few years ago, Larry Summers and I
(Feldstein and Summers, 1979) calculated that the excess taxes due to the use of

historic cost depreciation and inflated inventory profits accounted for 5 percent of the taxes paid by nonfinancial corporations.
If we approximate this extra tax burden per unit of capital as propor-

tional to the rate of inflation, the real net—of—tax rate of return to the firm
becomes (l—r)f'—Air where A measures the effect of inflation on net—of—tax profi—

—8—

tability. Empirical calculations suggest that under the tax law prevailing
before 1981, A was

approxinRtely

one—fourth (see the appendix to chapter 11 in

Feldstein, 1982.) The firm's equilibrium condition requires equating the real
net—of--tax

(7)

return to the firm to the real net—of—tax rate of interest:
(l—T)f'—Alr =

(1—t)j—w.

Thus the nominal rate of interest is
(8)

j =

f'

1—A

+

it

l—t

and the real rate of interest is

(9)

j—n=

f'

T— A

+

It.

l—T

Equation 9 shows that inflation raises the real rate of interest if t > A and

lowers it if T < A. The explanation of this is simple: the real rate of
interest that firms can pay with a given marginal product of capital is
depressed by inflation

to the extent that it

induces extra taxes because of

historic cost depreciation and FIFO inventory accounting (hence the negative
A term) but is increased by inflation because nominal interest payments are
deductible in the calculation of taxable interest (the positive effect of T).

Equation 8 shows that if A and T were equal, the nominal interest rate

would rise roughly point—for—point with the inflation rate. Thus Irving
Fisher's equilibrium relation could be true in an econonr with distortionary
taxes, but because of numerically offsetting factors rather than because of any
inherent tendency toward a constant real rate of return.

It is important, nreover, to note that a constant real rate of
interest nans that the real net—of—tax rate of interest received by taxable
lenders depends on the rate of inflation:

—9—

r = (1_9)i_ir

(10)

= (l—O)f' +

(i—o)(i—x)

= (1—O)f' +

— it

1—t

(1—o)A
l—t
—

To see how large this effect is, note that if t6,

it.

the

real net rate of interest

falls by A per percentage point of inflation; if we take asa a reasonable
approximation that the marginal product of capital is f' =
and that A =

0.25,

.12,

that 0 =

= 0.5

a 12 percent rate of inflation reduces the real net return in

half, from six percent to three percent.

The fall in the net return caused by inflation implies that a
sustained monetary expansion will change the equilibrium capital intensity and

therefore the marginal product of capital. Thus even when T = A the full
general equilibrium response to inflation contradicts Fisher's prediction that
the equilibrium nominal interest rate rises by the rate of inflation.

A further word of caution. The results that I have derived assume
that firms are 100 percent debt financed at the margin'. If firms are 100 percent equity financed or use a mixture of debt and equity (Feldstein, Green and

Sheshinski, l9T8) the quantitative results can be quite different. For my purpose today, however, it is not necessary to derive definitive results. It is
sufficient to establish that, even if money demand is completely inelastic,

'See Stiglitz (1976) for an explicit model of this sort, although not in the
context of inflation. For a more general model of the debt — equity choice, see
Auerbach (1982).

—10—

changes in

the steady—state rate of money

growth

are

far

from

neutral

in their

effect on the real equilibrium of the econoxxr.

Lest this seem like a lot of effort to demolish an intellectual straw
man,

let me remind you

long—run

that, except for Tobin—Mundell liquidity effects, the

dichotonr between the money growth rate and the real econoxmj is assumed

in virtually all of the best work in monetary theory, including such outstanding
examples as Tobin

statistical
of

(1963) and Sargent

(1980)1. Even more significant are the

studies like Earro (1977) and Faina

(1975) that

take

the neutrality

anticipated money growth as a theoretically Justified null hypothesis.

Similarly, when Schiller (1980) investigated whether Federal Reserve policy

could alter the real interest rate, his focus was too narrow. By altering the
rate of inflation, the Fed alters the difference between the net—of—tax real
profitability of investment and the net—of—tax real cost of funds.

The adverse effect of inflation on the profitability of business
investments causes a shift of the capital stock away from plant and equipment
and into owner—occupied housing (Feldstein, 1982, chapter 6).

In

fact, during

the 1970s the share of residential construction in total net investment
increased and the real value of single family homes rose sharply because the
relative stock of housing had not yet increased to its new equilibrium level
(Poterba, 1980).

A sinillar disequilibrium response was also reflected in the behavior

of share prices. In the very long run, share prices rmist rise at the same rate

as the price level in general. In the short run, however, an increase in the

'An interesting counterexample is a very recent paper by Modigliani and
Papademos (1982).

—11—

equilibrium inflation rate depresses the expected after—tax return on equity
capital relative to other portfolio investments and therefore reduces the market
price of corporate shares (Feldstein, 1982, Chapters 10 and ii).

This is a tem-

porary condition which is reversed gradually as a reduction in the relative size
of the corporate capital stock permits the real pretax rate of return to rise.2
To understand the full interaction of inflation and the tax system, it
is necessary to look beyond the basic tax rules affecting interest payments,

depreciation, capital gains and inventories. The tax code contains a nrriad of
special provisions affecting different types of capital income that may

be

influenced by inflation: there are special rules for banks, insurance companies, timber, oil and gas, farmers, utilities, etc.

I am certain that there

are many such influences of which I am unaware. To illustrate the importance of
such special features, I will describe the tax rules that apply to the portfolio
income of life insurance companies.3
In the United States, individuals pay life insurance premiums with
after—tax dollars and the insurance benefits subsequently received are not part
of taxable income. If the insurance companies were not subject to tax on their

portfolio income, savings in the form of life insurance would effectively be
treated on a consumption tax basis, i.e., there would be no tax on the interest
earned on this form of saving. This was almost the situation immediately after
1959 when the current special income tax rules for insurance companies were
enacted.

That law provides that an insurance company would pay no tax on its

'Share prices are also depressed by the fact that inflation produces
nominal capital gains that are subject to tax when the stock is sold.
2See Summers (1982) for an explicit model of the adjustment process in a
rational expectations general equilibrium model.
discussion draws on Feldstein and Warshawsky (1982).

—12—

portfolio income, savings in the form of life insurance would effectively be
treated on a consumption tax basis, i.e., there would be no tax on the interest

earned on this form of saving. This was almost the situation immediately after
1959 when the current special income tax rules for insurance companies was

enacted. That law provides that an insurance company would pay no tax on its
portfolio income if that income was just enough to provide the nominal rate of
return that it had promised to its policyholders. The promised rate, which is
controlled by the state insurance commissioners, changes very little and is
still less than five percent.

If an insurance company earns more than the promised rate, it must pay

tax at the corporate rate on a portion of its capital income. That jxrtion is
determined by an archane rule, the Menge formula, that provides that the taxed
portion is ten times the difference between the rate of return on the company's

portfolio and its promised rate of return. Thus, if a company earns 6 percent
on its protfolio and has a promised rate of

percent, it pays tax at the cor-

porate rate on 20 percent of its portfolio income; equivalently, it pays tax on

all its prtfolio income at 20 percent of the corporate rate or about a 9 percent tax rate.

As long as the interest rate on the bonds held by insurance companies
was close to the low promised rate set by the regulators, saving in the form of

life insurance was virtually tax free. This not only encouraged life insurance
as a form of saving but also, by providing a tax free vehicle for life cycle
saving, encouraged saving in general.

Consider now what happens as inflation raises the rate of interest.
With a 10 percent inflation rate and a l).t percent bond interest rate, the Menge

formula

indicates that

the insurance company would be taxed at 100 percent of

—13—

the

corporate tax rate on its total portfolio income. Inflation means that life

insurance is no longer an essentially untaxed way to do life cycle saving.

Moreover, saving in the form of life insurance would have a lower after—tax
yield than direct investment in the same bond portfolio for anyone whose personal tax rate was less than the corporate tax rate.
The special tax rules affecting life insurance thus are another 'way in

which an inflationary monetary policy reduces the rate of capital accumulation.
I think the problem of life insurance taxation is also a good indication of the
complexity of adjusting the tax laws to eliminate the effect of changes in the

of inflation. Although fifteen years of inflation has been long enough to
reduce substantially the rate of life insurance saving, it has not been long
rate

enough

for

the political

process to find a way to remedy these problems.

Until now, I have limited my analysis to the effects of monetary

policy, in a closed economy. When the broader perspective of an open economy is
considered, the interaction between inflation and tax rules also influences

international capital flows and therefore international trade. In an open eco—
nomy without taxes, a steady state increase in inflation in the home country
would cause its nominal interest rate to rise by the increase in the rate of

inflation. Because of purchasing power parity, the value of its currency would
depreciate at that same rate relative to the currencies of all other countries.

A foreign lender who buys bonds of the home country would thus receive the same
rate of interest net of exchange loss as he had before the increase in infla-

tion. Inflation provides no incentive for international capital flows.
To see one way in which taxes might
Hartman
system

change the analysis, I will follow

(1979) and consider an economy in which the only imperfection in the tax

is to include nominal

interest instead of real interest. With that tax

114

rule,

the nominal interest rate in the home country

increase

would rise not by the

in the rate of inflation but by that rate divided by one minus the cor-

i/(i—r)).

With a corporate tax rate of one—half, the

nominal interest rate would

twice the increase in inflation. Purchasing

power parity would still

rise by
imply that

in equilibrium the currency depreciated at

porate tax rate (di/dif =

the rate of inflation. The rate of interest to the foreign lender who buys home
country bonds, net of currency depreciation, thus rises by the increase in the
rate of inflation.

This is clearly not an equilibrium situation. Capital will flow into
the home country until the rate of interest net of currency depreciation is the
same there

as in the rest of the world. Capital flow achieves equilibrium

the
by increasing the capital intensity in the home country (thus driving down

real rate of return) and lowering the capital intensity in the rest of the world

(thereby raising the real rate of return elsewhere). The equilibrium occurs
when the difference between the marginal products of capital at home and abroad
is equal to the rate of inflation.

Although this is an oversimplified picture of taxes and international
capital

movements, it is

monetary

stock

sufficient to show how taxes cause an inflationary

expansion to have

real

effects on the distribution of the world capital

and therefore on capital flows

Before

and trade patterns.

leaving the framework of the steady—state behavior of the eco-

nomy, I want to comment briefly on the implication of the fiscal framework for

the

theory of optimal inflation and the optimal quantity of money. Milton

Friedman (1969) pointed out that a negative rate of inflation equal to the real
rate of interest would make the nominal interest rate

reduce

zero and would thereby

the opportunity cost of holding money to its zero cost of supply. Any

—15—

higher rate of inflation would in effect imply a tax on holding money balances
and would thereby move the econoxiw away from an efficient equilibrium.

Friedman's negative rate of inflation would of course require a continuing decline in the money stock which would in turn require a continuing

surplus in the government budget. Friedman's condition would thus be optiuRl
only if there were a lump sum tax to produce the necessary revenue without

introducing any distortion. Phelps (1973) subsequently noted that without lump
sum taxes it would be optimal to have a higher rate of inflation since the net
money creation (or the reduced rate of decline of the money stock) would permit
a reduction in other distorting taxes.

The optimal rate of inflation and the optimal quantity of money become
a more complex problem when we recognize that inflation distorts the taxation of

capital income. Because of the fiscal structure, a higher rate of inflation has
the advantage of producing tax revenue (if the effects of understated depreciation and inventory costs outweigh the deduction of nominal interest income)

and of shifting portfolios from capital to money (thereby offsetting the usual

bias against holding non—interest—bearing money balances). At the same time, of
course, the interaction of inflation and the fiscal structure reduces the incen-

tive to save and distorts the allocation of capital among different uses. The
optimal steady state rate of inflation can only be established by a quantitative
evaluation of all these effects.

2. Tax Rules and Monetary Transition
The

fiscal structure of an econonw affects not only the steady state

equilibrium associated with any

also

level

and rate of growth of the money

stock

but

influences the character of the transition from one steady rate of money

—i6—

growth to another. Since the evolution of expectations about monetary policy
are a critical determinant of the transition process but are not central to
understanding the influence of tax rules, I will assume that expectations adjust

immediately to the new reality. To be specific, I will consider the case in
which the money stock has been growing at 10 percent a year for a long period of
time when the central bank announces that henceforth the money growth rate will

be only 1 percent. Everyone immediately and correctly adjusts his expected rate
of money

indefinite future.
Consider first what ou1d happen in an econon with no taxes. The 6

growth to 4 percent

for the

percentage point decline in the money growth rate implies a 6 percentage point

decline in the steady state inflation rate. Th keep the real interest rate
unchanged, the nominal interest rate must also decline by six percentage points.

This "superneutral" response to the decline in money growth is possible only if

the demand for money is completely insensitive to the interest rate. With any

interest

elasticity, the lower nominal interest rate causes an increase in the

demand for money. The increased money demand means a lower capital intensity
and a higher real rate of interest. As I noted earlier, however, the very small
size of the non—interest—bearing money stock relative to the capital stock makes
this Tobin—Mundell effect on capital intensity and on the equilibrium real
interest rate very small.

Although the interest sensitivity of money demand has only a small
effect on steady state equilibrium, it can have a powerful effect on the tran-

sition process. To satisfy the increased demand for real money balances at the
lower nominal interest rate, the price level must decline immediately. Thus the
announcement of a lower rate of growth of money implies an equal decline in the

—17—

nominal interest rate only if the price level can drop immediately by enough to
reduce the demand for nominal rroney balances to the available supply.

In reality, prices are not conletely flexible downward and the price
level

does not fall fast enough to permit the real interest rate to remain

unchanged. Instead, the nominal interest rate must remain high to balance the
supply and demand for money. The result is a rise in the real rate of interest

and this high real rate induces a decline in economic activity. The lover level
of economic activity and the decline in inflation that it causes both reduce the
demand for nney but not by enough to permit an immediate return of the real
interest rate to its natural level. As long as the real interest rate is above
its natural rate, there will be slack in the economy and therefore downward

pressure on inflation and interest rates. The high real rate is thus eventually
self—correcting.

The slow fall in the short—term rate keeps the long term rate above
its eventual equilibrium value even if expectations about declining inflation

are held with certainty. This high level of the long—term rate follows directly
from the fact that, in the absence of uncertainty, the long rate is an average

of the future short rates. Thus if the short rate is expected to decline from
13 percent to 7
7

percent,

percent

at the rate of one percent a year and then to remain at

a new 10—year bond will have a yield to maturity of 9

percent.

The increase in real rates of interest during the transition period
implies

that a decline in the rate of nney growth

taxless

economy. The presence of a tax system complicates and exacerbates this

is far from neutral even in a

non—neutrality.
As I emphasized earlier, because the tax system is not indexed, the
rate of money

growth affects the

real rate of

interest and the real after—tax

—i8—

profitability of different activities. A change in the

rate of nxney

growth

therefore induces a shift of resources among different industries. In particular, because the interaction of taxes and inflation penalizes investment in
depreciable plant and equipment relative to investment in owner—occupied
housing, a permanent decrease in the rate of money growth induces a shift of

resources out of housing and into plant and equipment investment. Similarly,
because inflation reduces the after—tax yield on saving, a decrease in the rate
of money growth induces a shift from consumption to saving.
Although the intersectoral shift of resources induced by a change in
money growth could in principle occur without any unemployment, the reduced
demand for the products of some sectors is likely to involve some unemployment

before the workers in those sectors find employment elsewhere. Unemployment
would arise naturally in this process if there is an advantage to devoting full

time to searching for a new job. The availability of unemployment benefits that
drastically reduce the opportunity cost of remaining

the

unemployed tends to raise

reservation wage of those who must change jobs and therefore to increase

significantly the duration of unemployment.1
It is interesting to contrast this view of the way in which a reduction in the money growth rate causes unemployment with the theory developed many

years ago by Freidrich Hayek. Hayek also argued that a decline in inflation
would cause a downturn in economic activity because the lower rate of inflation

would cause some sectors to contract. More specifically, however, Hayek believed
that business investment would expand during an inflationary period because bank

1See Feldstein and Poterba (1982) for a discussion of the effect of
unemployment insurance on reservation wages and the average duration of
unemployment.

—19—

credit looked cheap and profits were artificially increased by the fact that

price increases temporarily exceeded wage increases. The essence of Hayek's
argument was therefore that inflation induced a misperception of investment

incentives which in turn led to a misallocation of capital. Reversing that
misallocation caused the unemployment that accompanied a reduction of inflation.
With an unindexed tax system, a misallocation of capital can occur

during inflation without any misperception. The change in inflation changes
relative tax burdens and therefore induces a new allocation of capital. It is
interesting also to note that the misallocation of capital caused by the U.S.
inflation of the 1970s was opposite in direction to that predicted by Hayek so
that net investment in plant and equipment declined during the decade as a share
of GNP.

The effect of the tax system on the econorxr's transition from a high

inflation rate to a low inflation rate is not just a function of its unindexed

character. Even a completely indexed tax system would affect the transition
process if the reduction in inflation caused some firms to experience a tem-

porary period of accounting losses. The high real interest rates, the depressed
level of economic activity, and the reallocation of activity that accompany a
reduction in the inflation rate all imply that some firms will have an unprofitable period.

Under conventional tax rules, a firm's incentive to invest is sharply

reduced during any period in which it has no taxable profits. The reduced
incentive to invest reflects the fact that without taxable profits the firm cannot take advantage of the investment tax credit or the relatively large depreciation allowances that occur during the first few years of an investment's

life. The tax savings associated with the depreciation and investment tax cre—

—20—

dit

must be carried forward to future years and are thereby reduced in value.

This

implies that the net cost of any investment is increased. In contrast, the

positive income from the investment will occur only in the future when the firm

expects to be fully taxable. breover, since interest payments during the early
years of the investment do not reduce concurrent tax liabilities, the effective
net interest rate is higher for a nontaxable firm than for a taxable firm.

These distortions arise because the tax system is assymetric in its

treatment of gains and losses. If negative tax liabilities were rebated concurrently or could be

carried

problem would not arise. it
sitivity
among

of

firms

forward with an appropriate rate of interest, this

existing

tax law1 increases the cyclical sen-

investment and makes the impact of monetary policy quite non—neutral
and industries.

3. The Determination of Monetary Policy
Several years ago, I argued

that

monetary policy

in

the 1960s and

1970s had been too expansionary because the monetary authorities failed to
recognize the interaction between inflation and the tax system.

The monetary

authorities focused on the interest rate and worried that what they perceived as
a high interest rate 'was
vity.

discouraging

investment and depressing economic acti-

In fact, although the nominal interest rate was

rising

during this

period, the real interest rate showed no trend and the real net—of—tax interest

rate has fallen substantially. The low real net rate of interest increased

'The problem is substantially ameliorated by the "safe harbor leasing rulest'
in 1981 but these are now (July 1982) effectively in abeyance and their
future is uncertain.

enacted

2The argument is summarized in Feldstein (1980).

—21—

consumption and investment in housing by ure than enough to offset the
depressing effect of inflation on investment in plant and equipment.
Since 1979 the Fed has been following a imich sore xronetarist approach

in determining its monetrary policy. The gradual deceleration of the soney
growth rate has become the overriding target of monetary policy. Since interest
rates are no longer a fundamental target, the previous mistakes

in interpreting

the interest rate are no longer relevant.
The future evolution of monetary policy is of'

future Governors of the Federal Reserve may

be

course less

clear. The

less manetarist in their behavior

and may revert to targeting interest rates or nominal GNP or some weighted function of inflation, unemployment, and other measures of economic performance.

If this happens, how will the fiscal framework influence the future choice of
monetary policy?

It is of course possible that the monetary authorities will continue
to ignore the fiscal effects of monetary policy and might therefore choose poli-

cies that do not achieve their intended results. I want however to examine the
implications of assuming to the contrary that the monetary authorities do

understand the fiscal consequences of alternative monetary policies and take

them into account in their choice of monetary policy. How then might alternative fiscal frameworks affect the choices made by the Fed or urged upon it by
the Congress or the administration?

With the tax laws that prevailed in the 1970's, a one—time increase in
the money stock caused a one—time increase in tax revenue as taxpayers were

pushed into higher tax brackets. A sustained increase in the growth rate of the
money stock increased tax revenue continually and, by raising the rate of infla-

tion, discouraged investment in plant and equipment. A government eager to

—22—

increase tax revenue in order to eliminate a deficit or to finance increased
government spending might therefore encourage an inflationary monetary policy.

The enthusiasm for raising revenue in this way would however be tempered and
perhaps reversed by recognizing that inflation reduced business investment and
therefore the growth of productivity.

The 1981 tax legislation changed both of these fiscal effects.
Starting in January 1985, the personal income tax is to be indexed: each year
the bracket limits and other nominal amounts in the tax law will be increased in

proportion to the recent rise in the price level. Inflation will therefore no
longer push people into higher tax brackets and increase real tax revenue. The
1981 legislation also provides for a much rrxre rapid tax depreciation of plant

and equipment. All equipment is now written off over at most five years and
with an accelerated schedule equivalent to 150 percent of the five—year

declining balance rate. The rapid tax depreciation increases the after—tax
return to investment at arw inflation rate. Tbreover, since depreciation is so
rapid, an increase in the rate of inflation reduces the real value of the depreciation allowance by much less than it did under the old tax rules when much of

the equipment was depreciated over 15 years or more. Indeed, companies with
moderately high ratios of debt to capital are likely to find that a rise in the
rate of inflation actually increases the incentive to invest.
How does the 1981 tax legislation alter the likely course of monetary

policy? First, indexing the personal tax brackets removes any incentive to use
one—time increases in the money stock as a rmthod of raising revenue through
bracket

creep. Second, since both the "favorable" revenue effect and the

adverse investment effect of a sustained monetary expansion are eliminated, the

effect on the incentive to pursue an inflationary monetary policy is

ambiguous.

—23—

A pessimist might well worry, however, that virtually eliminating one of the
major adverse effects of inflation may cause future governments and Federal

Reserve Boards to pursue a more inflationary nnetary policy.
Future changes in tax rules may make an inflationary monetary policy

seem either nre or less appealing. One such change is now under active consideration in the Congress. The very large deficits projected for the next
several years have induced Congress and the administration to consider alter-

native ways of increasing tax revenue. One proposal is to repeal the indexing
of the personal income tax before it takes effect in 1985. An unindexed tax
system would provide a clear incentive to reduce the projected budget deficits
by increasing the rate of inflation rather than by the politically painful pro-

cess of reducing government spending or increasing tax rates explicitly. The
knowledge that the inflation will not decrease investment and may actually
encourage it would reinforce this temptation to use an expansionary rronetary
policy.

.

Concluding Remarks
My aim in today's lecture has not been to propose or defend any par-

ticular theory about the effect of monetary policy on the economy. Instead, rrrj

purpose has been the more general one of encouraging macroeconomists and monetary theorists to devote attention to the way that the fiscal framework affects
the impact of monetary policy.

The traditional distinction between the specialities of public economics and macroeconomics is undoubtedly a useful one for advancing research in

both fields. But the growing role of the public sector and of taxes in par—
ticular cannot be ignored in analyzing macroeconomic behavior.

I hope that my remarks today will encourage some of those who hear
them or read them later to turn their own attention to this important subject.

July 1982

—25—

Bibliography
Auerbach, Alan (1982) "Taxes, Firm Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital:
An Empirical Analysis," presented at the NBER—SSRC Oxford Conference on
Micro—Data and Public Economics.
Barro, n.J. (1971) "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the U.S."
American Economic Review: 67, 101—15.

Fama, E. (1975) "Short—term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation," American
Economic Review, June, 169—82.
Feldstein, M. (1976) "Inflation, Income 'Ixes, and the 1.te of Interest: A
Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review 66, 5, 809—820.

__________ (1980) "Ix Rules and the Mismanagement of Monetary Policy," American
Economic Review: 70,

2,

182—86.

__________ (1982) Inflation, Tax Rules and Capital Forntion, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Feldstein, M., J. Green and E. Sheshinski (1978) "Inflation and Thxes in a
Growing Econorrr with Debt and Equity Finance," Journal of Political Econonr:
86,

2, S53—S70.

Feldstein,

M. and J. Poterba (1982) "Unemployment Insurance and Reservation
Wages" presented at the NIBER—SSRC Oxford conference on "Micro—Data and
Public Economics."

Feldstein, M. and L. Summers (1979) "Inflation and the xation of Capital
Income in the Corporate Sector" National Tax Journal: XXXII, 4, )445_47Q.
Feldstein, M. and M. Warshawsky, "Inflation, the Menge Formula, and Life
Insurance Savings," forthcoming.
Friedman,

and

M. (1969) "The Optimum Supply of
Other Essays, Chicago: University

Money" The Optimum Supply of Money
of Chicago Press.

Hartman, D. (1979) "Thxation and the Effects of Inflation on the Real Capital
Stock in an Open Econonr," International Economic Review: 20, 2, 14l7.25.
Modigliani, F. and L. Papadenios (1982) "Inflation, Financial Markets, Fiscal
Structure, and the Monetarh Mechanism," given at the NBER—EHESS
International Seminar on Macroeconomics at the University of Mannheim.
Mundell, R. (1963)
71, 280—83.

"Inflation and

Real Interest" Journal of Political Econocr:

Phelps, E.S. (1973) "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance," Swedish Journal
of Economics: 75, 67—82.

—26—

Poterba, J. (1980) "Inflation, Income Taxes and Owner Occupied Housing,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 553.
Sargent, T. (1980) Macroeconomics, New York: Academic Press.
Shiller, R. J. (1980) "Can the Fed Control Real Interest Rates?" in S. Fisher,
ed., Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Stiglitz, J.
303—11.

(1976) "The

Summers, L. (1982) "An
Taxation:

Corporation Tax"

Journal

of Public Economics: 5,

Asset Price Approach to the Analysis of Capital Income

Thesis, Harvard University.

Tobin, James (1965) "Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica: 33, t,

671—81k.

