                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TAX POLICY AND FOREIGN DIRECT
                 INVESTMENT IN THE UNITEfl STATES




                         David C. Hartman



                      Working Paper No. 967




               NATIONAL BTREATJ OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           August 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER 's research programs
in Taxation and in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #967
                                                     August 1982




         Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment in the United States



                                  Abstract


          This paper provides some evidence on one aspect of international

investment, the impacts of domestic tax policy on foreign direct investment in

the United States. The possible impacts, which are discussed in the first sec-

tion, are complex. For example, an investment incentive which applies to both

domestic and foreign investors would be expected to result in an increased

foreign investment in the U.S.   On the other hand, a savings incentive, which

has no direct impact on foreign investors, would nevertheless tend to increase

domestic investors' demand for capital assets, thereby driving down the returns

expected by foreign investors and possibly resulting in significant decreases in

foreign investment. Because of measurement difficulties, we are only partly

successful in obtaining precise estimates of this sort of impact.   However, the

results we do obtain suggest that foreign investment in the U.S. is strongly

affected, in the manner predicted, by changes in domestic tax policy.




                                      David G. Hartinan
                                     National Bureau of Economic Research
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138

                                      (617) 868—3906
         Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment in the United States

                               David G. Hartman*


I. Introduction.

          Tax policy toward international investment is an issue which has

occupied the attention of U.S. policyrnakers for many years. Until recently,

direct investment involving the United States was characterized by U.S. multina-

tional firms investing abroad. Thus, it is not surprising that, at the same

time that so much attention was being paid to U.S. tax policy toward foreign—

source income, very little attention was given to the impacts of domestic tax

policy on investment by foreigners in the United States. More recently,

however, foreign firms' investment in the United States has come to play a much

more important role in total U.S. capital formation. For instance, in 1979, net

direct investment by foreigners in their U.S. affiliates reached 11.9 billion

dollars, or approximately fifteen percent of total net plant and equipnent

expenditures in the United States.1

          One recent paper (Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley (1982)) has illustrated

the potential importance of foreign direct investment inflows for the outcomes

of tax policy. That paper demonstrated, using simulation analysis, that if

foreign investment is highly elastic, its impacts could come to dominate other

effects of tax changes on economic welfare. The reason is that the presence of

capital income taxes implies that the U.S. government shares in any returns to

capital generated by increases in foreigners' investments in the U.S.

          While this theoretical work implies that the elasticity of inter-

national capital flows with respect to rates of return is a very important para-

meter in determining tax effects, almost no information is available concerning
                                      —2—


this crucial elasticity. In a previous empirical paper (Hartman (1981b)) it was

shown that domestic investment incentives, in addition to increasing total

investment by U.S. firms, tend to attract investment by these investors which

otherwise would have gone abroad. However, there has, as of yet, been no

empirical work on the responsiveness of foreigners' investments in the United

States to changes in domestic tax parameters.

          Obtaining some evidence on the magnitude of this response i espe-

cially important at this time. Current tax policy in the United States appears

to be guided in a very important way by concerns with the rate of capital for-

mation. Thus, the 1981 tax reform was designed to put major emphasis on

increasing both the rate of savings and the rate of investment. In policy

discussions, and in fact in much of the economics literature on taxes and capi-

tal formation, savings incentives and investment incentives are treated as

alternative methods of achieving the same result.2

          Once the presence of international capital movements is recognized,

however, savings incentives and investment incentives can assume very different

roles. Domestic investment incentives, for example, can result in large

increases in domestic investment by foreigners and by domestic firms, at the

expense of investment abroad, even if major increases in savings do not occur.

On the other hand, savings incentives could result in increased investment both

at home and abroad, thus causing domestic investment to increase by less than

the increase in savings.

         This paper provides some evidence on one aspect of international

investment, the impacts of domestic tax policy on foreign direct investment in

the United States. The possible impacts, which are discussed in the first sec—
tion, are complex. For example, an investment incentive which applies to both

domestic and foreign investors would be expected to result in an increased

foreign investment in the U.S.   On the other hand, a savings incentive, which

has no direct impact on foreign investors, would nevertheless tend to increase

domestic investors' demand for capital assets, thereby driving down the returns

expected by foreign investors and possibly resulting in significant decreases in

foreign investment. Because of measurement difficulties, we must be modest

about the precision of our estimates of these impacts. However, the results we

do obtain suggest that foreign investment in the U.S. is strongly affected, in

the manner predicted, by changes in domestic tax policy.


II. Domestic Tax Effects on Foreign Investment Inflows

          Our analysis of the effects of domestic tax policy on foreign invest-

ment will involve testing the traditional proposition that foreign investors

base their decisions on where to make capital investments on the real after—tax

rates of return available on alternative investments. In a simplified aggregate

model, we should use after—tax rates of return on foreigners' investments abroad

and in the U.S. to explain the level of foreign investment in the United

States.3 The complexity of each country's tax system, and, in particular, the

complexity of the interaction among tax systems, make this comparison far from

straightforward.

          Because of the empirical orientation of this paper, we intend to

sketch only briefly the theory which underlies the response of foreign investors

to domestic taxes, with a goal of empirical implementation is an aggregate time

series model. Those interested in a more rigorous development of these ideas

should consult Hartman (1981a). In taxing the income earned in the U.S. by
                                         —4—


foreign investors, the U.S. government has the first opportunity and imposes its

corporate taxes on the firms' returns just as it would on a domestic investor's

income. When the income from these investments is actually repatriated as a

dividend to the foreign investor, an additional tax, called a "withholding tax"

is also typically collected. Then, the home government of the investor gets an

opportunity to tax the proceeds. In order to avoid the double taxation which

otherwise would be implied by the collection of the investor's home country tax,

the home nations typically either exclude foreign source income from taxation

completely or give the firm a credit for the U.S. taxes paid.

             The effective rate of taxation, to which a foreign investor should

respond in making its U.S. investment decisions, is, therefore, a complicated

concept. In particular, the question of how a firm should view the deferred

taxes (the U.S. withholding tax as well as any residual home country tax) has

often been resolved in empirical studies by simply averaging the applicable tax

rates, with weights depending on the fraction of earnings ordinarily repatriated.

             In the recent theoretical paper referred to above, we noted that the

repatriation of earnings to the foreign parent firm,   while    the foreign parent

firm   is   at the same time investing further n the U.S. by an explicit transfer

of funds, results in no change in the net financial position of either the

parent firm or the U.S. subsidiary, except that any    taxes   which are levied on

repatriated earnings are paid currently rather than being deferred into the

future. Thus, it is optimal for the U.S subsidiary to obtain explicit transfers

of funds from the parent only if its planned investment in the U.S. is suf-

ficient to totally exhaust its current U.S. earnings. That is, one would not

expect to observe foreign parent firms making new investments in the U.S. while
                                       —5—




at   the same time receiving dividend payments from their U.S. affiliates. Thus,

the weighted average rule for calculating effective tax rates would appear to

have a fatal shortcoming. Rather, we can depict the required return on invest-

ment in the U.S. by foreign firms as shown in Figure 1, where E represents the

earnings available within the U.S. subsidiary for investment, and r2 exceeds

r1 for reasons to which we will now turn.

           Suppose, first, that the firm is in the position of making a marginal

investment which would involve retaining earnings, rather than repatriating them

to the foreign parent. The general nature of the effective tax rate which

influences this decision can be most simply investigated by recognizing that the

present value of the liability coming from deferrable taxes is not affected by

the decision to defer them. That is, the present values of the taxes due on one

dollar, if repatriated today, or on one dollar plus all of the earnings that

that dollar generates in the intervening period, if repatriation occurs later,

are equal. The reason that deferral provides an advantage is that the further

earnings generated from a reinvested dollar do not accrue any additional real

tax liability as a result of withholding taxes and host country income taxes.

Thus, in deciding whether to reinvest earnings or repatriate earnings, an opti-

mizing firm should think of the effective tax rate on additional U.S. capital

income as arising only from the standard U.S. income tax.   So, the appropriate

net—of—tax return on U.S. investment, to be compared to the net-of—tax return

available abroad, should be calculated ignoring withholding taxes imposed by the

U.S. and any additional tax liability imposed on dividend payments by the

foreign government.4

          On the other hand, the firm transferring funds to a U.S. subsidiary
                            —6--




                         Figure    1




  Required Return
on Foreign Investment
    in the U.S.




                    r2




                                       E
                                             Level of Foreign
                                           Investment in the U.S.
                                        —7--




does not have an accumulated foreign tax liability on those funds, and should

consider the fact that when it repatriates the resulting earnings it will face

additional withholding and foreign income taxes. The calculation of the after-

tax rate of return in this case is highly complex, depending upon the planned

timing of future repatriations. For example, if repatriation is expected to

occur at a very far distant point, the importance of that future tax liability

diminishes. Obviously, the future plans of the firm determine the value of

   in Figure 1. Unfortunately, even setting the difficult conceptual issues

aside, problems of measurement will prevent us from constructing an effective

withholding tax rate and foreign income tax rate to be applied to the aggregate

of foreign investment in the U.S. At the same time, it does not seem too

unreasonable to assume, given the aggregate nature of our analysis, that the

average values of these tax rates might be relatively constant over time. If

so, ignoring these taxes in the empirical analysis will not present any

problems.

            The reason for this very striking difference in the incentive effects

of taxe8 due upon repatriation in these two cases is intuitive. Since the

deferred taxes act more as levies on transfers of funds out of the United

States, rather than as taxes on the earnings of capital, they would be expected

to have very different effects depending on whether the funds are already in the

U.S. or whether a firm is contemplating transferring funds to the U.S. When the

funds are already in the hands of the domestic subsidiary, a tax on transferring

funds back to the parent firm becomes an unavoidable cost, and does not

influence the firm's optimal investment decision. On the other hand, the same

tax is avoidable if the funds are not already located in the U.S., and, there—
                                      -8-


fore, serves to some extent as an investment disincentive.

          As noted above, we will be forced to ignore these deferrable taxes in

the empirical work in any event. A good argument can be made that this should

cause no difficulty; but it is still important to consider investment of

retained earnings separately from investment of new funds transferred from the

parent, since these marginal investment decisions are conceptually distinct.

          One other conceptual distinction is particularly important in the case

of the United States. Foreign investment in the U.S. can take the form either

of new capital expenditures by foreign investors or of purchase of existing

assets. Both of these fonns of investment appear to be very important in the

U.S. case and, reliable data do not exist to separate the two forms. It is

nevertheless important to maintain a logical distinction between these two forms

of investment is in considering how to measure real after—tax rates of return on

assets in the United States. For firms expanding the operations of existing

subsidiaries by making new capital investments, the current rate of return to

foreign—owned assets in the United States would be expected to provide a better

measure of the anticipated rate of return to new assets than some rate of return

measured for the economy as a whole. Specifically, the foreign firm might

possess some advantage in its product, technology, or management which has

allowed it to earn a current rate of return higher than that generally pre-

vailing in the economy. This higher rate of return will be an inducement to

further investment. Conversely, the measured rate of return most applicable to

a firma which is buying existing assets would seem to be the overall rate of

return to assets in the U.S. In fact, in the empirical analysis to follow, both

a general net real rate of return and a foreign—investor—specific rate of return
                                              —9-


will be allowed to influence foreign investment.

          More importantly, when a firm is considering purchase of existing

assets, its decisions will be influenced by the valuation placed on those

existing assets by U.S. domestic investors. As a result, a change in domestic

tax policy, such as an inducement to savings, which changes the attractiveness

of assets without necessarily changing the current measured net real rate of

return to the capital can influence foreign investors' decisions.


III. The Evidence.

          The theory developed in the proceeding section leads to an estimating

equation such as equation (1 ).




(i)    ln() =        ac
                          +
                              a1
                                   ln(r*(1_t*)) + a2 ln(r(l_t*)) +
                                                                   a3
                                                                      in (




As we noted in Section II, the marginal investment decisions of firms which

are reinvesting earnings at the margin could be affected differently (by taxes)

from the marginal investment decisions being made by firms which are trans-

ferring funds from abroad at the margin. Thus, equation (1) will have coef-

ficients which are particular to retained earnings investment (Ire) .        An

equation with the same variables will be used to explain "transfer" investment

(Ii). In our estimation, retained earnings investment will 'be taken as a frac-

tion of U.S. GNP. This is done to allow for better comparison with previous

results on domestic investment, although the alternative of using investment

deflated by the GNP deflator produces virtually identical (though marginally

more significant) results.

         In this equation, i&(1_t*) is the after—tax rate of return actually
                                           —10—


realized by foreign investors in the U.S. As pointed out above, this rate of

return is most appropriate for firms which are considering expansion of current

operations (which may or may not be earning rates of return comparable to those

in the rest of the U.S. economy). Since an increase in the rate of return

earned in the U.S. tends to increase investment, we would expect a1 to be posi-

tive.

          The second term in equation (1), r(1_t*) is the overall gross rate of

return on capital in the United States, reduced by the U.S. tax rate paid on

current income by a foreign investor. This variable measures a similar concept

to that measured by r*(1 _t*)     ,   except that it may be more applicable to firms
which are acquiring existing assets on which they do not expect to earn extraor-

dinary returns based on production of differentiated products or possession of

superior technology. We would, of course, anticipate that the coefficient of

this alternative measure of the U.S. rate of return, a2 , would also take on a

positive sign.

          The final term in equation (1), ),             measures the tax rate on U.S.

capital owned by foreigners (t*), relative to the tax rate on U.S. capital owned

by U.S. investors, (t) ,   or   equivalently, the net-of—tax rate of return received

by domestic investors relative to that received by foreigners, on the same

investment. t is appropriately measured to include all taxes on capital; in

particular, it includes taxes paid by the final recipients of the capital

income. This ratio, therefore, measures the attractiveness of a U.S. investment

to a domestic investor, relative to its attractiveness to a foreign investor.

By including this term, we hope to capture the valuation effect discussed in the

previous section: the tax change which causes an investment to become more
                                     —1 1—



attractive to a domestic investor but causes no change in the effective tax rate

faced by a foreign investor tends, in the short run, to increase the foreigners'

cost of acquiring that investment and, thus, tends to reduce foreign investment.5

Therefore, we would expect a3 to be negative.

          In addition to the limitations of our analysis caused by lack of data

and discussed in the previous section, there is one further notable omission

from equation (1). That is, we have no measure of the alternative rate of

return available abroad to those contemplating foreign investment in the U.S.

While one could construct a measure of the after—tax real rate of return

available in a particular country to a particular investor who is resident of a

particular second country, the complexity and uncertainty involved in attempting

to construct an aggregate (marginal) measure seems unlikely to produce any

useable results. Rather than make any attempt in this direction, we have chosen

to accept the left—out variable problem. However, it seems unlikely that even

the ideal aggregate rate of return would show sufficient variability over time

to be very important if it were measurable. Furthermore, as long as the

variations in the alternative rate of return are not highly correlated with

variations in those factors included in equation (1), no bias will be produced

in the estimates of the coefficients of equation (1 )   by having left it out. If
anything, one would anticipate that real after—tax rates of return to capital

across countries would be positively correlated. Therefore, since we would

expect the coefficient of the alternative rate of return variable to be

negative, any bias produced in the coefficients a1 and a2 should be in the

direction of making them less significant. In addition, we will conduct some

further experiments, estimating directly the tax effects embodied in equation
                                         —12—



 (1).   This should provide useful information, since the variations in U.S. tax

rates seem even less likely to be correlated with events occurring abroad.


A. Retained Earnings Results

           Investment of retained earnings is highly important, accounting for

well over forty percent of' total foreign investment over the period of obser-

vation. We should anticipate getting our best results for the retained earnings

equation, since the measured rate of return will best reflect the experience of

"mature" subsidiaries which are likely to use reinvested earnings as their

marginal source of capital.6



           Estimating equation (1 )   using   annual time series data for the 15 year

period (1965—1979), produces the result given by equation (2).




(2) ln() = -6.573      + 1.436 ln(r*(1_t*)) +
                 (.679) (.118)
                                                  1.232 ln(r(1_t*)) - 1.720
                                                  (.376)              (.415)
                                                                               ln()
                                                                   = .940
                  (standard errors in parentheses)              DW = 1.67
                                                               SER = .096



This result demonstrates that the very simple model of the foreign investment

decision we have presented above provides for a fairly good explanation of

variations in retained earnings investment. In addition, despite the measure-

ment problems discussed above, the three factors we have isolated as being

important in our theoretical discussion are all shown by equation (2) to be

highly significant explainers of retained earnings investment.
                                      -13-


           In particular, each of the two real after tax rate of return

 variables, the measure specific to foreign investors and   the   measure for the

 U.S. economy as a whole, contributes significantly. This result seems to indi-

 cate the importance of both "traditional foreign investment" (the exploitation

by foreign firms of firm—specific advantages in production) and what might be

called "large portfolio investment" (the purchase of sufficiently large shares

of existing operations to be classified as foreign direct investment, but

without anticipation of extraordinary rates of return) in the recent U.S.

experience. Alternatively, it could simply be the case that both rates of

return contain some information on a given investment's potential.

          Furthermore, the significance of the relative tax term indicates that

a decline in the tax rate faced 'by an individual U. S. saver, relative to the

tax rate faced by a foreign investor tends to cause a decrease in the level of

foreign investment. Thus, all of our ex ante hypotheses concerning the impact

of tax policy on foreign direct investment are strongly confirmed by the results

just presented.

          As mentioned in footnote 5, the potential for correlation of measure-

ment errors in r(i_t*) and 're cannot be dismissed. Instrumental variables

estimation, the usual prescription for such a problem, strongly confirms the

substantive conclusions of the previous result. Despite the fact that x(1_t*)

was instrumented by its one—year lagged value, and that the correlation between

the return and its lagged value have a correlation of only .78, the result is

very similar to that given by equation (2):
                                              —14—




(3)   in()   =   -6.864     +
                  (.768) (.178)
                                 1.589 ln(r*(1_t*)) + 1.548 ln(r(1_t*)) - 2.020 ln((1_t))
                                                       (.479)              (.509)
                                                                                    -t )


                                                                    2=     .931
                                                                    DW = 1.84
                                                                   SER = .103


          To further explore the magnitude of the errors—in-variables problem,

an equation was estimated using the reinvestment ratio, (Ire divided by foreign

investor's U.S. earnings (E)) as the dependent variable. Since it is the errors

in earnings, which are incorporated in both 're and r*(l_t*), the behavior
                                    I
of an equation explaining               should be unsatisfactory if the results shown

above are purely the product of bias. However, the coefficients obtained are

entirely consistent with those in equation (2).



(4) 1n()
      E = 2.386
                        +       .275 ln(r*(1_t*)) + 1.045 ln(r(1_t*)) - 1.602
                 (.679) (.087)                       (.277)              (.306)
                                                                                  1n()
                                                                                    —



                                                                           .750
                                                                   DW = 2.26
                                                                  SER = .071


          Since the impacts of U.S. taxes are the prime concern of this paper,

it is useful to provide additional confirmation that it is really net of tax

rates of return to which foreign investors are responding. This is done, as is

shown in equation (5)     by estimating separately, whenever possible, the effects
of the various tax parameters.
                                        —15—




(5) 1n() = -6.559      +   1.434 ln(r*(1_t*)) + 1.230 ln(r) - 1.727 ln(1-t') + 2.984 ln(1_t*)
              (.894)       (.149)              (.407)           (.516)        (1.488)


                                                            =      934
                                                         DW =   1.67
                                                        SER =     .102



It should again be noted that observations of r(1_t*) are obtained without

any independent estimation of t .       Thus, in order not to introduce error into
this variable, we leave r*(1_t*) intact. By contrast, r and t are esti-

mated independently, so the gross rate of return to capital in the U.S. and the

tax rate facing foreign investors in the U.S. are included separately to test

specifically for the tax effects.

          This equation strongly confirms that after—tax rates of return are the

appropriate variable, with all of the coefficients in the equation (3) being

significant. In addition, it should be noted that the coefficient of ln(1_t*)

is virtually identical to the coefficients which were implied by the original

functional form.   That is, the coefficient of ln(1_t*) is nearly equal to the
coefficient of ln(r) minus that of ln(1—t').

          With the estimated impacts of taxes on retained earnings investment

therefore strongly confirmed, it remains to explore the empirical significance

of these impacts for the level of foreign investment in the U.S. First,

however, we turn to the estimation of the relationship between tax rates and

the other half of foreign investment, that accomplished by means of funds trans-

ferred from abroad (It)


B. Results on Transfers from Abroad

          As noted above, the theory dictates inclusion of a measure of the
                                        —16—


additional foreign tax liability which would be due upon the date of

repatriation of earnings from these investments. However, time series infor-

mation required to construct such a variable is not available. In addition, it

is plausible to believe that over our 15-year time period the average tax rate

in the rest of the world did not change significantly. Thus, we proceed to

estimate an equation of the form of equation (i) for investment accomplished by

funds transfers. The result is given by equation (6).



(6) ln() = —8.535    + .552 ln(r*(1t*)) + 1.674 ln(r(1_t*)) - 2.329
              (1.635) (.284)              (.905)              (.998)


                                                                 =   .286
                                                              DW = 1.92
                                                              SER = .590


          It should be immediately noted that our model does not explain Ij

nearly as well as it explains 're   •    This   should not be surprising, given the

variety of motivations which could lie behind foreign investment in newer opera-

tions (those which are not yet generated sufficient funds to finance further

investment). In particular, we can again appeal to the traditional factors used

to explain foreign investment, such as differentiation in products, technology,

and management, which, for newer investors, would not be well captured by any of

the variables in our model. Despite these reservations, however, it should be

noted that all three coefficients are significant at the .05 level in a one—tail

test. Again, the notion that taxes affect foreign investment is confirmed.

Furthermore, the pattern of coefficients, relative to those found in the case of

're is just the one that would be anticipated. Namely, the coefficient of

ln(r*(1_t*)) is a good deal lower, reflecting the fact that existing foreign
                                      —17-


 investment does not provide as good a guide to the returns anticipated on "new

 investment." The in (r(1_t*)) coefficient, by contrast, is larger than in

 the previous case, reflecting that "new investments" may be anticipated to yield

an amount more closely related to the overall yield in the economy; this conclu-

sion is reinforced by the fact that the in -f--2.)     coefficient   is larger in

absolute value than that found in the previous case.

          As in the previous case, we seek to confirm these conclusions by

reestimating the equation with tax effects estimated separately. The results,

shown in equation (7), do not add much confidence to the previous result.



(7) ln() = -10.185    + .808 ln(r*(1_t*)) +   1.989 ln(r) - 1.480 ln(l-t') + .202    ln(1_t*)
               (1.971) (.329)                 (.898)         (1.138)           (3.282)


                                                                       .341
                                                              DW     1.99
                                                             SER =     .495


In particular, the coefficients of ln(1—t) and ln(1_t*) are not signifi-

cant in this case. Particularly at odds with our expectations the coefficient

of ln(1_t*) , which would be anticipated to equal approximately the coef-

ficient of ln(r) minus that of ln(1—t) or about 3.469. The failure of

these tax variables to perform more significantly in the equation is better

understood when it is recognized that the correlation between t and t*

equals .95. While this correlation was not sufficiently high to make the

results unreliable in an equation which fit as well as the 're equation

(equation (2)), it is sufficiently high to destroy any confidence in separate

coefficients estimated in an equation fitting no better than equation (7).

While the coefficients of equation (7) do not add further confirmation of (6),
                                     -18-


neither do they provide evidence which rejects the hypothesis that the func-

tional forms should be as in equation (6). Thus, we would view equation (6) as

confirming the theory we have advanced about the effects of taxes on foreign

investment.

          In general, the estimated effects of taxes on foreign investment, both

that accomplished by reinvestment of earnings and that accomplished by explicit

transfers of funds, are found to be quite strong. The results indicate that

a change in U.S. tax policy which tends to diminish the tax rate faced by

foreigners (for example, a decrease in foreign or state corporate income taxes),

provides strong encouragement to increase foreign investment in the U.S. At the

same time, a change in U.S. tax policy which increases the attractiveness of

U.S. capital investment to domestic savers (for example, a decrease in the tax

rate on interest or dividends received or on capital gains), tends to provide a

strong discincentive to foreign investment, by raising the domestic valuation of

domestic assets. The amount by which foreign investment would be expected to

respond to specific changes in tax policy will be explored in the next section.

First, further experiments, designed to rule out some possibilities that these

results are spurious, will be described,.

         It has already been noted that making some crude attempts to adjust

for mismeasurement in capital consumption allowances and inventory valuations

which go into determining the reported value of r*(1_t*) have virtually no

effect on the results. Similarly, the use of instrumental variables estimations

to overcome problems of measurement error in r*(i_t*) do not alter the

conclusion. nother matter of some concern in a simple time series analysis

such as this is the possibility that our regression results are a product of
                                        —19—


explaining variables having a strong trend by other strongly trending variables.

Casual observation of values of the variables included in our regressions tends

to discount this possibility. However, in order to be more certain of our

results, all of the regressions (2) —    (7)   were rerun including first a linear

trend and then a logarithmic trend. In no case were any of these trend

variables significant and in no case did they alter in any way our basic

conclusions.

          Finally, several other events which occurred during this period might

have been important to those contemplating foreign investment in the U.S. Not

including those other variables introduces the possibility of bias in the coef-

ficients which are of interest. So, several alternative specifications were

tried in both the 're and the 1t equations. In 1974, a Middle Eastern oil

producing nation made a large investment in a U.S. firm, to acquire assets

located in its country. This investment was originally recorded as a foreign

direct investment in the United States, but was thereafter removed from the

statistics. Since 1974 was by all accounts an unusual year in international

economic affairs, the equations were all rerun including a dummy variable to

remove the 1974 observation from consideration. This variable was clearly

insignificant in all cases and did not produce any significant change in any

other parameter. Also occurring during our period of observation were disloca-

tions in international financial markets during the period of fixed exchange

rates and in the change to floating exchange rates. Speculative flows of capi-

tal between nations in anticipation of parity changes could have shown up in the

foreign investment figures. Thus, we have included in the model a variable

suggested by Kohihagen (1977) to reflect speculation in the capital market.

Again, this variable did not achieve significance, and produced no important
                                        -20-


changes in other coefficients. Thus, through all of these alterations

to the basic model, the results have been shown to be highly robust.


III. The Impacts of Tax Changes.

          We now turn to simulation experiments involving basic changes in the

tax parameters t and t .       First,     t ,   the   capital tax facing foreigners

investing in the U.S. (federal corporate tax, state and local corporate tax, and

state and local property tax) is reduced by ten percentage points to determine

the impact on foreign investment. A ten percentage point decrease in t would,

according to the Feldstein, Poterba, and Dicks-Mireaux figures used in this

paper, amount to: a) a cut by about one third of the effective rate of federal

corporate tax, b) approximately a complete removal of the state and local pro-

perty tax, or c) about double the impact of removing state and local corporate

taxes. Such a change would have, according to our model, increased reinvestment

of earnings by affiliated subsidiaries by about .98 billion dollars in 1979, or

just over one quarter. Similarly, explicit transfers of capital from abroad

would have increased by about .95 billion dollars or about sixteen percent. It

turns out, therefore, that a ten percentage point tax reduction, which transla-

tes into a decline in the total rate of, tax collection on foreign source income

of 20.9 percent produces, through all of the mechanisms we have described, an

aggregate increase of about 20.39 percent in the annual total net direct invest-

ment undertaken by foreigners in the United States. Thus, one would expect to

observe a slight decrease in the amount of U.S. taxes collected on foreign

source income, if such a tax cut were implemented, everything else equal.

         As an example of a tax cut which induces Americans to find capital

investment more attractive, while foreigners see no similar incentive, suppose
                                     —21—


that the tax on interest income was completely eliminated. This, according to

Feldstein, Poterba, and Dicks—Mireaux, would amount to au eight percentage point

cut in the total taxation of corporate capital income in the United States.

According to our model, such a cut would produce approximately a 1.2 billion

dollar decrease in investment through reinvested earnings, coupled with a

decline of 3.13 billion dollars in capital directly transferred from abroad.

These figures, it should be noted, are much larger than those resulting from a

change in the corporate income tax, because of the asymmetric effects on foreign

and domestic investors.

          In general, the reader must be cautioned against taking these results

as anything other than illustrative. The models on which they are based are

very simple ones, which describe a yearly flow of net investment. While this

methodology is comparable to that used for similar purposes in the domestic

literature (see, for example, Feldstein (forthcoming)), it is not particularly

well suited to describing the eventual outcome of the changes in policy, after

all adjustments take place. The conclusions, though, are highly suggestive.


IV. Conclusions

          It has long been recognized that if international flows of capital are

highly elastic, the welfare consequences of domestic tax policy could be quite

different from those derived from a closed economy model. Recent work by

Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley (1982) has highlighted the potential significance

of these effects. While there are general equilibrium effects to consider, one

is not, in general, badly mislead by thinking of these effects as arising

because, when foreigners invest in the United States, the United States govern-

ment collects a fraction of the rate of return to the capital in the form of tax
                                        ——

revenue.   Preliminary figures for the year 1980 indicate that foreign investors

earned approximately 9.3   billion   after—tax dollars on investments in the United

States. Thus, among federal, state, and local governments, around 9 billion

dollars in tax collections in that year must have been attributable to capital

provided by foreigners. Given the modest levels of welfare gain usually attri-

buted to proposed changes in tax policy in a closed economy model, it is not

implausible that welfare gains or losses attributable to resulting changes in

foreign direct investment, could loom very large in one's welfare calculations.

The evidence presented in this paper suggests that the welfare effects arising

from the change in foreign direct investment could be small, since the increase

in annual foreign investment almost exactly balances the decline in tax revenue

produced by the decline in the tax rate. Our result is, therefore, intermediate

between: 1) the situation in which foreign investment is not at all responsive

to taxes, in which case a welfare loss of perhaps one billion dollars would be

generated by a ten percentage point cut in the effective corporate tax rate (an

amount which foreign parent firms would receive as a windfall) and 2) the alter-

native situation in which a ten percentage point cut in the corporate income tax

rate would generate a massive inflow of capital, which would produce very large

welfare gains. Similarly, our results are indicative that an improved incentive

to savings in the U.S. can be expected to produce, at least temporarily, a

decline in foreign investment, which tends to produce an economic welfare loss

for the economy. By our estimates, this savings incentive effect on foreign

investment could be quite large, implying that any welfare gains anticipated by

conventional models need to be weighed against welfare losses arising from the

foreign sector, which could potentially amount to several billion dollars.
                                     —25—



          While all these welfare calculations are highly preliminary in nature,
what seems to be unambiguous in our results is that foreign investment does

respond significantly to domestic tax policy. Recent changes in U.S. domestic

tax policy include both incentives to increase investment operating on the cor-

porate income tax side and incentives for savings operating on the individual

side. By most accounts, the tax rate cuts for individuals, aside from that

affecting the top bracket of taxpayers, are modest at best. On the other hand,

the investment incentives embodied in the new accelerated depreciation provi-

sions seem to represent drastic changes in the tax treatment of corporate

income. Thus, unless top bracket taxpayers act to very significantly bid up the

prices of existing assets in the short run, one would anticipate major increases

in foreign direct investment in the United States over the coming years, rela-

tive to what would have happened without the tax changes.
                                        —24-


                                      FOOTNOTES



1. Foreign direct investment, as distinguished from portfolio investment, takes

place in a domestic operation over which the foreign parent firm has control.

For several reasons, foreign direct investment figures cannot be thought of as

the precise equivalent of net domestic investment numbers. One difference is

that the net domestic investment figures are obtained by subtracting from gross

investment a depreciation figure adjusted to approximate as closely as possible

economic depreciation. The Commerce Department collects no data which would

allow it to adjust the book depreciation figures used in computing net foreign

investment, and only the roughest adjustments to be discussed below can be made.

          In addition, foreign direct investment is most accurately thought of

as a financial transaction: an implicit or explicit supply of parent firm funds

to a U.S. affiliate. To the extent that additional funds are borrowed in the

U.S. or supplied by "minority" owners, these figures understate the investment

undertaken in the U.S. which is under the control of foreigners. On the other

hand, foreign direct investment does not necessarily mean purchase of real

assets and, so, may overstate the foreign—owned equivalent of domestic net fixed

investment. However, the tendency of local financing to be short—term (Robbins

and Stobaugh (1973), Chapter 4) and the incentive to minimize exchange risk by

financing current assets, but not fixed assets, through short term local

borrowing (Robbins and Stobaugh (1972)), both imply that foreign direct invest—

nient in the U.S. may be an adequate indicator of the net fixed investment

figure.   Confirmation that this approximation holds very closely in the case of
investment   undertaken   abroad by U.S. firms can be found in Hartman (1981b).

Thus, even though data limitations force us to follow the usual practice of
                                         —25—


using foreign direct investment figures as if they represented net fixed

investment (see, for example, Goldaborough (1979)), there is some evidence to

support this procedure.


2. See, for example, Summers (1981) and Bradford (1981).


3.    Further   justification for the theory sketched here can be found in Hartman

(1981b).

4. For a discussion of the limited exceptions to this simple rule, see Hartman

(1981b).


5.    Because the rate of return to domestic capital is based on replacement

costs, these valuation changes are not captured by r(1_t*).


6.    In fact, there is the possibility that the performance of this equation will
be   deceptively good, reflecting a specification error. As the data description

in   footnote   6 indicates, any measurement error in earnings will 'be introduced as

error not only in the dependent variable, retained earnings, but also in our

measure of the domestic rate of return on foreign assets. That is, there could

be a spurious correlation between an independent variable and the residual. It

turns out that instrumental variables estimates (instrumenting r*(1_t*) by its

lagged value) do not differ in any important way from the ordinary least squares

estimates reported here.


7.   The sources for data are as follows: r*(l_t*) is "reinvested earnings" plus

"income from interest, dividends, and earnings of unincorporated affiliates"

(both from "Balance of Payments" tables in U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
                                         —26--



Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business, selected issues), divided by
"direct investment position" (from "Foreign Direct Investment in the United

States," Survey of Current Business, selected issues). No separate estimate of

t is available from the source which provides information on &(1_t*). In

constructing the other variables, r, t (equal to the sum of the rates of cor-

porate income tax imposed at all jurisdictions plus property taxes), and t (the

total effective tax rate including t and tax rates facing savers) are all

taken from Feldstein, Poterba, and Dicks—Mireaux (1981), Thus, we are

recognizing that the effective tax rates facing domestic investors and those

imposed on foreign investors subject to the same taxes are equal. Note that the

measure    of t inherent in r(1 _t*) and the measure of t used to construct
r(1_t*) are independent.
            It   should also be noted that the concepts measured by   r(1_t*) and
r*(1_t*)   are somewhat different in their treatment of firm debt. While r

includes the return to the entire debt portion of the firms' capital, r*(1_t*)

includes the debt return only to the extent that the debt is foreign—owned.


8. As further confirmation of our results, rates of return were adjusted in a

crude fashion for mismeasurement of real depreciation and inventory profits

(using the percentage impacts on domestic firm's earnings of these adjustment,

as reported by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis in

the Survey' of Current Business, various isues). This adjustment made no percep-

tible difference in parameter estimates.
                                         —27—


                                      REFERENCES


Bradford, David F., 1981, "Issues in the Design of Savings and Investment

      Incentives," pp. 13—47 of Depreciation, Inflation, and    the   Taxation of

     Income from Capital, Washington, D.C., The Urban Institute Press, Charles

     R. Hulten, ed.


Feldatein, Martin, "Inflation, Tax Rules    and Investment," National Bureau of

     Economic Research Working Paper No. 577, Econometrica, forthcoming.


Feldstein, Martin, James Poterba, and Louis Dicks—Mireaux, 1981, "The Effective

     Tax Rate and   the   Pretax Rate of Return," National Bureau of Economic

     Research Working Paper No. 740.


Goldabrough, David J., 1979, "The Role of Foreign Direct Investment in the

     External Adjustment Process," IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 26, Number 4

     (December), pp. 725—754.


Goulder, Lawrence H., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, "Domestic Tax Policy and

     Foreign Sector," in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis

     edited by Martin Feldstein, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, forth-

     coming.


Hartman, David G., 1981a, "Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment," National

     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 689, June.


Hartman, David G., 1981b, "Domestic Tax Policy and Foreign Investment: Some

    Evidence," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 784.
                                         -28-


Kohihagen, Steven W., 1977, "Exchange Rate Changes, Profitability, and Direct

     Foreign Investment, Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 44, Number 1 (July),

     pp. 43-52.


Robbins, Sidney M. and   Robert   B. Stobaugh, 1973, Money in the Multinational

     Enterprise, (New York: Basic Books, 1973).


Robbins, Sidney and Robert Stobaugh, 1972, "Comments" in International Mobility

     and Movement of Capital, edited by F. Machiup, W. S. Salant, and L.

     Tarshis, pp. 354—364, New York, National Bureau of Economic Research.


Summers, Lawrence, 1981, "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q—Theory

     Approach," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Volume 1, pp. 67-127.
