NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

The Welfare Cost of Social Security's
Impact on Private Saving

Martin Feld stein

Working Paper No. 969

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

August 1982

The research reported here is part of the NBER 's research program
in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #969
August 1982

ABSTRACT

The Welfare Cost of Social Security's Impact on Private Saving

Although there have been several studies of the effect of
social security on private saving, there has been no attempt to

measure the welfare cost of this distortion. The present paper
develops an analytic framework for this evaluation and presents
numerical calculations.

Martin

Feldstein

National

Bureau of Economic Research

1050 ssachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts
617—868—3905

The Welfare Cost of Social Security's Impact on Private Saving
Martin Feldstein*

In recent years a substantial number of econometric studies have examined the effect of social security retirement pensions on the level of

private saving.1 Implicit in these studies is the presumption that reduced
saving implies a welfare cost. It is surprising therefore that there have been
no explicit attempts to evaluate the size of this welfare cost in a manner analogous to the measurement of the welfare cost of distortionary taxes (e.g.,
Harberger 19614 and the studies cited in Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1980). The purpose of the present study is to provide such an evaluation.
The analysis here shows that in an important special case a social
security program can reduce private saving without imposing any welfare loss.

In more realistic cases, however, the welfare loss is large both absolutely and
in relation to the size of the social security program.
The primary rationale for universal social security pensions is of
course to provide retirement income to those who lack the foresight to provide

for themselves. An evaluation of the net effect of social security therefore
requires balancing the welfare gain from this type of transfer payment against

the welfare loss caused by the savings distortion. A more complete analysis
would also include the distortion in retirement behavior and in pre—retireinent

labor supply caused by social security taxes and benefits. An evaluation of

*Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper
is part of the NBER Study of Public and Private Pensions. The views expressed
here are the authors and should not be attributed to any organization.
Barro (1979), Barro and MacDonald (1979), Blinder, Gordon and Wise
(1980), Darby (1979), Diamond and Hausman (1982), Feldstein (l971, 1977, 1980,
1982), Feldstein and Pellechio (1979), Kotlikoff (1979), and M.innell (1976).

the welfare loss of the induced reduction in savings is however a useful
starting place and a natural sequel to the econometric studies of the effect of
social

security on saving.
The present paper therefore makes the extreme assumption that labor

supply and retirement behavior are exogenously fixed and that each dollar of

"social

security wealth't (i.e., the present value of social security benefits)

reduces private saving by one dollar. The latter assumption implies that social
security does not raise consumption during retirement. I want to emphasize that
this extreme assumption is not meant to represent reality1 but to focus the analysis on the welfare cost of reduced capital accumulation.

The reduction in private saving could, of course, be offset or more
than offset by accumulating a large trust fund with which to pay future social

security benefits (Samuelson, 1975; Feldstein 1977). In practice, however, the
social security program in the United States and in most other industrial

countries is unfunded. I shall therefore assume that there is no funding and no
change

in other public capital accumulation to offset the reduction in private

capital

accumulation.

The first section of this paper develops the analytic framework for

evaluating the net loss of reduced private saving. The second section presents
some illustrative numerical calculations. Then in the third section I examine

the effect of a finite horizon on the value of the welfare loss. There is a
brief concluding section that indicates the direction for future research on
this subject.

1Empirical estimates of the extent to which social security benefits reduce
private saving vary but most of the estimates indicate that each dollar of
social security wealth reduces private wealth accumulation by between 50 cents
and one dollar.

—.,—

1.

The Analytic Framework
In a very important paper, Paul Samuelson (1958) extended the life

cycle theory by developing an explicit overlapping generations model and used

this framework to analyze the effect of social security. Since Samuelson
assumed an economy without a productive capital stock or other durable store of
value, social security could play the welfare—increasing role of permitting
individuals to finance retirement consumption.

The absence of a capital stock is of course critical to Samuelson's
conclusion that an unfunded social security program increases the welfare of all

generations. In a model with a productive capital stock, the substitution of
unfunded social security for private saving raises the welfare of all generations only if the economy is initially producing with an inefficiently large

capital stock.1 When this is not true, the excess of the productivity of real
capital over the implicit rate of return earned on the taxes paid to an unfunded
social security program causes a loss to each generation of workers who par-

ticipate in the program. Since members of the initial generation of retirees
receive benefits without paying any taxes, their welfare is unambiguously

increased. The net welfare effect depends on balancing the gain to the first
generation of retirees against the loss to all future generations.
The framework for the present analysis will be an extended version of

Samuelson's overlapping generations model. Each individual lives for two
periods, working in the first period and retiring in the

second period. All

1Cass and Yaari (1967) show that if the economy's rate of growth exceeds its
marginal product of capital, the substitution of' social security for private
saving raises welfare in all generations. This is an application of the familiar proposition that welfare can be unambiguously improved by reducing capital
intensity in an economy whose capital intensity is greater than the golden rule
level. Samuelson's economy without productive capital is a special case of the
growth rate exceeding the productivity of capital.

-individuals

are alike and earn a wage wt if ttiey work in period t. The labor

force grows at rate n per period and the real wage rate grows at rate g per
period. The basic difference from the Saimielson model is that savings may be

invested in real capital. Th avoid the complexities of an endogenous and time—
varying rate of return, I shall assume that the marginal product of capital
remains constant at rate p per period.

The number of aged retirees in each period (At) is equal to the number

of workers in the previous period (Lti). Since the population grows at rate n
per period, Lt =

(l+n)Lt_i

and Lt =

(l+n)Ai.

Consider a social security program that imposes a tax at rate 0 on

wage income in each period. The workers in period t pay a tax of

0t1- and, because of the unfunded pay—as—you--go nature of the program,
receive benefits when they retire equal to the taxes paid by the next
Tt =

generation: Bt+1 = bt+1A.t+i = Owt+1Lt+i where

period

bt is the benefit per retiree in

t.

The implicit rate of return, 1, that individuals earn on their tax
"contributions" is defined by the ratio of the benefits that they receive to the
taxes that they previously paid: Rt+1/Tt =

since

l+n =

and l+g =

wt+l/wt.

Owt+iLt+i/tLt

=

(l+g)(l+n)

= 1+1

The implicit rate of return is therefore

equal to the rate of growth of real income.

If the workers of generation t had instead saved and invested Tt,

their savings would have earned the real marginal product of capital, p. If
there were no tax on capital income, the individual savers would also receive a

return of p. it even if a capital income tax reduces the net return to individual savers, the nation as a whole earns the entire pretax rate of return. I

—)—

shall

assume that the benefits of that tax revenue accrues to the generation of

savers who own the capital.1 Thus instead of receiving Bt+l = (1+Y)Tt in return
for their social security taxes, they would receive (1+p)Tt. The social security
program therefore reduces the retirement income of the workers of period t by
(P—y)Tt =

(P_I) OwtLt.
The present value of this loss as of the first period of these worker's

lives is (p.-y) OwtLt/(1+d) where d is the rate at which individuals discount

income between the two periods. If there is no capital income tax, individuals

equate their rate of time preference to the marginal product of capital: d = P.
A capital income tax at rate t lowers the annual marginal rate of return to
individual savers2 from r to (1—t)r and therefore makes the net rate of return

per period N = Li+(i—t)r]Y—i where y is the number of years in a generation.
I shall define an effective "period tax rate" T by the identity N = (1—T)p.
Thus, with a capital income tax, the equality of the individuals' time preference
and the net rate of return implies d = (l—T)p.
In the next generation the corresponding loss is

(p_y)ew+1L+1/(l+d) = (p_I) e(l+g)w(l+n)L/(1+d) = (1+Y)(p-Y)OwtLt/(l+d).
Thus the generational loss grows at rate I.

If the program is introduced with

workers of generation t0 and continues forever,3 the present value of the
infinite stream of' losses is given by

-

t=o

(l+d)(l+6)

1This may be in the form of direct benefits for retirees, a lower tax rate on
capital income, or an equivalent reduction in the labor income tax. If instead
the revenue is used to reduce the tax burden on the next generation of workers,
the analysis would differ only slightly from the one that follows in the text.

.
.
A capital income tax reduces the marginal return to individual savers even
though the total return to savers as a whole is p.
2

3The

possibility of a finite termination date is discussed in section 3.

-6-

where 6 is the appropriate discount rate for the intergenerational aggregation

of consumption.1 Since wtLt =

(l+g)t

w0(1+n)t L0 =

(1+y)t

w0L0,

r
z

If

—

(p_y)Ow0L0

l+d

1+1

J

tOL

the discount rate exceeds the growth rate (6> y), the sum

converges

and the

present value of the losses to all generations of workers is:

Z

r 1+6

00

Ow L

11+d

L

Although Z measures the loss to all generations of workers who participate in the program, it ignores the benefit to the initial generation of

retirees who receive benefits without paying any tax. Their benefits are equal
to the taxes paid by the first generation of workers, Ow-0L0. The present value
net loss to all generations, including the first generation of retirees, is thus

N =

Z -

r 1+6

.
6—y

OwL
00

The value of N depends critically on the value of 6, the social
discount rate used for the intergenerational aggregation of consumption. There

are two alternative theories of the appropriate definition of 6. The first
theory equates the social intergenerational discount rate with the private
intrageneration discount rate, i.e., 6 = d.

The rationale for this approach is

shall return directly to the appropriate value of 5.

that the generations are linked by bequests and that the preferences of the

bequethers are accepted as normatively valid. The alternative theory rejects the
private discount rate as irrelevant for intergenerational comparisons and bases
the social discount rate on the presumed decline in the marginal utility of

income as the level of income grows. If per capita income grows at rate g and
the elasticity of the individual marginal utility function is C, the marginal
rate of substitution of income in successive periods is (l+g)

.

Conventional

assumptions put C between 1 and 3l
Consider first the implication of equating the social discount rate

and the private discount rate, 6=d. In an econoir with no capital income tax,
the private discount rate should equal the marginal product of capital; thus d=p

and therefore &p. Substituting these values into equation

implies N=O. Thus

there is no net excess burden caused by the reduction in private saving if the
econoxxr has no capital income tax (or other savings distortion) and if the

marginal product of capital is used to discount future income reductions.2 In
this unique case, the benefit to the initial generations of retirees who receive
the unrequited transfer when the program is established just balances the inf i—

nite stream of losses sustained by all future generations.
If we continue to accept the equality of the social discount rate and
the private discount rate but recognize the existence of a capital income tax,

the welfare neutrality of the savings reduction disappears. With &=d=(l—t)p,

'Irving Fisher (1892) and Ignar Frisch (1932) purported to estimate C by
imposing certain separability assumptions and obtained c=2.
conclusion also rests on the assmpt ion that changes in the rate of
saving do not alter the marginal product of capital on the marginal rate of
substitution.

-eequation

14

implies1

_r____
—
(1T1

N

—

L

—

It

(i—T)1

° °
1

-a

6wL
° °

is clear that N is an increasing function of the tax rate, the marginal pro-

duct of capital and the economy's rate of growth. A positive capital income tax
rate implies that the marginal product of capital exceeds the rate of time preference and therefore that any change in the rate of saving has a first—order

welfare effect.2 The higher the marginal product of capital, the greater the
welfare loss from any reduction in saving. A higher rate of growth of the eco—
nomy means that the annual losses grow at a faster rate and therefore have a
greater present value.
The net value presented in equation 14 can also be interpreted as the

net gain of terminating an existing program in

year. Terminating the

program implies that the retirees in the terminal period receive no benefits
while the workers in that period and all future periods pay no tax and receive

no benefits. If the terminating period is defined to be tO, the net present
value (as of t=o) of the welfare gain of termination is measured by N with Ow0L0
the amount of tax that would be collected in that period if the program were not
terminated.

1Recall that T
period.

is

defined so that (l—T)p is the after—tax rate of return per

is analogous to the fact that any tax change has a first—order welfare
effect if there is a pre—existing distortionary tax.

_—

Although the absolute present value
measure is directly relevant for
assessing the desirability of starting
it is also interesting to

or terminating a social security program,

restate this loss as a proportion of the present value

of all taxes.' Since taxes at t=O

are Ow0L0 and benefits grow at rate I per

period, the present value of taxes, discounting at rate 6, is

o)

—

6-.y

o

L0

The ratio of the net loss to this
present value of taxes is therefore

N

(7)

('+6)(y)

=

v

In

—

(l+d)(&.y)

(1+d)(i+6)(&.y)

the important special case where the private and social discount
rates are

equal (6=d), this implies

=

(8)

V

1+6

It is interesting to compare this to the netloss
to a typical worker
per dollar of his tax payments. Since he
receives a return of I on his social
security taxes rather than the total return of p,2 his loss
is p.-y. This loss
is a reduction in his retirement
income. Its present value as of the time that
he 'works and pays

tax

is therfore (P—y)/(i+p).

Since y>

6

is

a necessary

1Note that since taxes and benefits are equal in
value of taxes is also the present value of benefits.each period, the present
2flecafl that

directly

but

individuals y only receive the net—of—tax return (l—T)p

also

get the benefit of the tax revenue tp indirectly.

—10-

condition for the convergence of N and V, it is clear that N/v is smaller than

the steady state loss per dollar of tax revenue. This difference reflects the
fact that N/V incorporates the extra benefit to the initial generation of
retirees.

When the social and private discount rates are equal to the net—of—tax
rate of return, (l—T)p, equation 7 can be written

N

v

=

l+(l—T)p

The net loss per present value dollar of social security taxes is equal to the

tax revenue that is lost per dollar of foregone savings, discounted at the
individual's net of tax return.

2. Some Illustrative Calculations
Some numerical calculations will indicate plausible iragnitudes for the

welfare losses derived in the previous section. To obtain values for y, p and
T,

I will

use the experience of the U.S. economy in the three decades beginning

in 1950. I will assume that the length of a "period" or generation is 30 years.
During the thirty years beginning in 1950, the average annual rate of

growth of real personal income was 0.037, implying that y =

1.97.

(1.037)30 —

i

=

The average pretax marginal product of capital in the U.S. nonfinancial

corporate sector was 0.ll1 (Feldstein, Poterba and Dicks—Mireaux, 1981),
implying that p =

(i.iiI4)°

— 1 = 21.5O.

Finally, during the same period these

corporations, their shareholders and their creditors paid approxin.te1y 68 per-

cent of their pretax capital income in taxes to federal, state and local govern-

ments (Feldstein, Poterba and Dicks—Mireaux, 1981). Since this average tax rate

—11—

may

exceed

the corresponding marginal tax rate, I will make the conservative

assumption that t=0.50. With r=0.l14 and t=0.50, (1—t)p = 11÷(1_t)r]3O — 1 =

2.50,

Since p =

I

.28.

= 0.825.

Substituting these values into equation 5 (based on the assumption
that the social and private discount rates are equal to each other and to the
net—of—tax return, (1—t)p) implies that the net loss is N=8.75 Oi0L0. The net
welfare loss caused by the reduction in saving induced by the social security
program is equal to 8.75 times the initial size of the program, i.e., 8.75 times

the unrequited benefits received by the first generation of retirees.
Alternatively, this calculation implies that reducing the existing social
security program by a fraction f, and thereby denying benefits of fOWTLT to the
"current" generation of retirees, would

generate

a net welfare gain of 8.75 0T1-r•

These losses and potential gains can be restated
as a proportion of
the present value of social security taxes by using equation 9. With Ip =
20.21
and (l—i)p = 14.28, equation 9 implies N/V =

3.83;

the net loss is 3.83 times

the present value of the taxes. This surprisingly high ratio reflects the fact
that the real pretax rate of return on the foregone investment is high relative
to the discount rate and that this difference

compounds substantially over the

30 year length of each period.1

Although these calculations are only illustrative, the parameter
assumptions are not unrealistic and the derived values of N and N/V do indicate
the substantial size of the potential welfare loss caused by the reduced savings
that

result

from starting or continuing an unfunded social security pension

program.

1Reducing the length of the period to 20 years lowers N and N/V but their
values remain high: N = 5.86
and N/V = 1.86.
Ow-0L0

—12—

If we reject the assumption that the social discount rate is
necessarily equal to the private discount rate and instead use the assumed diminishing marginal utility of consumption to calculate 6, we obtain 6 = (1+g)

where g is the rate of growth of per capita real income and C

is

c

—

the elasticity

of the marginal utility schedule. During the three decades after 1950, the
annual rate of growth of real per capita income was

(1.023)30 = 1.98.

(l—T)p

=

Thus l+g =

It is clear from equation 2 that convergence to a finite

value of N requires 6 > y =

With C

0.023.

= 2,

1.28, N =

6 =

i6.6i

1.97 and therefore C > 1.6.

2.92.

implies that with 6 =

Equation

2.92 and d =

Ow0L0, substantially greater than the value of N

obtained by assuming that 6 = (1—t)p.

Similarly N/V =

I.21

is larger than it

was with the higher discount rate. To reduce N to 8.75 O0L0, 6 must be equal
to (1—T)p =

1.28.

Since (1+ 6) =

(1+g)

C

the

elasticity of the marginal utility

function must be at least 2.45.

Thus, both approaches to the selection of a discount rate indicate a
very substantial value for the net welfare loss.

3. Finite Horizons
The derivations and calculations in section 1 and 2 all assume that

the social security program goes on forever. There is never a "last generation"
that pays a social security tax but receives no benefit. In Samuelson's words,
social security is "a Ponzi game that works,"1 at least in the sense that it
continues to command political support even if each new generation incurs a

1Ponzi was a famous Boston swindler whose chain letter scheme collapsed when
further buyers cound not be found.

—13—

welfare

loss.'

It is important, however, to consider whether the qualitative results

and the general order of magnitude of the losses depends critically on the

assumption of an infinite horizon. As I noted earlier, terminating the program
in year T involves a net gain that is exactly equal in magnitude to the net
loss implied by starting a program in that period, say

¼l0)'
(

Tp

—

GT —

(l—T)p-.y

in the special case in which d = 6

TLT
(l—T)p. The present value of this ter-.

mination gain (as of time t=o) must be offset against the loss calculated for
the infinite horizon.

The present value of

as of time zero is G

(1_6)_T GT

(l+(l_T)p)_TGT.

Thus:

G = (i

(ii)

G =

(12)

Since y <

(l—t)p,

+

(l_T)p)_T

(l—t) p—i

ew0L0 (i + y)T

T

[l+TP]

N

the offsetting gain is of decreasing relative importance as T

increases.

11f there vers only two generations, the workers would vote to terminate
the
program and, because they are more numerous, would prevail. In reality, there
is a distribution of ages and some of those who are not yet retired would be net
losers if the program were terminated. The redistribution in the actual program
further complicates the voting equilibrium. See Feldsteiri and Pellechio (l9T9b)
for a brief discussion of these issues and some empirical estimates.

—1 —

If,

for example, the program is terminated after 3 generations (90

years), G = o.18N.

The present value loss of a program that lasts three genera-

tions is thus 82 percent of the loss of an infinite program.
For plausible parameter values, the assumption of an infinite horizon
does not alter the qualitative or general quantitative conclusions.

14•

Conclusion

The analysis and calculations presented in this paper make it clear
that a social security program that replaces an equal amount of private saving
can impose a welfare loss whose present value is many times the size of the

existing generation's benefit. The actual adverse welfare effect depends, of
course, on the extent to which social security benefits do depress private
saving as well as on the effect of social security programs on labor supply,

retirement behavior, etc. Moreover, because some individuals behave myopically,
the social security program not only reduces saving by less than the full amount
of taxes but also provides income to those who might otherwise have too little
in old age.

Evaluating the magnitude of the welfare loss caused by reduced saving
is therefore just one part of the evaluation of the welfare effect of social

security. A similar analysis is required to evaluate the effects of changes in
retirement and labor supply. These adverse consequences must then be balanced
against the favorable effect of providing retirement income for those who lacked

the foresight to provide for themselves. The net welfare effect of variations
from the current level of benefits could then be assessed as a basis for
deciding the appropriateness of changing the existing program.

July 1982

Al

—15--

Re ferences

Atkinson, A. and J. Stiglitz (1980) Lectures on Public Economics, New York:
McGraw—Hill
Barro, R.J. (1978) The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving,
Washington: American Enterprise Institute.
Barro R. and G. MacDonald, (1979) "Social Security and Consumer Spending in an
International Cross—Section," Journal of Public Economics.

Blinder, A., B. Gordon and D. Wise, "Life Cycle Savings and Bequests: Cross—
sectional Estimates of the Life Cycle Model," in The Determinants of
National Savings and Wealth, edited by Franco Modigliani, London and New
York: Macmillan, in press.
Cass, D. and M. Yaari, (1967) "Individual Savings, Aggregate Capital
Accumulation, and Efficient Growth," in K. Shell, (ed.) Essays on the
Theory of Optimal Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 233—268.
Darby, M.R. (1979) The Effects of Social Security on Income and
Stock, Washington: American Enterprise Institute.

the

Capital

Diamond P.A. and J. Hausman (1982) "Individual Retirement and Savings Behavior
Decisions," presented at the Oxford Conference on Microdata and Public
Economics, June 27—30, 1982.
Feldstein M. (l9T1) "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital
Accumulation," J.P.E. 82, 905—26.

"The Social Security Fund and National Capital
Funding Pensions: The Issues and Implications for
Financial Markets, a Federal Reserve Bank of Boston publication.

____________ (1977)
Accumulation,"

____________ (1977)

"Social Security and Private Savings: International

Evidence in an Extended Life Cycle Mzdel," in The Economics of Public
Services, M. Feldstein and R. Inman (eds.), London: Macmillan.

___________ (1980) "International Differences in Social Security and Saving,"
Journal of Public Economics: 1, 225—.
____________ (1982) "Social Security

and Private Saving: Reply" Journal of

Political Econonr: 90, 630_6142.

Feldstein, M. and A. Pellechio (1979a) "Social Security and Household Wealth
Accumulation: New Microeconomic Evidence" Review of Economics and

Statistics:

61, 361—68.

Feldstein, M. and A. Pellechio (1979b) "Social Security Wealth: The Impact of
Alternative Inflation Adjustments" in C. Campbell, (ed.), Financing Social
Security.

—16—

Feldstein, N., J. Poterba and L. Dicks—Mireaux (1981) "The Effective
Tax Rate and the Pre—Tax Rate of Return," NEER Working Paper No. 7IO,
Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Fisher, I.

(1892), Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of Value and
Prices, Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences.

Frisch, R. (1932), "New Methods of Measuring Marginal Utility," in Beitrage
zur okonomischen Theorie (No. 3), Tubigen: J. C. B. Mohr.

A.C. (1961) "Taxation, Resource Allocation, and Welfare" in J. Due
(ed.) The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes in the Federal Revenue System,
Princeton Univertsity Press, Princeton, New Jersey.

Harberger

Kotlikoff, L. J. (1979) "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle
Accumulation," American Economic Review 69,
Munnell,

A. H. (l9T)

Cambridge, Mass. :

396_11O.

Effect of Social Security on Personal Saving,
Ballinger.

The

Exact Consumption—loan Model of Interest with or
the Social Contrivance of Money" Journal of Political Economy, 66,

Sarrnielson, P. A. (1958) "An

Without
167_182.

Samuelson, P.
Model",

A. (1975) "Optimal Social Security in a Life—cycle
International Economic Review, i6, 539_5)4I.

Growth

