NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A THEORY OF EXPROPRIATION AND DEVIATIONS
FROM PERFECT CAPITAL MOBILJITY

Jonathan Eaton
Mark Gersovitz

Working Paper No. 912

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

August 1982

This paper represents a revised version of a paper which appeared
under the same title as Discussion Paper No. 93, Princeton Research
Program in Development Studies, Princeton University, in December
1980. We would like to thank Gene M. Grossman, Ronald W. Jones,
Larry A. Sjaastad, Nicholas H. Stern and Joseph E. Stiglitz for
comments and suggestions. Much of Eatonts work on this paper was
completed while he was a visitor at the Graduate Institute for
International Studies, Geneva. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #972
August 1982

A Theory of Expropriation and Deviations
From Perfect Capital Mobility

ABSTRACT

This paper develops a theory of capital movements in the presence of
potential expropriation. The threat of expropriation is derived from utility

maximizing behavior by host countries. Potential investors, anticipating
this behavior, modify their investment plans to avoid expropriation. .Yhen—
ever the host country faces competitive foreign investors expropriation
represents part of a time—consistent but suboptitnal plan of the type discussed

by Kydland and Prescott (1977). The consequent equilibrium may be characterized by a number of distortions.

In the simplest model we analyse, a host country faces a large number

of potential, competitive foreign investors. We explore the implications of
the threat of expropriation for shadow pricing in the host country and for

the optimal technology choice by potential investors. We consider variants.
of the model in which the potential investor is in a monopoly position vis—a—
vis the host country, in which the foreign investment project is subject to
risk which is unresolved at the time of the expropriation decision, and in
which factors affecting the optimality of expropriation by the host country
are unresolved at the time of the investment decision.

The larger the penalty incumbent on the host country in the event of
expropriation, the greater its welfare in the simple, competitive model.
When the foreign investor is a monopolist, however, this result is reversed.
Jonathan Eaton
Economic Growth Center
Yale University
Box 1987, Yale Station
New Haven, Connecticut 06520

Mark Cersovitz
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08455
(609) 452—4794

(203) 436—8414

1.

Introduction

Many factors prevent commodity trade from equalizing the rewards to
-factors of production in different countries, providing an incentive for

factor movements between countries. While movements of factors, especially
capital, are important in the world economy, they have not been sufficient
to equate factor returns among countries.
The failure of capital flows to equate rates of return on capital is
frequently attributed to political risks and left outside the sphere of

economic analysis. Specifically, investments abroad, especially in LDC's,
are said to be more subject to the risk of expropriation, or at least to
unpredictable changes in the tax and exchange control regime offered by the

host country. Williams (1975) estimates that about twenty percent of the
value of foreign investments carried into or made during 1956—72 in LDC's

was expropriated without compensation in this period. Rather than consigning
the study of these phenomena to other disciplines, we argue that an important

set of economic considerations affect the nature of these impediments to
capital mobility.

In this paper, we provide a theory of expropriation based on maximizing

behavior by investors and host countries. This theory can be used to identify
industry and national characteristics that increase the threat of expropria-

tion and imply large deviations from equalized rates of return on capital)
We examine host country and parent country policies minimizing the distortions
associated with the threat of expropriation.

Three broad conclusions follow from the analysis. First, the threat
of expropriation implies significant distortions in the international allo—
cation of capital even though the act of expropriation may be relatively

—2—

rare. For instance, in a world of perfect foresight and rational decision—
making, acts of expropriation would never occur and yet the actions by
investors taken to ensure that countries do not expropriate are distorting.
Second, the ability of governments to expropriate foreign investments

may actually reduce their own welfare. Further, the hosts may be better
off if investor country governments can retaliate against expropriating

countries. Indeed, the higher this penalty, the more their welfare may be
increased. This conclusion arises because a government's power to expropriate after investments are made leads investors to restrict their invest-

ments beforehand in a way that makes the host country worse off than it
would be if it could not expropriate, yielding an example of the general
paradox of time inconsistency (Kydlarid and Prescott, 1977).

Third, domestic factor prices may not accurately reflect social returns
when the threat of expropriation affects the supply of foreign investment.
The social rate of return on capital may exceed its domestic marginal product
while the social rate of return on any factor supplied by foreigners and

not expropriable may be less than the marginal product of that factor. This
result has implications for project evaluation in LDC's.
In Section 2 we present a simple model of foreign investment with

potential expropriation based on MacDougall's (1958) work on foreign invest-

ment in the absence of expropriation. A small country produces a single
output with three factors. Labor is supplied domestically in a fixed amount
and is not internationally mobile. Two other factors, capital and management,
are internationally mobile. These two factors diffei in that capital can be
expropriated; management cannot be. For our purposes, capital represents the
tangible aspects of foreign investment: plant, equipment, inventories and

—3--

other properties left behind after expropriation. Managerial services are
the intangible assets that a foreign investor brings to the production

process: technical knowledge, organizational capabilities, access to overseas markets and the like. Essential to our analysis is the assumption that
if expropriation occurs, the managerial services of the foreign investor are

no longer available and cannot be replaced by other foreigners. This
situation may arise because foreign managers boycott the expropriating
country or because the capital installed by foreign investors is specific
to its own

managerial

skills. Ex post the firm's managers may have a unique

ability to operate that firm's capital.
In deciding on expropriation, a host country must weigh the benefits
of obtaining income from foreign capital and the ownership of the capital
itself against the costs of losing access to foreign managerial services.
For many levels of foreign investment, including the one equating the

domestic marginal product of capital to the world interest rate, the benefits

of expropriation may outweigh the costs. Foreign investors will not increase
their investments to the point where expropriation becomes optimal. If the
threat of expropriation is binding, the level of foreign investment and

national income will be determined by competition among investors and the
capacity of the host country to absorb foreign investment without expropri-

ation. In Section 2 we examine the determinants of this equilibrium and the
effects of changes in .national factor endowments and world factor prices on

this equilibrium. We also investigate the effects of the threat of
expropriation on the distribution of income among national factors. Section
3 examines the associated consequences of the threat of expropriation for
project evaluation and optimal investment decisions in host countries.

In Section 4 we consider the case of a foreign investor who is a mono-

polist vis—a—vis a number of potential host countries. The monopolistic
investor will always invest less than competitive investors for a given

technology. National income will also be lower.
Section 5 examines the consequences of expropriation for technical

choice. We show that when a parameter of the production function (e.g., the
elasticity of substitution) is a choice variable for the investors, investors

may distort the technology to reduce the threat of expropriation. Because
of this type of distortion, the threat of expropriation may raise the equilibrium level of investment above the level obtaining under perfect capital

mobility. Furthermore, the monopolistic investor may actually invest more
than competitive investors, but the host country is still worse off than if
the foreign investors were competitive.

In Section 6 we return to the assumption that investors are competitive

but assume that projects are risky and that expropriation transfers this risk

to the host country. Risk bearing rather than managerial skill is the

contribution of foreign investors that cannot be expropriated. A host can
benefit from increases in the riskiness of projects if it is risk averse
while foreign investors are not, since risk reduces the threat of expropriation.
In Section 6 we assume that the risk inherent in foreign investment is

not resolved until after the expropriation decision must be made. This
assumption is appropriate to projects where the risk is ongoing, e.g.,

agricultural projects subject to annual differences in weather or projects

producing output sold in volatile international markets. For other types of
projects, uncertainty is resolved before the expropriation decision must be

made. This situation may prevail in extractive activity where a mineral
discovery resolves the uncertainty before production begins. In Section 7

—5—

we assume that the national endowment of managerial services is a random

variable revealed after the investment decision has been made but before

the host country decides on expropriation. In this model expropriations
can actually occur, in contrast with our previous models. Foreign investors
act knowing of this risk.

Our model applies specifically to capital movements in the form of

direct investment. The host country imports not only foreign capital but
foreign entrepreneurship as well, either in the form of managerial services

or risk bearing. The penalty of expropriation is the loss of this entrepreneurship. Our model does not incorporate indirect investment since there
is no mechanism to insure repayment.

Capital movements in the form of portfolio investment have, however,

become increasingly important to less developed countries. Implicit in this
form of lending is a set of penalties for nonrepayment other than the ones

we consider here. An important penalty may be exclusion from future participation in international capital markets. Elsewhere (Eaton and Gersovitz,
1981) we analyze financial market equilibrium in which the penalty of default
is loss of future ability to borrow.

We could have incorporated similar considerations into the current

analysis. For simplicity, however, we focus on a single period of what is
a repeated process in the relationship between a host country and foreign

investors. In contrast with our earlier work we do not consider explicitly
the effect of an expropriation on the host country's ability to attract

foreign capital in the future. This exclusion is justified if the host
country has a high discount rate or if it cannot acquire a reputation,

perhaps because its government changes frequently. Alternatively, we can

incorporate the loss of future investment suffered by an expropriation
into a general penalty consequent upon expropriation, the effects of which
we do analyze here.
Our mode]. does assume, however, that investors act to protect their

reputations in punishing expropriation: as a consequence of expropriation
firms withdraw their managerial services or impose other penalties, such as

an embargo on future investment in the country, An assumption of this sort
is essential for the existence of an equilibrium with any capital movement

at all. If investors cannot develop a reputation for punishing expropriators
they have no incentive, ex post, to impose a penalty. 1-lost countries would

always expropriate, so that potential investors would never invest abroad.

—7—

A Simple Model of Foreign Investment with Potential Expropriation

2.

Consider an economy rroducing a single output (Q) using inputs of

(L), capital (K) and managerial

..labor

(2.1)

F1

to

>

Q

0

,

=

F1

services (H) where

F(K,H,t)
<

0

.

The

production function PC )

exhibits

constant returns

scale. The endowments of each factor possessed by the country are: L

K and Ii .

Lt the

time of foreign investment, capital and managers are

completely robile between countries while workers are entirely immobile.

Thus L = L

while K and H exceed K and H by the amounts of foreign

investmcnt in capital and foreign transfer of managerial skills respectively.

e focus only on situations in which K > K

the

and H > H

economy we consider is a capital exporter, so that

foreign capital is not an issue.2 If K >

its

while H <

ii

.

If

K < K

expropriation of

the host country

has nothing to lose from expropriation, since it is not importing foreign

managers. In this case the host country would expropriate any amount of
foreign capital. Investors will then find no amount of investment worth-

while sothat KK.
The country is small in the international economy facing a gross rate
of return on capital, r , and a managerial reward, s ,

given

by world markets.

Foreign investors borrow investment funds from the world capital market at
cost (r —

1) and must repay the principal plus income whether or not

—8—

expropriation occurs.

Profits of foreign investors if expropriation does not occur (11N) are
(2.2a)

F(K,N,) —

11N

Here

— r(K -

— s(H —

ii)

denotes payment to the host country, its national income, if

expropriation does not occur. If expropriation does occur, foreign managerial services are withdrawn, are no longer employed and need not be paid.

Further, no payments need be made to host country factors. However, firms
must still pay foreign lenders the value of their capital plus income. Thus,
if expropriation occurs, the foreign investors receive profits (]1E) of

—r(K —

11E =

(2,2b)

i)

If expropriation occurs, the host country takes over all production of
of Q,3 and receives national income (yE) of

E F(K,H,)

(2.3)

Expropriation is optimal if

=

condition

E

>

N

and not otherwise. The borderline

defines a relationship between

which we name the EE curve. For a given

,

and K via (2.3)

investment in excess of the

corresponding level of K on the EE curve implies expropriation. The slope
of

this curve is
N

(2.4)

=
EE

In

FK(K,i,i)

> 0

the absence of expropriation profits are 11N given by (2.2a). We

assume that competition among potential investors guarantees
that

(2.5)

is such that

FE = s

and

—9—

We discuss how the host country might extract

below. EquatIon (2.5)

defines a second relationship between YN and K .

This is the H curve

and has slope

dYN

=

FK(K,RPL)

II

-

r

where H is given by
F(K,Ii,i:) = S

(2.6)

We

define K as the level of K such that

(2.7)

FK(,H,L)

r

i.e., the level of K that would obtain under perfect capital and managerial
mobility with no threat of expropriation. On the usual assumption that

FF — F2

>

0

,

the

II curve is upward sloping for K c K and downward

sloping for K > K
The EE and II curves are illustrated in Figure 2.1. All points below
the EE curve represent situations of expropriation. If these curves intersect only to the left of

for K >

,

the

!E curve lies everywhere about the II curve

and no foreign investment is possible. Any investment would be

expropriated. If the EE curve intersects the II curve anywhere to the right
of
(IC,

,

then

since the point

the country obtains maximum income of

) lies above the EE curve. In this case the expropriation constraint

is not binding. An example of this situation is given by an F( ) which is
Cobb Douglas and an ii

0

.

In

this case, Y 0 since output cannot be

produced without U
If the EE curve cuts the II curve between i

and

but not to the

—10--

right of K then the expropriation constraint is binding. Equilibrium is
determined at a point such as (K, N) It is possible that the EE curve
cuts the II curve more than once between

to the right of K

and K with no intersection

In this case we assume that the host obtains the

highest possible income. At this point the EE curve cuts the II curve
from below.4 Thus, at an equilibrium where the expropriation constraint
determines the country's capital stock5

(2.8a)

FK(K,H,L) >

r

= o

(2.8b)

(2.8c)

FJ(KH,L)

yN E

The remainder of this section focuses on this type of equilibrium.
When the threat of expropriation is binding, K < K

as given by (2.7)

and the marginal product of capital exceeds the world interest rate, r
Thus if all domestic factors are paid their marginal products, foreign

managers are paid their marginal product and foreign capital is paid r ,

Euler's

theorem implies that the value of total output will exceed the sum

of factor payments by a wedge (FK(K,ñ,L) —

r)(K

—

.

We

assume that

because of competition among potential investors this wedge accrues to the
host country.

There are a number of mechanisms whereby the host country could extract
this wedge. One would be the imposition of a luinp—swn tax on foreign

investors in this amount. Such a tax would allow the host country to
maximize the benefits from foreign investment given that it cannot foreswear

expropriation. An equivalent tax would be a tax on capital (tK*) such that

—11-.

(1 —

t)FK(K,Ü,1)

=

r

at the point where the EE and ii curves intersect. 6

Taxes on foreign capital in LDC's are in fact quite common and can be
justified if foreign investment is already constrained by the threat of
expropriation.

Maintaining the assumption that the host country does receive the rent
on foreign investment, we now analyse the effects of changes in various
exogenous variables on the equilibrium level of investment and on national
income when the threat of expropriation is binding.

First consider an Increase in K ,

the

supply of nationally—owned

capital. This change shifts the II curve up by an amount r ,

and K .

equilibrium levels of

raising

the

If the threat of expropriation were

not binding, K would remain at K while Y would rise by r . When the
threat of expropriation determines K , however, an increase in national
capital raises the total level of capital and raises national income by

than r

more

in II shifts the II curve up by s and the EE curve up

An increase

by FH(K,il,L) >
fall.

The level

s

.

Equilibrium Income rises by less than s and may even

of foreign investment falls. With more national managers

expropriation is, ceteris paribus, more desirable. This effect leads to a
reduction in foreign investment and in the total capital stock.

An increase in

shifts the II curve up by FL(K,ñ,i) and the EE

curve up by FL(K,i,t). Since at equilibrium ui >

,

income rises by more

or less than FL(K,fi,t) and foreign investment rises or falls as FLH
If labor and managers are complements an increase in i

increases

0

the benefit

accruing to the host from the presence of foreign managers and reduces the
incentive to expropriate.

An increase In r has no effect on the EE curve but shifts the II curve

—12—

down by (K
level of

The equilibrium level of K falls, as does the equilibrium

K)

which falls by more than K —

An increase in

, the

falls.

s has no effect on the EE curve (at the equilibrium

point) but shifts the II curve down by H —

.

of K falls, as does the equilibium level of

than H i , the

amount by which

amount by which

Again the equilibrium level
,

which falls by more

falls.

When the threat of expropriation is binding, increases in the inter—
national prices of imported factors have a larger negative effect on national

income than otherwise. The reason is that, at higher prices of these factors,
only a lower level of compensation of national factors is compatible with

competitive equilibrium. At a given level of foreign investment, expropriation would be optimal. Hence foreign investment is reduced.
If a penalty (P >

0) is imposed In case of expropriation equation (2.3)

can be modified to

(2.3') E F(K,H) —

p

An increase in P leaves the II curve unchanged but shifts the EE curve
down, increasing foreign investment and national income. Thus a penalty
for expropriation can make a capital importer better off.
Finally we note the distributional consequences of the threat of expro-

priation. For analytic simplicity we assume that the tax implicit in a
binding threat of expropriation accrues to the government while the three

national factors earn their marginal products. In relation to a situation
of perfect capital mobility, capital gains (by (FK(K,H,L)

—

r)

)

while

labor loses. National managers earn s independent of the level of foreign
investment and are unaffected. In Section 7, where we present a model where
the act of expropriation can actually occur, we discuss the effects of an
expropriation itself on the distribution of income among factors.

—13—

Implications for Project Evaluation

3.

In the previous section, national factor supplies

,

L

and

,

were

exogenous. From a longer—run perspective, however, the supplies of capital
and managerial services are determined by national decisions to invest in

physical and human capital. In this section we use the model to examine

the plications of expropriation for optimal investment strategies.
The model implicitly determines national income, Y ,

in

terms of the

national endowments of factors so that we may write Y =

.

Consider

a two—period decision. In the first period resources are allocated toward
producing physical and human capital. The economy initially has a work

force of size N and training for management requires withdrawal from he
labor force for one period, denoted period 0 .

Consumption in the f rst

period is therefore

c0=i(—il)—i

(3.1)

where

I is the period 0 production function for commodities. Preferences

are a function of period 0 consumption and period 1 natior.al income, U(C0,Y).

Then U and K will be chosen so that

(3.2)

—U1 + UY = 0

(3.3)

—U11' + U2Y 0
At an expropriation—constrained equilibrium described by (2.8) and the

EE and II curves

(3.4)

y— E

K dK

(FK (K,ii,1) —

—
r)[FK(K,H,L)

T

+ r —

]
FK(K)H,L)

+ r

—14—

Y- dY
—

(3.5)

(F. (K,H,L) —

dK
+s
r) —
dli

dli

Consider first the social return to national capital, Y .

at an equilibrium, the coefficient of FK(K,R,L) —

since FK(K,H,L)

r > 0

is positive. Thus,

the social return to national capital exceeds

,

the world interest rate r
complements, FK(K,H,L) <

r

From (2.8a),

Furthermore, if managers and capital are

F(K,H,L)

in this case Y > FK(K,H,L) ; i.e.,

the social return to national capital exceeds its marginal physical product.
Conversely,

if K and B are substitutes, FK(K,H,L) > FJ<(K,N,L)

and the

return to capital lies between the domestic marginal physical product and
the

world interest rate. In the first case

Increasing the capital stock

increases the productivity of managers, thereby reducing the incentive to

expropriate. Conversely in the second case.
An

increase in the supply of national managerial services, on

the other

hand, increases income by less than the world reward to managerial services,

which equals the domestic marginal product of managerial services. By

s ,

reducing reliance on foreign managerial services, an increase in H reduces

the availability of foreign capital. This effect may operate to the extent

that

Y<0
In

summ ary, wh en the threato

opriatiiifld in

tls opt imal

decisions. As long as capital and managers are tomplements both rules tend
to understate the marginal social product of capital and to overstate the
marginal social product of managers.

—15—

4.

Investment by Monopolistic Investors

In Section 2 we assumed that investors were perfectly competitive in
that the host country could extract a payment that drove profits to zero.

Facing a large number of potential investors, the host would only accept

investment projects yielding zero profits to the investor. We now turn to
the case in which the foreign investor is a monopolist vis—a—vis a large
number of host countries, but remains competitive in world markets for

capital and managerial services.8 The threat of expropriation nevertheless
exists.

As before, if the host country expropriates, it earns an income of
=

F(K,H,L)

The monopolistic Investor must pay the host country at

.

least this amount to preclude expropriation, but has no reason to pay more.

Thus profits are given by

= F(K,H,L) —

(4.1)

F(K,fl,t)

—

r(K

—

i) — s(H

—

ii)

First order conditions for profit maximization imply
(4.2)

=

(4.3)

=

FK(K,H,L)

F11(K,H,L)

—

FK(K,H,L)

—

r

0

— s = 0

For the second—order condition to be satisfied we require that F(K,H,1) —

F(K,H,L)
K = K

<

0

,

i.e., FK <

0

.

If it is not satisfied anywhere, then

and no foreign investment occurs. As in the competitive case, the

foreign investor equates the marginal product of managerial services to the
world salary but maintains a domestic product of capital in excess of the
world interest rate.
Subsituting (4.2) and (4.3) into (4.1) and

applying

Euler's theorem yields

(4.4)

{FL(K,H,1) —

FL(K9H,L)}L

+ {FH(K,H,) —

FR(K,H,L)}H

II

+

FK(K,H,L)

-

FK(K,}1,L))K

as an alternative expression for profits. Monopoly profits are the difference between national factor incomes at actual marginal productivities and
the marginal productivities that would obtain if expropriation were to occur.

Consider again a penalty P that the host country would suffer if it
should expropriate. In this case the host country will receive only

=

F(K,H,L)

-

p

in the event of expropriation. Note that the same K is chosen by the
monopolist since P does not alter the first order conditions (4.2) and
(4.3), However, the investor need only pay the amount

expropriation. The existence

of

the penalty increases

to preclude

monopoly profits

and

reduces national income even though expropriation does not take place, in
contrast with the competitive case, where the penalty raises national income.

Given the production function F( )

• the

monopolist will always invest

less than competitive investors. When (4.2) is satisfied, (4.1) is positive.
Since

< 0

for values of K greater than the level of monopoly invest-

ment, the level of K which satisfies TI = 0

that satisfies

0

is greater than the level

—17—

5. Potential Expropriation and the Distortion of Technology
In Section 2 the threat of expropriation was shown to imply a distortion

in factor use. Too little capital was invested by foreigners so that the
economy's capital—labor ratio (K/L) was below the unconstrained optimum.
Other forms of distortion may be consequences of a threat of expropriation.
For instance, Magee (1977) discusses expenditures foreign investors may make
to conceal the nature of their production process.
A very general formulation of this notion is to assume that the firm's

profit in the absence of expropriation is given by

(5.1)

=

F(K,H,L,y)

— s(H—fi) —

r(K—i) — C(K,H,1,y) —

where y is a parameter of the production function and C(s) is the cost over
and above any effect on F( )

of

choosing a particular value of y. Increases

in y increase C, i.e., C/y > 0.

In the event of expropriation, national

income is
(5.2)

=

J(K,H,L,y)

where J(.) is the country's production function after expropriation.9
Once the possibility of distorting technology is introduced, two
conclusions from the previous analysis need not obtain.

First,

the level of investment occurring in competitive equilibrium under a
threat of expropriation may exceed that

obtaining

under perfect

capital mobility. Second, a monopolistic investor may invest more than
the competitive equilibrium level of capital.

To establish these propositions we define

(5.3)

G(K,y)

F(K,H,L,y) —

C(K,H,t,y)

—

s(ii-

H)

—18—

CR — s =

where, since U is mobile exj, B is defined implicitly by FE

0.

For simplicity we consider a technology in which y assumes a value of either
O or 1, and assume that G(K,0) >

In

G(K,l)

the absence of an expropriation option, competitive investors will

choose y = 0 and set K

,

>
J(K0 , 0)
G(K0

(5.4)

,

where GK(KO , 0) =

and

K

in J( ),

investment at a level

*

where K0 satisfies (5.4) with equality.

Consider now the case where y = 1.

fying GK(Kl

(5.5)

If however,

0 investment would occur only until

would lead to expropriation. If y
* <

r.

r(K0 — K)

0)

where we suppress the constants

K

-

for all K.

1) =

J(1 , 1)

r.
<

Define K1 as the level of K satis-

If

G(1

,

I)

-

r(K1

-

) > J(K

,

0)

then, by choosing y 1 and investing K1, competitive investors can provide
the host country a higher national income than by choosing y

ing K .

If,

instead, the first inequality of (5.5) is not satisfied, in-

vestors will provide only K capital if y

(5.6)

= 0 and invest-

1, where K satisfies

J(K,l)=G(K,l)—r(K1—K).

Nevertheless, if

(5.7)

J(K,l)>J(K,0)

competitive investors can still provide the host country a higher income by
*
Nothing precludes the possi1 and rationing investment at K1
choosing y

bility that K1 >

or that K > K0

.

In

these cases more capital is installed

because the threat of expropriation is binding when the first best (y

used. This possibIlity requires, however, that

= 0) is

GK(K,l) >

(5.8)

C(K0)

i.e., that the distortion of technology augment the marginal product of

capital to the investor.

To establish the second proposition assume that, in fact, J(K ,

J(K

,

0)

>

In this case, under competition, there will be no distortion of

1).

If, instead, there is a single monopolistic

technology and y will equal 0.

investor his profits will be

y)

y) — r(Km

(5.9)

max [G(KTh ,
y=O,l

where

is defined implicitly by the condition:

(5.10)

J(KTh ,

GK(K,Y) JK(1c —

If J(K,0) >>

J(K,l),

again, cK(K,l) >
>

is

r

0 ,

y

0,1

then (5.9) is likely to be attained at y = 1.

G(K,O)

while, in addition, JK(K,l) <

K'0'

If,

then

possible. The monopolist may find that, by distorting his

technology in a way that increases the marginal product of capital to him,
he reduces the usefulness of his capital stock to a potential expropriator,
thereby reducing required compensation to the host country. Because the

marginal product of capital is greater with this distortion, he invests
more than competitive investors who, in this case, do not install a distorted
technology.

The distortion of technology, in terms of its effects on the welfare of

the host country, is analogous to an increase in the penalty P incumbent on

the host in the event of default. When potential investors are competitive,
the host country benefits from the ability of investors to distort technology.
The ability of a monopolistic investor to distort technology, however, acts
to the host country's detriment.

—20—

6.

Optimal Investment In

In Sections 2 to 5 foreign investment was riskiess. Frequently, however,
foreign investors engage in risky activities bearing much of this risk. In
expropriating such activities the host assumes the risk inherent in these
activities.

We assume that domestic production (Q)

Q

(6.1)

is

given by the function

OF(K,L)

0 is a random variable; in this section we abstract from managerial services.

National endowments of capital and labor are K and L .

Capital

is mobile

across borders before the investment takes place while labor is not. Capital

is in place at the time 0 is known and cannot be withdrawn.

Expropriation

Investors

must also be chosen before the true value of 0 is known.

are cotn—

petitive and either risk neutral or consider the risk completely diversifiable.
In the absence of expropriation, host income is

If expropriation occurs, national income

regardless of o

(NE) depends on 0

E eF(K,L)

(6.2)

Expropriation will be optimal if

E[U(YE)] exceeds U(YN) and not other-

wise where U(•) is the host's utility of income.

Since E[U(YE)) increases

in K , the condition

(6.3)

E[L1(YE))

implicitly

U(YN)

defines a level of K , denoted

K*(YN) such that K > K*

that expropriation is optimal and not otherwise.

Note that K*t(YN) > 0

If expropriation occurs foreign investors will earn profits of

(6.4)

E —r(K —

irplies

—21—

assuming, as before, that foreign sources of capital must be paid regardless.
If expropriation does not occur then profits are

OF(K,L) -

(6.5)

r(K

-

-

Firms maximize expected profits. If K is less than K* then investment occurs until

E[OFK(K,) —

(6.6)

r]

0

Denote K by the level of K satisfying (6.6).
Competition among investors and taxation of the type discussed in
to the point where

Section 2 will raise

- r(K

E[OF(K,L) -

(6.7)

)1

=

satisfying (6.7) at K K by

Denote the level of

.

If

then K defines an equilibrium level of total investment and

K <
an equilibrium

level of national income. At this equilibrium the threat of expropriation is

not binding. If however K > K*(YN)

investment at a level of K will lead to

expropriation and the equilibrium level of investment vii]. be constrained.

We depict the resulting equilibriim in Figure 6.1. Values

of K and

consistent with competition in international capital markets, i.e., satisfying (6.7), are illustrated by the curve II.

Values satisfying the no

expropriation condition with strict equality, i.e.,

E{U[OF(K,t)1}

(6.8)

U(YN)

are illustrated by the curve EE.
The slope of II is given by

(69)

g—

II

E(eFK

—

r

)

—22—

positive for K < K

and

negative for K >

C

a maximum at K bere it is satisfied by

(6.10)

E{u'[OF(K,L)]eFK)

fr- EE

Thus the II curve achieves

.

.

The EE curve has slope

0

>

U(YN)

The expected output if no investment occurs is

E

(6.11)

E(0)F(K,L)

This is the amount foreign investors are willing to pay to produce in the
host country without investing any foreign capital. We define

by the

relationship
(6.12)

E{u[er(K,Lfl} u()

i.e.,

is the amount investors must pay the host for the right to use

domestic factors if they make no investment themselves.

If U is concave then

.

will cross to the right of K ,

i.e.,

In

this case the EE and II curves

there will exist one equilibrium cotn—

patible with: (1) competitive international capital markets, (2) no expropriation and (3) a positive level of foreign investment.

Thus if the host

is risk averse while investors are risk neutral, some Investment will occur.

If the EE and II curves cross to the right of K the equilibrium will be
characterized by

and

and the threat of expropriation is not binding.

If the curves cross only to the left of K the competitive equilibrium levels

of K and Y are constrained by the threat of expropriation.

If the EE

curve cuts the II curve more than once, we assume, as before, that the equl—
librium with the highest

obtains. We next determine the effects of

increases in risk and in E(O) ,

, L and

r on the equilibrium levels of

K and Y when the EE curve cuts the II curve from below and the threat of
expropriation is binding (K <

—23—

First, if output becomes more uncertain, a risk averse host country is

less willing to expropriate. A lower level of compensation

is required

to forestall expropriation of a given capital stock. The EE curve shifts

down. Risk neutral investors do not require a higher expected return, so
the II curve does not shift. The equilibrium values of

and K rise.

Paradoxically, then, an increase in the riskiness of investment can actually
increase national income and national welfare by reducing the incentive to
expropriate and attracting foreign investment.

Given K , an increase in E(O) shifts both the EE and II curves up by an
amount F .

Income, but not the level of foreign investment, rises.

An increase in L shifts the II curve up by an amount

(6.13)

=

dL

E(O)FL

and the EE curve by

(6.14)

dYN
———
=
dL
EE

E(U'OFL)
£U )

= E(e)F1 +

COV(u',eFL)
C(TTI

If the host country is risk averse U' is a decreasing function of 0 and
the second term in the far right version of (6.14) is negative. Hence the
II curve shifts up by more than the EE curve.

rises by more than E(O)FL

and foreign investment rises. Because an increase in L raises the riskiness
as well as the level of output the host country is able to accept more capital.

An increase in K or a reduction in r continues to increase income.
As in the certainty mod1, this effect is larger when the threat of expropriation is binding relative to a situation of perfect capital mobility.

—24

Investment with Stochastic Expropriation

7.

In previous sections we have presented models in which expropriation

never actually occurs. In a deterministic context, or in a context in which
the expropriation decision must occur before any randomness is resolved, expropriation can be predicted exactly, and rational, fully—informed investors

will not make investments that will be expropriated. If, however, some
random process affecting the desirability of expropriation is resolved between
the time of the investment and the expropriation decision, investments may be

expropriated. Investors make such investments accepting this risk.
Although the investigation of a model with stochastic expropriation is
considerably more difficult than the preceding analysis it is crucially
important to an understanding of the

expropriation

issue. To illustrate this

phenomenon, consider again the model developed in section 2, but assume that
the supply of national managers, Ti

in 9 , where

, is

given by a function H(S) increasing

0 is a random variable uniformly distributed on (0,1). S is

not known when investment takes place but is revealed before the expropriation

decision, A number of other variables could be random. Introducing uncertainty in the supply of national managers provides one simple means of illustrating
some aspects of stochastic expropriation.

National income, if expropriation does not take place, is given by

(7.1)

where

YN(O) =

r

+ wf + sTi(e) =

F(K,}1,L) — FK(K —

— s(H — Ti)

rd is the interest rate paid national capital, w the wage and other

variables are defined in section 2, The third part of equation (7.1) follows
from Euler's theorem and our assumption that national factors receive their

marginal products. In contrast to the deterministic case, such payments will
exhaust product, as we show below. The profits of foreign firms, if

—25—

expropriation does not occur, are, as before,
(7.2)

In the event of expropriation, however, national income becomes

E(0) =

(73)

G(K,i(o),ñ,t)

where
C(K,fi(O),N,L)

(7.4)

since

max[F(K,li(e),L), F(K,R,L) + s(B —

it is now possible that

Ce)

> B for high values of 0 .

bility of the host exporting managerial services was

ruled

This

possi-

Out in the deter-

ministic model of section 2. Profits are simply, as before,

E = -r(K

(75)

Expropriation

=

> .1N

becomes optimal, then, when
and

Note that both

76

and not otherwise.

are increasing in 0 , and that

sri'

while

E

(77)

{max[F11(K,ii(0),L),sllil'

so that
dYN
dO

ayE
dO

i.e., as 0 rises, expropriation becomes more desirable.

The value 0* is defined by the condition
yE(0*)

(7.8)

yN(0*)

or

0* 0 if E(0) > yN(0)

r

or e

1

if N(1) > yE(1)

Expected profits are given by
(7.9)

E(fl)

0*[F(K,B,L) —

— sf1 —

w]

—

r(K

—

)

We assume that investors are atomistic, and take not only r and s,

but rd, v and O as given; individual investors invest too little to consider
their investments to affect national factor prices or the probability of expro-.

priation. Competition among investors implies zero expected profits

0

E(fl) =

(7.lOa)

This condition, along with the assumption that national factors and foreign

managers are paid their marginal products and Euler's theorem, implies that

(7.lOb)

r = 0

0*FK

(if K >

0).

But this result is equivalent to the first order condition of ECu) with

respect to K. In a situation of stochastic expropriation, the host need not
*

impose a tax of tK to ensure zero expected profits — the probability of expropriation, (1

0*), plays an analogous role.

Together (7.8) and (7.lOa), along with r, s, i and L, determine equi—

librium values of K, H and 0.
Using F11 = s to determine H implicitly and substituting into (7.8)

and

(7.lOb)we obtain two equations in two unknowns, 0* and K. Relationship (7.1Gb)

gives values of K and O consistent with zero profits. We denote this locus

the II curve. If 0* C

the II curve has slope.

_0*(FF —

dO*

(7.11)

(0,1)

F,)

KHH
'F F

II

If F is a well—behaved production function, the principal minors alternate

in sign and FF >
crease !n

F

,

implying

increases the expected return on capital, increasing K. The II

curve is drawn in figure 7,1. At 0*
and K

that the II curve slopes upward. An in-

0 expropriation is almost certain

K; no foreign investment takes place. At the other extreme, if

1 expropriation is almost certain not to occur, and K = K, where

—27—

FK(K,H,L) =

r

defines the equilibrium value of K.

Relationship (7.8) defines 0* as another function of K and exogenous

variables. We call it the EE curve. It has slope

=

(7.12)

FGK + (FF —

EE

F)(K-)

F(s_CH)H'

which is ambiguous in sign.

The ambiguity arises because an increase

in K raises income whether expropriation occurs or not.
In general we cannot say In which state income rises more.

Because of this ambiguity equilibria with higher levels of foreign investment
may, ceteris paribus, be associated with a lower probability of expropriation.
Whatever the slope of the EE curve, however, it lies completely to the
right of K for 0* < 1; at K = K,

>

for

all values of 0.

If K =

, the

host country gains no capital by expropriating but loses its ability to

import managerial services. Consequently the threat of expropriation never
prohibits foreign investment entirely.
The EE and II curves may cross several times as illustrated in Figure 7.1.

Because 0* tends to zero as K tends to infinity, the last intersection of
these two curves must have the EE curve cutting the II curve from above.
The expected value of the host's income, E[Y(0)], is given by

(7.13)

E(Y) =

e*N

+ flyE(o)do

Using (7.1), (7.8), (7.lOb) and (7.11), it can be shown that

(7.14)

-

)
[0*(F

i.e.,

FF)(K

+

>o

*CKd0]

E(Y) increases along the II curve. We assume, as before, that the

—28—

host country ensures that the highest intersection of the EE and the II
curves is chosen.

The local effects of increases in K , L

,

E(H), r and s -are deter-

mined by the effect of these changes on the positions of the II and EE curves:

First consider an increase in K .

The II curve is unaffected while the

EE curve shifts up. The equilibrium levels of 0* and K rise; i.e., total
investment rises and the probability of default declines. As in the preceding
models, national capital does not crowd out foreign capital one—for—one.

Secondly, if L increases the II curve shifts down (which follows from
Euler's theorem applied to the marginal products of a constant return to
scale production function) while the direction of the shift in the EE curve

is ambiguous. Consequently 0* and K may rise or fall.
Thirdly, if the distribution of 0 changes to dominate the original in
the first—order sense, i.e., if larger numbers of domestic managers become
more probable, the II curve is unaffected while the EE curve shifts down.
1. —

Foreign investment falls and the probability of expropriation,

Fourth, an increase in r ,

the

0,

rises.

world interest rate, shifts the II curve

upward while the EE curve is unaffected, The level of investment falls while
the probability of expropriation also falls if the EE curve slopes up but
rises if it slopes down.

If s rises the EE curve shifts down while the shift in the II curve

is ambiguous. The effects on

0* and K are therefore indeterminate.

Introducing an ex6genous penalty in amount P imposed by the investor's
country on
curve

an

expropriating host does not affect the II

curve

while the EE

becomes

(7.8')

F(K,R,L) — FK(K

—

i) — sO! — B(0*))

G(K,H(0*),L)

—

P

—29—

Ai increase in the penalty shifts the EE curve upward so that the level of
investment, K ,

rises

while the probability of expropriation, 0*, falls.

As long as capital and managers are complementary factors the penalty
raises the income of the host country in any state of nature, even in states

where expropriation actually occurs and the penalty is imposed. First, in
any state in which expropriation does not occur, host country income rises,
as may be shown by differentiating the third part of (7.1) with respect to

K. In state 0 host country income is the same whether or not expropriation

occurs. Since x (0 )

(7.15)

dY(®*)

As long as

> 0

=

,

rises,
dY(0*)

E*

so must Y (0 ).

=

Thus

GK(K,H(0),L)

if GK(K,H(o),L) > 1

—

1 >

0

then GK 4 > 1

for all 0 >

0*.

Thus, even in states where the penalty is imposed, the existence of the

penalty raises income: the positive, indirect effect of the penalty In rais—
lng

the level of the capital stock dominates the direct, negative effect

of the penalty.1°

In section 2 we discussed the implications of a binding threat of

expropriation on income distribution. We now consider the distributional
implications of expropriation itself.110f course the effect of expropriation
on income distribution depends upon how the income from the expropriated

capital is distributed among factors. If expropriation raises national
income as a whole this income can be distributed in a way which harms no

domestic factor. For analytic convenience, however, we will assume that
income accrues to a fourth party, perhaps the government.
First, note that if H(0) > H when expropriation occurs only H managers

will be employed domestically. In this case expropriation does not affect
the domestic levels of factor use. Hence, for this case, the act of expropriation has no distributional effects since marginal products are unaffected.

If, however, H(E) < H, only (O) managers will be available domestically

aLter an expropriation. Managers will gain, since they earn FH(X,H(E),L) > s =

.FH(K,H,L).

Labor gains or loses as FLH

0 while capital gains or loses as

F 0; that is, factors complementary with managerial services lose while
substitutes gain. Both capital and labor may

lose

from an expropriation but

both cannot gain.
To surmnarize, an increase in the probability of expropriation, if expro-

priation does not occur, tends to benefit national capital, harm labor and
leave national managers unaffected relative to a situation of perfect capital

mobility. If all factors are complements expropriation itself will either
leave all factors unaffected relative to a situation of no expropriation, or
harm capital and labor and benefit managers.
Throughout, we have related the expropriation decision to its effect

on national income or on the expected utility of national income. Authorities
controlling the expropriation decision may be motivated more by the effects
of expropriation on various sub—groups rather than on the economy as a whole.

An extension of our analysis would be a reformulation of the expropriation
criterion to account for these distributional preferences.

—31-

-

8. Conclusion

It

is widely recognized that the threat of expropriation can create

partures from perfect capital mobility. This threat has usually, however,
been treated as an exogenous factor not susceptible of economic analysis.
In this paper we have developed a model of expropriation derived explicitly
from utility maximizing behavior on the part of host countries and investors.

While our basic model is a simple one, in the tradition of neoclassical trade
theory, it yields a number of implications about the effects of expropriation

on the welfare of the host country, on the distribution of income in the host
country, on the appropriate shadow pricing of factors of production, and on

the choice of technology in production. While we have explored a number of
variants of our model, for instance by introducing uncertainty of two quite

different forms, several basic points emerge, The threat of expropriation is
detrimental to the welfare of a host country facing competitive foreign
investors; domestic capitalists benefit from the threat of expropriation while

the effect on labor is detrimental. Domestic managers are unaffected.

If the

threat of expropriation constrains the level of foreign investment, domestic

marginal productivities understate the marginal social product of capital, if
capital and managers are complementary, and overstate the marginal social
product of managers.
The extent to which a host country is subject to a penalty if it should
expropriate actually enhances the welfare of a host country facing competitive
potential foreign investors when there is no uncertainty about expropriation.
This conclusion is reversed if a foreign investor is in a monopoly position

vis—a—vis the host country. If investors are competitive but it is uncertain
whether or not expropriation will occur at the time

the investment is

made, the effect of an expropriation penalty may be ambiguous. As long as

—32-.

managers and capital are complements, however, the penalty raises host—
country Income in all states of nature, even those states in which expro—
priation occurs and the penalty is imposed.
Our

theory

has a number of implications for empirical research. First,

it provides a framework for predicting where deviations from perfect capital

mobility are most likely to emerge and suggests a number of testable hypo-

theses. For example, countries with high endowments of managerial skills
relative to physical capital are most likely to remain with a high marginal

physical product of capital. Secondly, the stochastic model we develop in
Section 7 provides a structure for estimating expropriation probabilities in

different countries. Thirdly, our model suggests a number of characteristics
of technology and factor employment which might be observed as a consequence

of a threat of expropriation. For instance, our model suggests explanations
for observed differences in technologies used by foreign and domestic firms
In the same country.

—33—

NOTES

1. For instance, Williams (1975) and Jodice (1980) report evidence suggesting
that expropriation Is particularly frequent in the banking sector and
that manufacturing Investments are less vulnerable than mining investments.

2. We assume that in the event of expropriation any asset abroad of the host

country will be seized in retaliation. The benefits of expropriation thus
depend only upon the net capital position.

3. This assumption is justified if each firm
(constant returns), if a firm

always

is

a ininature of the economy

applies the maximum penalty when

any of its capital is seized and if factors are immobile among firms
after the decision to invest. In this case the host expropriated all
the capital of all foreign firms if it expropiates anything at all. If
the second condition is not met consideration should be given to one
type of partial expropriation — a takeover of some of each firm's
capital. On this point see footnote 7 below.

If the third condition is not met, the possibility of a second type of
partial expropriation arises —

the complete takeover of some, but not

all, firms. In this case, a country might lose access to only the proportion of H—li corresponding to the proportion of firms expropriated.

The host could then re—allocate some of the H to these investments from

the investments It did not expropriate. The initial level of foreign
investment would have to be such as to prevent this strategy from being
optimal for the country since no firm

would want to be among the expro-

priated. A modified version of the EE curve discussed below would be
defined by this condition. A model of this second type of partial

—34

expropriation is similar in conception and results to the model of total
expropriation discussed here, but is somewhat more complicated to present.
4. Contrasting the equilibrium where the expropriation threat is binding
with the unconstrained equilibrium, note that the capital—labor ratio is
lower in the first situation while the relative magnitude of H/L is
higher if capital and management are substitutes but lower if they are

complements. Thus, given a production function, the threat of expropriation
distorts factor hiring decisions. In Section 5 we discuss how the threat
of expropriation may cause firms to modify the production function itself.
Forsyth and Solomon (1977) sumnarize the evidence on differences in factor

proportions by nationality of investor. There appears to be no overall
tendency for foreign investors to employ different factor proportions than

domestic investors. Wide disparities in either direction exist, however,

in specific industries. It would be of interest to know if those industries
where the risk of expropriation is ceteris paribus greater exhibit relatively labor intensive production by foreign firms.

5. Note that the left—hand side of (2,8a) is the marginal product of capital

holding the em
level, H .

of capital

nt of mana

ers constant

The first term on the right—hand side is the marginal product
din

eotof

managers at the optimal level when

managers are internationally mobile, H
first

at the national endowment

,

Since we assume H >

H

, the

marginal product is greater or less than the second as F 0

6. If we had made the alternative assumption that the wedge (FK — r)(K

accrued to investors

rather

—

K)

than to the host country, our results would

be parallel but not identical. The EE curve would remain the same while
the

relationship

—35—

FKK + FLt + sfl

would define national income and replace the II curve. Denoting this
equation the II' curve, note that it lies below the II curve. Thus if
foreign investors receive the rent associated with the threat of expropriation, the equilibrium level of investment and national income will be

lower than in the case we consider. If this line of thought is to be
pursued, a theory is needed to explain how the right to invest is rationed

among competing potential foreign investors. We find it more realistic,
however, to assume that host countries are able to exploit their position
vis—a—vis competitive investors and capture the rents associated with

foreign investment. Note that a tax on foreign investment income at rate
maximizes not only national income but the level of foreign investment

as well. In the range between 0 and t an increase in the tax rate
on foreign capital income tK actually summons more foreign capital: as
tK rises in this range so do the benefits to the host country of not
expropriating. Thus foreign investors can invest more without suffering
expropriation.

7. Taxation of foreign capital often takes the form of a requirement that

a national of the host country receive a share in the equity of a foreign

investment without providing a commensurate share of funds. The host
country may not necessarily obtain this transfer via legal means. It

may also be effected via bribes, a form of illegal taxation. Foreign
investors do, apparently, frequently pay bribes to host country officials
for the right to invest.

Taxation may even take the form of an anticipated expropriation that

—36--

allows the investor to earn a competitive return on an investment either
because the expropriation is partial or because it occurs at a later date

(in a multi-period context). Firms invest knowing that time—consistent

behavior by the host leads to either of these results. The situation may
be explained by the concept of the obsolescing bargain; both parties enter
into an agreement anticipating that a shift in their relative strengths

will lead to a subsequent renegotiation. Such situations arise and do not
imply irrational behavior by investors. Our paper considers an expropriation to render an investment regrettable from the investor's viewpoint

(i.e. to lead to a return less than the market return). Our analysis
also indicates, however, how the threat of the type of expropriation we
do consider makes other forms of (partial) expropriation appropriate as
optimal time—consistent taxes.

8. An alternative assumption is that one investor faces one host leading to
a Cournot—Nash or similar game theoretic analysis, a topic which we leave
to possible future analysis.

might be a three factor production function with

For instance, F( )

ex ante elasticity of substitution a assumed constant and common between

all pairs of factors. The parameter y , 0

a might be the chosen

y

ex post elasticity of substitution. In this case,
F( ) .

If

C(a)

0 ,

would not enter

y = a would be chosen under most circumstances.

However, with potential expropriation it may be optimal for the host if

firms choose y < a
because

at cost CCy) > 0

.

This

outcome is preferred

can be raised by the additional deterrent provided by the

ex post inflexibility of technology.

—37—

10. When

managers

and capital are substitutes

(F < 0),

arises that in some states in which il(O) >

the possibility

, the

increase in K

resulting from the imposition of the penalty does not overcome the

negative effect of the penalty itself on income. Because the penalty
reduces host—country income in these states of nature, we cannot rule
out the possibility that expected host country income falls as a result
of a penalty.

].]

Tobin (1974) also considers the distributional consequences of an act
of expropriation. Since he assumes a linear technology and an arbitrary

number of factors, his results diUer somewKat.

REFERENCES
Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz, "Debt with Potential Repudiation:

and Emirical Analysis," Review of

Theoretical

Economic Studies, vol. 48, no. 152

(1981), pp. 289—309.

Forsyth, D.J.C. and R.E. Solomon,

"Choice of Technology and Nationality in

Manufacturing in a Develping Country,"

Oxford Economic Paper, vol. 29, no. 2

(1977), pp. 258—282.

Jodice, D.A., "Sources of Change in Third World Regimes for Foreign Direct

ti, vol.

Investment 1968—1976," Internatioa1_9rga

34, no. 2 (1980),

pp. 177—206.

Kydland, R.E. and E.C, Prescott, "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The

InconsistencY of Optimal Plans,"

Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977)

pp. 513—548.

Magee, S.P., "Information
Theory of Direct Foreign

and Multinational Corporations: An AppropriabilitY

Investment," in J.N. Bhagwati (ed.), The New Inter—

nationa1ECOn0mO The North—South De

(Cambridge: NIT, 1977).

Abroad:
MacDougall, G.A.D., "The Benefits and Costs of Foreign Investment from

vol. 36, no. 1 (1958), pp. 13—35.

A Theoretical Approach,"

Expropriation,"
Tobin, J., "Notes on the Economic Theory of Expulsion and

Journal of Deve1omefl Economics,
Williams, M.L., "The Extent

vol. 7, no. 1 (1974), pp 7—18.

and Significance of the Nationalization of

poreign—Owned Assets in Developing

Countries 1956—1972, "Oxford Economic

vol. 27, no. 2 (1975), pp. 260—273.

N
Y

E

——a—a

I
I

I
Y

.——

I

I

1

I

I

I

I

L

I

I
I
I
I
I

El

—
NK
K

I
I
I

I

I
I.
K

FIGURE 2.1

- — a. S — e

I
I
I
I
I
I

I

I

—S

I

I
I
I

I
I

I
I
I
I
I

aK

K

E

FIGURE 6.1

K

I

E
1

I
A'

I

I
I
A

I
I

I
I
0

A

—

K

K

FIGURE Y.1

K

