NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE UNEMPLOYMENT AND OUT OF THE LABOR FORCE

BEHAVIORALLY DISTINCT LABOR FORCE STATES?

Christopher

J. Flinn

James J. Heckman

Working Paper No. 979

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

September 1982

This research was supported by NSF Grants SOC 77—21136 and
SES—81O1963. We wish to thank Gary Chamberlain and Burt Singer for
valuable comments. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Paper #979
September 1982

NBER Working

Are Unemployment and Out of the Labor Force
Behaviorally Distinct Labor Force States?

ABSTRACT

This paper formulates and tests the hypothesis that the categories
unemployed and out of the labor force are behaviorally distinct labor force
states. Our empirical results indicate that they are. In the empirically
relevant range the exit rate from unemployment to employment exceeds the

exit rate from out of the labor force to employment. This evidence is shown
to be consistent with a simple job search model of productive unemployment

with log concave wage offer distributions. We prove that if unemployed workers
receive job offers more frequently than workers out of the labor force, and
if wage offer distributions are log concave, the exit rate from unemployment
to employment exceeds the exit rate from out of the labor force to employment.

Christopher

J. Flinn

University of Wisconsin—Madison
James J. Heckman

Department of conomics
University of Chicago

1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
(312)

962—8173

1. Introduction
There is considerable controversy over the issue of whether or not the
categories unemployed and out of the labor force are behaviorally distinct labor

force states. This issue is particularly relevant in the study of the labor
market dynamics of youth.

Given the range of nonmarket options available to many youths, and
given practices of many state unemployment compensation programs which effectively
limit the eligibility for unemployment compensation of most youths,.it seems

especially likely that there is no distinction between unemployment and out

of the labor force status for young people. Clac and Summers (1982) and
Ellwood (1982) have recently made this claim. They argue that the empirical
distinction between reported "unemployment" and reported "out of the labor
force" is so arbitrary that it is of little or no analytical value.

This point would seem to have some merit after examining the official
Current Population Survey definition of unemployment which defines those
individuals as unemployed "who had no employment during the survey week, were
available for work, and (1) had engaged in any specific job seeking activity
within the past four weeks, or (2) were waiting to be called back to a job
from which they had been laid off, or (3) were waiting to report to a new

wage or salary job scheduled to start within the following 30 days." Because
there is no stipulation as to the quality or quantity of searches made within

the month, the unemployment—out of the labor force distinction may be of little
value in predicting employment probabilities for the nonemployed.

2

On the other hand, theoretical models suggest that being unemployed

as opposed being to out of the labor force describes different behavior. For
example, in search theory (e.g., Burdett and Mortensen (1978)) a key difference
between unemployed individuals and those out of the labor force is that the
former are at an interior point with respect to the amount of time they devote

to search while the latter are at a corner and spend no time searching. In
these models, separate behavioral equations characterize the reemployment
probabilities from these two states.
In this paper we test the hypothesis that the classifications unemployed

(u) and out of the labor force (o) are behaviorally meaningless distinctions.
We reject this hypothesis. Distinct behavioral equations govern transitions

from out of the labor force to employment (e) and from unemployment to
employment.

The idea underlying our test is as follows: controlling for both
observed and unobserved individual differences in explanatory variables, if
the escape rate from unemployment to employment

(hue) is the same as the

escape rate from out of the labor force to employment (h), the origin state
(u or o) is irrelevant in determining the rate at which individuals leave
nonemployment to enter employment. In a simple three state Markov model, this
test is equivalent to testing the proposition that the two nonemployment states
can be aggregated into a single state resulting in a two state Markov model
for employment and nonemployrnent.

We find that in the empirically relevant range the exit rate from
the state of unemployment to the employed state exceeds the exit rate from

the tate of out of the labor force to the employed state. This finding is
consistent with versions of a traditional job search model in which the rate

3

of arrival of wage offers for the unemployed exceeds the rate of arrival of

wage offers for those out of the labor force. It is also consistent with versions
of a job search model with a positive interest rate in which the mean of the
wage offers for the unemployed exceeds the mean of the wage offers for those

out of the labor force. Thus the empirical evidence reported in this paper is
broadly consistent with versions of search theory in which unemployment is a
state that facilitates the job search process.

The plan of the rest of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we
exposit our test in a simple setting. in section 3, we describe the more general
econometric specification used to perform our test. Section 4 presents empirical

results and our interpretation of them. Section 5 contains concluding rmarks.
In an Appendix, we present a new sufficient condition for the exit rate from
unemployment to be an increasing function of the rate of arrival of job offers.

4

2. Testing the Behavioral Distinction Between Unemployment and Out
Of the Labor Force

To motivate our test, we consider two cases)' In the first case, the

probability density function of employment spell durations in g(t) where
t

denotes the length of the employment spell. The probability that a person

terminating employment classifies himself as u or o is determined by

tossing a coin that comes up u fraction r of the time and comes up o
fraction 1—it of the time. Once acquired the person keeps these labels as
long as he is nonemployed so that there is no direct switching between u

and o states. The density function of duration times in nonemployment is
g(t). The exit rate, or hazard function, from nonemployment is defined
as

hn =

g(t)
l—G(t)
nn

where G(t) is the cumulative distribution function of nonemployment
durations. The joint probability of unemployment classification and

nonemployment duration t

is

it

g(t)

with associated hazard function

To simplify the exposition we assume that agents are homogeneous throughout
this section. This assumption is not essential and is not used in performing
the empirical work reported in Section 4.

5

hue =hn
The joint probability of out of the labor force classification and nonemployment

duration t
n

is
(1 —

with

Tr)g(t)

associated hazard

h

oe

= h,
n

so that

(21)

hoe =hue
e

The hazard rate will be the same for the two nonemployment states o and u.
In the second case considered here, individuals are allowed to switch

their reported nonemployment status randomly. By this we mean that initial
nonemployment classification is governed as before by a toss of a coin and
that within a spell of nonetnployment individuals switch randomly between

o and u. The continuous time analogue of discrete time independent Bernoulli
trials is an exponential waiting time model (Cox (1962)). Write the hazard

for durations from o to u as h

ou

and the hazard from u to o as h

The density of time spent going from o to e

uo

(toe) is

hoe exp —(hoe+h ou
)toe

6

while the density of time spent going from u to e (t )

is

tie

h
tie

)tue
-(hue +h uo

exp

Individuals may change between reported nonemployment states for any reason.

All

that

is required for the origin state (o or u) to be irrelevant for

characterizing transitions from nonemployment to employment is for hoe =

h.

Note that in both cases, conditioning on o or u eliminates the
classification probability parameter iT.

Thus the test advocated in this paper

is valid even if individuals systematically report themselves as o or u
and the reporting probabilities are functions of explanatory variables.

The condition h
oe

h

is also the requirement that must be satisfied

ue

in a Markov model to aggregate o and u into a single state n, and for the
resulting two state model for e and n to be a properly defined Markov model.
To demonstrate this it is most convenient to work with the state probability
Tuma et. al, (1978));

representation of the three state Markov model (see,

Flinn and Hec1ian (l982a)). Define P.(t) as the probability that state j
is occupied at time t and P. Ct) as the instantaneous rate of change of this

probability. Then

P Ct)
e

P(t)

—(heu + heo)

h

eo

P (t)

u

h

eu

h

oe

-(h
+ hou)
oe
h

ou

h

P Ct)

h

P Ct)
o

ue

uo

-(hue + huo)

e

P Ct)

u

7

or

P3(t) =

AP

(t)

in matrix notation where the superscript 3 indicates a three state model.

Note that the rank of A is at most 2.
In order to aggregate o and

u into a two state model defined in

terms of n, we require that we be able to collapse the three state
system
into

—h

hne

P(t)

where P(t) =

P(t)

-h

hen

Pn(t)

+ P(t). In matrix notation the two state model may be

written as P2(t) =

BP2(t).

The rank of B is 1. For this to be an

equivalent representation of the three

that rank (A)

hoe =

h
ue

h

ne

rank (B) = 1.
.

P(t)

Sufficiency

state model, a necessary condition is

A necessary and sufficient condition is that

may

be

checked by direct Substitution into A.

This interpretation of our test is also informative in that it makes

precise the sense in which o and
u into a single state for the

u are irrelevant. Aggregating o and

purpose of statistical analysis does not alter

the Markov property of the model.

The rate at which individuals leave non—

employment to enter employment does not depend on which nonemployment state

8

individuals occupy.
It is tempting to extend this type of reasoning to consider transitions
from employment to the two

nonemployment states. Thus it might be argued that

if u and o are irrelevant distinctions, the rate of transition from e

to u (heu)

would be the same as the rate of transition from e to o

eo This argument is correct only if the probability of exiting from

employment to unemployment

(ri)

to out of the labor force (1—ri)

•fl

If

equals the probability of exiting from employment
so

= 1—ri

=

-

8e(te) is the density of employment length durations with associated

hazard rate h (t ),

e e

the hazard rate for transitions from e to u is

h

eu

e

while the hazard rate for e to o transition is

h

Obviously h + heo =
But unless Ti = 1—ri =

he

(1 —

ri)h

by the properties of conditional probabilities.

1/2, h

h. We have no theory of

ri.

Even if

reporting oneself as unemployed is strictly a matter of tossing a coin,

nothing requires

ri =

1/2.

However, if information is available on the

fraction of employment spells that are immediately followed by unemployment,
it is possible to obtain a consistent estimate of

and to test the

proportionality hypothesis that

(2.2)

heu/heo

=

ri/i—n

Assuming r is constant in the population. If

is a function of observed
ri
and unobserved heterogeneity components, a more complicated but still straightforward
estimation scheme is required.

9

3. Econometric Implementation of the Test

In order to test the hypothesis that unemployment and out of the labor
force are not behaviorally distinct labor market states we first specify a

parametric form for the hazard functions (h.k, j

k; j,k =

e,o,u)

on which

the test is based. We have adopted a general functional form for the hazard
functions in order to minimize the possibility of spuriously rejecting the

two 3tat model because of model misspecification. For a detailed
consideration of the econometric issues which arise in the estimation of
duration data models, the reader is referred to Flinn and Hec1nan (1982a).

In this section we sketch the econometric specification employed in performing
our proposed test.

Since a hazard function is a conditional probability density function,
a requirement of any econometric specification is that for all possible values
of the parameters and both observed and unobserved heterogeneity the hazard

be nonnegat±ve. The econometric specification adopted in this paper imposes
nonnegativity.

A hazard function associated with a particular probability density'
is said to exhibit positive, no, or negative duration dependence according
to whether

t<

h(t) > 0

- A hazard function is uniquely determined by the probability density functiom
and vice versa.

10

For example, if h(t)/it > 0

for t > 0, the instantaneous conditional

probability of exiting the state increases with the duration of the spell. Iii
a job search model in which the reservation wage declines with the length of an
unemployment spell, we expect to observe positive duration dependence in the

hazard associated with unemployment to employment transitions. On the other hand,
in a model that allows for specific human capital accumulation, we expect to
observe negative duration dependence in the hazard associated with employment

to unemployment transitions. The exponential distribution of duration times is
the only distribution consistent with a hazard function exhibiting no duration
dependence.

It is possible to specify hazard functions that exhibit all three types

of duration dependence for different values of t. In labor economics it is
especially important to allow for nonmonoticity of the hazard since many
economic models have been developed that predict a nonmonotonic hazard
(see,

Jovanovic, 1979) Our econometric model allows for noninonotonicity

in the hazard in a simple and readily interpretable manner.

In our previous work Flinn and Heckman (1982a) we have demonstrated

the importance of controlling for nonstationary in the environment. While most
theoretical models assume stationarity, our econometric specification does not
impose this frequently counterf actual assumption onto the data. We permit the
hazard function associated with any transition to depend on time varying

explanatory variables. Incorporating time—varying variables into our

11

econometric model is computationally burdensome but proves to be essential
in obtaining consistent parameter estimates (see Flinn and Hec1ian (1982a),
Section IV).

The specific functional form for the hazard function that we employ
in our empirical work is

exp

h.k(tjk) -

((Tk + tik)

+ ljtjk + 2,jktjk

j,k
j

jk

+

VJk)

e,o,u;

k

where

is the calendar date at which the current spell began,

1k is a

parameter vector conformable with X, the linear and squared duration terms

capture relatively general forms of duration dependence, and Vik represents
( a scalar measure of) the effect of unobserved individual differences on the

state j to state k hazard. The hazard is nonnegative as required. Note that

the time index on X(T. + t. ) indicates that the instantaneous conditional
jk
jk
probability of exiting from state j to state k after being in state j for

duration

t.jk

jk + t.jk

at calendar time t.

is a function of current values

of X. For this specification, there exists no duration dependence in the

j to k hazard if l

=
'3•k

2

=
,J•k

0.

If 2 '3•k

=

0, we say that there is

positive (negative) duration dependence in the j to k hazard if
> 0
'3

(p

l,j

•k

<

0).

If

,J•k

0 then the hazard need

not be monotone.

We restrict the contribution of unobserved heterogeneity to the j

to

12

k hazard to be of the form

V.

where the Cik

are

=

C.

(5,

parameters of the model and

(5

is an individual specific

spell and time invariant heterogeneity component, the value of which is

unobserved by the analyst. In the estimation procedure, we adopt a random
effects specification and make an assumption concerning the form of F(5),
the cumulative distribution function of

Cik

are

(5

in the population. The parameters

identified up to a factor of proportionality.

13

4. Empirical Results And Interpretation

The sample used to perforni the empirical work reported here is selected

from the National Longitudinal Survey of Young Men. We follow 122 young men
for thirty consecutive months from the time they graduate from high school.
The small size of our sample is due to the stringent selection criteria imposed.
To be included in the sample an individual must (1) be white; (2). have

received a high school diploma in the spring or early suer of 1969; and
(3) not have returned to school in the period beginning in the fall of 1969
and ending in December of 1971.

The sample was selected in this manner in an attempt to minimize the
initial conditions problem discussed in the literature on applied stochastic
processes (HecIian (1981), Flinn and Heckinan (1982a)).. By using individuals

who have recently completed schooling, we have selected individuals with

little or no previous labor market experience. The vast majority of individuals
in our sample have not worked in full time jobs during high school. Because
of this, we feel that the initial conditions problem can safely be ignored
in deriving the maximum

likelihood

estimates presented here.

Unless duration times follow an exponential distribution, the

distribution of the first spell observed during a sampling period will not have
the same distribution as subsequent spells of the same type whose beginning

and ending dates are observed. By constructing our sample in the manner indicated
we claim that the first spell sampled follows the same distribution as
subsequent spells of the same type.

14

Due to the small number of transitions between the nonemployrnent states
• (u +

o

and o —'-

u)

we were not able to obtain estimates of the hazard

functions associated with these transitions. In the three state model we
estimate the parameters of the four hazards associated with the e -- o, e -

u

-'-

e, and o - e

transitions. In our test of the two versus three state

model, we estimate three hazard functions by constraining the u + e

o -

e

and

hazards to be equal. Estimation is by maximum likelihood. The

reader is referred to Flinn and Heclanan (1982a) for details concerning the

specification of the likelihood function and estimation procedure.
Table 1 presents estimates of the three state model estimated with

observed and unobserved heterogeneity in the transition rates. The observable
characteristics included are the duration of the spell, duration squared (to
allow for nonmonotonic duration dependence), and whether the individual is

married with spouse present (MSP) (1 if yes, 0 if no). The parameter

c. is

the factor loading for the state i to state j transition. The unobserved
heterogeneity component

is assumed to have a standard normal distribution.

The signs of the parameters are generally consistent with prior

expectations. For example, currently married men have lower rates of transiting
from employment to unemployment than do nonmarried men. The fact that the
standard errors are so large relative to the magnitude of the parameters is to
be expected given that we are attempting to estimate twenty parameters with

so few degrees of freedom. Only the constant terms and the factor loading
associated with the employment to out of the labor force transition are greater
than twice their standard errors.

In Figure 1 the hazard functions from the two nonemployment states to

15

L1J.c 1

sC u13Lec x:or;

t ::

Frow Employiueut

Constant
Duration/lO

iratiou2/100

rCc

St:LL Uiirc ri :L Cd

to:

To Employment

Unnp1oymnt

OLF

—3.822

—7.193

(9.778)1

(2.768)
.700
(.379)

—.240

—.019
(.030)

from:

OLF

Unemployment

.482
(.846)

(1.004)

Model

—2.384

—. 698

(3.782)

(2.078)

—1253

1.441
(.365)

(1.530)

.41

.208
(.084)

(.547)
•

is
C..
1•J

—.355
(.837)

.086
(.068)

1.396

2.788

(3.336)

(1.025)

—.065
(.193)

1.154

—.342
(1.633)

—1.866

(.400)

(1.081)

—

1Absolute value of asymptotic norm1

statistics

in parentheses.

hjk(tjk)

.1

.3

.4'

.5

.6

:7

1

2

1

3

5
DURATION

4

6

7

HAZARDS for U-e and o—e

FIGURE

8

H
a'

17

employment are plotted for nonmarried (NM) young males who comprise the bulk

of the sample. The hazard functions associated with the out of the labor
force to employment transitions are monotonically increasing, while the hazards
associated with the unemployment to employment transition are norimonotonic.

For nonmarried individuals h > h
ue
oe

for the first 6 months of the respective

nonemployment spells, after which the inequality reverses. The vast bulk of
nonemployment spells are completed in less than six months.

The estimates from the restricted three state model are given in Table

2. Let 2jk =

jk

1,jk 2,jk C.k)e The restrictions imposed are 0oe

which constrains all parameters in the unemployment to employment and out of the

labor force to employment transitions to equality. There are a total of five
restrictions. Performing the likelihood ratio test on the restricted versus
the unrestricted model, the value of the test statistic is 28.72 which is

distributed x2(5). The critical value for a 5 percent significance level is
11.07. We are able to reject the null hypothesis of the equality of the
parameters governing the two nonemployment states. These empirical results
suggest that out of the labor force and unemployment are not artifical

distinctions for this sample of young men. Because the simpler hypothesis
(2.1) is rejected, it is unnecessary to test the more computationally demanding
proportionality hypothesis (2.2) in order to reject the hypothesis that
unemployment and out of the labor force are behaviorally distinct labor force
states.

18

Table 2

Parameter Estimates from the Three State Restricted Model

From Employment

to:

Non iployment

Unemployment

OLE

—3.735
(9.934)

—/.718
(2.596)

—.857
(4.756)

Tenura/lO

.400
(.706)

.782
(.528)

—1.460
(1.790)

Tenure2/100

—.220

—.004

(.940)

(.007)

—.397
(.966)

.160

.202

(.148)

(.577)

1.327

3.102

(4.195)

(1.078)

Constant

MSP

C..

£= —.798.69

-

•

to Employment

.683

(1.116)

-.421
(1.894)

(Log Likelihood)

1Absoluta value of asymptotic normal statistics in parentheses.

.

19

Within the framework of job search theory, the fact that over the
empirically relevant range the exit rate from unemployment to employment
exceeds the exit rate from out of the labor force to employment does not

necessarily imply that the rate of arrival of job offers is higher for the

unemployed. In the traditional infinite horizon stationary environment one
state search model, increases in the rate of arrival of job offers increase
the reservation wage and have an ambiguous effect on the exit rate from

unemployment (see equations (A.2)—(A.4) in the Appendix). However, we
demonstrate in the Appendix that if the wage offer distribution is log concave,
higher arrival rates of wage offers imply higher exit rates from unemployment.

The normal distribution is log concave. Other examples of log concave
distributions are given in the Appendix.
Interpreting our findings within the framework of the traditional one
state search model, and assuming log concavity of the wage offer distribution,

our empirical evidence suggests that the rate of arrival of job offers is higher

in the unemployment state than in the out of labor force state. Thus our
evidence is consistent with the hypothesis of productive unemployment i.e. that
being unemployed raises the rate of arrival of job offers. However, the
fact that some individuals transit directly from out of the labor force to
employment without first becoming unemployed suggests that job search activity
occurs in both states, and that the difference between the two states is only
a matter of degree of search activity.

An alternative interpretation of the evidence within the traditional
one state search model is that searchers face a positive discount rate and
that the unemployed face a wage offer distribution with a higher mean than do

20

those individuals who are out of the labor force.-"'

With a positive discount rate, unit translations of wage offer distribution
produce less than unit changes in the reservation wage. Ceteris paribus,
individuals searching from wage distributions with a higher mean will have
higher exit rates from unemployment than will individuals searching from wage
offer distributions with a lower mean.
Note that this discussion is conducted within a traditional search model.
Within the context of a general three state model, such as the one developed
by Coleman and Hec1ian (1981), log concavity of the wage offer distribution is
not sufficient to ensure that a higher rate of arrivals of wage offers in
a state produces a higher exit rate from the state to employment. The conclusions
in the text hold in a two state model. See the Appendix.

21

5. ConclusiOn

In this paper we have constructed a test of the proposition that the
nonemployment states "unemployment" and "out of the labor force" are

behaviorally indistinguishable. Our empirical results indicate that
unemployment and out of the labor force are behaviorally distinct, so that
in general it is not legitimate to aggregate the two states into a single

nonemploynent state when analyzing labor market dynamics. Our test is
conducted using a flexible econometric model. We are confident that rejection
of the two state (employment and nonemployment) model is not attributable to
arbitrary functional form assumptions..i'

Rejecting the behavioral equivalence of unemployment and out of the
labor force suggests that the task of building economic models that predict
such a distinction is an empirically fruitful one. In. Plinn and Heclonan (l982b)

and Coleman and Heckman (1981) we present a three state model of search
unemployment that is consistent with the empirical evidence reported in this
paper.

-

Even after allowing for alternative distributions of the unobserved
heterogeneity component ô, we overwhelmingly reject the two state model.

22

References

R.E. Barlow and F. Proschan, Statistical Theory of Reliability and Life
Testing, Holt, Reinhart and Winston, 1975.
Brascamp, H.J. and E. Lieb, "On Extensions of the Brunn—Minkowski Prekopa—
Leindler Theorems,!i Journal of Functional Analysis, Vol. 22, 1976,
pp.366—389.
Clark, K. and L. Summers, "The Dynamics of Youth Unemployment", in R. Freeman
and D. Wise, ads., The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its Nature, Causes
and Conseguences, University of Chicago Press For NBER, 1982.
Coleman, T. and J. Heckinan, "Dynamic Models of Labor Supply", unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago, September, 1981.

Eliwood, D., "Teenage Unemployment: Temporary Scar or Permanent Blemish?",
in R. Freeman and D. Wise, eds., op. cit.

Flinn, C., and Heckman, J., "Models for the Analysis of Labor Market Dynamics",
in Advances in Econometrics, R. Basmann and G. Rhodes, eds. JAI Press.
Vol. 1 (1982a): 35—95.

Flinn, C., and Hec1an, J., "New Methods for Analyzing Structural Models of
Labor Force Dynamics", Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion
Paper No. 681—81. Journal of Econometrics (1982b) pp.113—168.
Heckman, J., "The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial
Conditions in Estimation of a Discrete Time — Discrete Data Stochastic
Process" in Structural Analysis of Discrete Data With Econometric
Applications, C. Manski and D. McFadden, eds. M.I.T. Press (1981):
179—195.
Jovanovic, B., "Job Matching and The Theory of Turnover't, Journal of Political
Economy (1979), Vol. 87, #1, pp.972—990.

Pratt, J., "Concavity of the Log Likelihood," Journal of the American
Statistical Association, Vol. 76, March, 1981, pp.103—106.
Ross, S., Applied Probability Models With Optimization Applications,
Holden Day, 1970.
Tuina, N., Hannan, M., and Groeneveld, L., "Dynamic Analysis of Event Histories",
American Journal of Sociology, 84 (1979): 820—854,

Appendix
A SUFFICIENT CONDITION FOR THE EXIT PATE FROM UNMFLOYMENT TO
BE AN INCREASING FUNCTION OF THE RATE OF ARRIVAL OF JOB OFFERS.

Let wage offers arrive in accordance with a homogenous Poisson

process with parameter X. The discount rate is denoted by r, r

F(w) is the cdf of wage offers. The cost of search is c, c > 0.

(0,1).

Accepted

jobs last forever, the environment is stationary, and agents have infinite

lifetimes. It is well known that in this model, the optimal search strategy

has the reservation wage property if w has a finite absolute first moment
(see Flinn and Heclcnan, (1982a)). The reservation wage R is the solution
to the following equation

c + r =

(A.1)

X/r

I

(x—R)dF(x)

for R > 0.

R
If the R that solves (A.1) is negative, the agent doesn't search.
The exit rate from unemployment, h, is

h = X(1—F(R))
(see, e.g., Flinn and Hecknan, 1982a).
Proposition:

In a one state infinite horizon continuous time job search

model of unemployment with exponential arrival times of wage offers, a
sufficient condition for an increase in the rate of arrival of wage offers
to produce an increase in the exit rate from unemployment is that the wage

offer distribution be log concave (i.e., that the hazard rate associated with
the wage offer distribution be increasing in wages).

A- 2

F(w)

Proof: Assume F(w) is absolutely continuous and nondefective

1).

The derivative of h with respect to A is

= (1 — F(R)) — Xf(R)

(A.2)

Differentiating (A.l) with respect to A, assuming R >

--

=

(A.3)

hr IR

i

0,

(l—F(x))dx

+ Air (1-F(r))

where we have used the well known fact (see, e.g., Ross, 1970) that

f
R

(x - R)dF(x)

=

I (1-F(x))dx

R

Using (A.3) in (A.2) and rearranging terms we reach

(A.4)

i

=

{i +

(l-F(R))

-

lF(R)

1

(1-F(x))dx]}.

A sufficient condition for (A.4) to be positive is that the term
in brackets inside the braces be non—negative.

(A.5)

[(1 -

F(R)) -

f(R)

1(1 -

F(x))dx]

0

It is convenient to characterize the wage offer distribution by
the hazard g(u) which exists by virtue of the absolute continuity of F.

We define

(A.6)

1 -

F(x)

=

exp(-fg(u)du)

It is convenient to work with c(R) which is defined as

A-3

x

(R)

f
R

(1

—

F(x))dx

=

1

exp(— f g(u)du)dx

R

Using this notation condition (A.5) may be rewritten as

-

(A.5)'

(R) + :: R)

>

This condition is satisfied if in (R) is concave in R since concavity
requires

T()2
c(R))

"(R) (

(A,7)

(R)

\

—

and multiplication of (A. 7) by ((R))2/"(R) produces (A.5)' since '(R) < 0.
By a theorem of Brascamp and Lieb (1976), as reported in Pratt (1981),

a sufficient condition for in (x) to be concave is that in "(x) be
concave, i.e., that

in

(x)

-

f

x

g(u)du

be concave in x. Assuming g(u) is differentiable, strict concavity
requires that g'(x) >

0, i.e., that the hazard is increasing. This

condition is satisfied if the iog of the density of w is concave (see Barlow
and Proschan, 1975). Examples of log concave densities include normal,
exponential, LaPlace, and for certain parameter values (see Barlow and Proschan,

1975, p.79) truncated normal, Weibull and Ganmia densities. A Cauchy distribution
is not log concave nor is a log normal distribution.

A-4

Log concavity of the wage offer density is also a sufficient condition
for the exit rate from unemployment to be an increasing function of the rate
of arrival of job offers in a simple two state equilibrium model of labor

market dynamics. The setup is essentially the same as in the one spell search
model except that individuals are terminated from employment spells at an

exogenously determined rate a. This model is discussed at length and estimated

in Flinn and Hec1ian (1982b). The reservation wage R

in that model is given

by the implicit function

R =

(A.8)

where R

r Vu and V

—c

+ ra

(x—R)dF(x),

is the value of occupying the unemployment state.

We could repeat the proof given above for the one spell search model to verify
sufficiency of the log concavity condition for the two state model but the
similarity between A.l and A.8 is too obvious to warrant a detailed derivation.

