NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ISSUES IN THE COORDINATION

OF MONETARY
AND FISCAL POLICY

Alan S. Blinder

Working Paper No. 982

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

September 1982

This paper was prepared for the conference on "Monetary Policy
Issues in the 1980's," sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City at Jackson Lake Lodge, Wyoming, August 9—10, 1982.
am grateful to Benjamin Friedman, John Taylor, James Tobin, William
Poole and other conference participants for helpful discussions, to
Albert Ando and Rick Sitnes for use of the MPS model, and to the
National Science Foundation for financial support. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #982
September 1982

ISSUES IN THE COORDINATION OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY
Abstract

This paper examines issues in the current debate over
coordination between fiscal and monetary policies.
Section II uses the traditional targets-instruments
approach to assess the potential gains from greater coordination.
Since greater coordination is often equated with looser money

and tighter fiscal policy, two econometric models of the economy
are used to estimate the quantitative importance of the policy

mix. Expectational effects that arise from the government budget
constraint are also analyzed.
Section III shows that our attitudes toward the noncoordination problem may be quite different depending on why
policies were not coordinated to begin with, and argues that
there are plausible circumstances under which it may be better
to have uncoordinated policies.
Section IV turns to the design of a coordination system.
The game-theoretic aspects of having two independent authorities
are stressed, and I offer a general reason to expect that
uncoordinated behavior will result in tight money and loose
fiscal policy even when both parties would prefer easy money
and tight fiscal policy.

Finally, Section V considers the old "rules versus
discretiont' debate from the particular perspective of this paper.
Professor Alan S. Blinder
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08544
(609) 452—4010

Page 1

I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
Now, as often in the past, there are complaints from all
quarters about the lack of coordination between monetary and

fiscal policy. Indeed, the feeling that monetary and fiscal
policies are acting at cross purposes is quite prevalent. This
attitude, I think, reflects dissatisfaction with the current

mix of expansionary fiscal policy and contractionary monetary
policy, which pushes aggregate demand sideways while keeping

interest rates sky high. This, too, has frequently been so
in the past.

Figure 1 offers a rough impression of the recent history

of monetary-fiscal coordination. It plots the change in the
high-employment surplus (as a crude indicator of the thrust
of fiscal policy) on the horizontal axis and the change in

the growth rate of M1 (as a crude indicator of monetary
policy) on the vertical axis for the years 1961-1980. The
scatter of points does not leave the impression of a strong
negative correlation, as might be expected from well-coordinated

policies. But even by these lax standards, the projected
points for the early 1980's (falling moneygrowth rates with
widening high-employment deficits) will--if realized—-be
exceptional.

The clear implication of the current debate is that greater
coordination between the fiscal and monetary authorities would

Page 1A

A money crrowth rate

5

•67

4
3

72

2

63

•

76

70

71.
1

68

64

•

78

•

65
80

—1

62

74

—2
66

—3

•73

—4

69

—5

I

-30

-20

I

I

-10

0

10

20

AHES

I
-V

Page 2

-

be better. There is so much unanimity on this point that even
an observer as distrustful of government as Milton Friedman
(1982) has urged that the Federal Reserve be brought under
the control of the administration.

This paper tries to take a fresh look at the coordination

issue. Among other things, it raises the possibility that

greater coordination might actually make things worse! The
paper takes as its objectives to raise questions, to clarify
issues, and to stimulate discussion rather than to provide

answers. Where answers are suggested, they should not be
interpreted as etched in stone.

Section II, which follows this summary, focusses on the
potential gains from greater coordination between monetary and

fiscal policy. The first part uses the traditional targetsinstruments approach to examine the possibility that coordination
might not be terribly important because the authorities have
more instruments than they need to achieve the goals of stabiliza-

tion policy. A variety of considerations, however, argue against
the empirical relevance of this possibility.
Since greater monetary—fiscal coordination is often
equated with looser money and tighter fiscal policy, the second
part of this section appeals to two econometric models of the

economy to estimate the quantitative importance of the so—called

mix issue. The empirical results suggest that the effects of
changes in the monetary—fiscal mix may not be as large as many
suppose.

Page 3

The final part of Section II deals with expectational
effects that arise from the government budget constraint, here
interpreted to state that the current mix of policies has

important implications for the range of policy combinations

that will be available in the future. I show that the government
budget constraint allows more degrees of freedom than some of
the recent literature suggests, and argue that some authors
have overplayed the role of expectational effects which, while
present, may not be dominant.

Section III turns to the reasons for lack of coordination,

and shows that our attitudes toward the non-coordination problem
may be quite different depending on why policies were not

coordinated to begin with. Here I argue that there are
plausible circumstances under which it may be better to have

uncoordinated policies. An analogy will explain why this may
be so.

Consider the problem of designing a car in which student

drivers will be taught to drive. The car will have two steering
wheels and two sets of brakes. One way to achieve "coordination"
is to design the car so that one set of controls——the teacher's

——can always override the other. And it may seem obvious
that this is the correct thing to do in this case. But now
suppose that we do not know in advance who will sit in which

seat. Or what if the teacher, while a superior driver, has

terrible eyesight? Under these conditions i± is no longer
obvious that we want one set of controls to be able to override

the other. Reasoning that a stalemate may be better than a

Page
violent collision, we may decide that it is best to design the

car with two sets of competing controls which can partially
offset one another.

Using the two previous sections as background, Section IV

discusses alternative fiscal—monetary arrangements ranging from

perfect coordination to complete lack of coordination. The
focus here is clearly at the "constitutional" level: what kind
of coordination system would we like to devise? The gametheoretic aspects of having two independent authorities are
stressed, and I offer a general reason to expect that uncoordinated

behavior will result in tight money and loose fiscal policy
even when both parties would prefer easy money and tight fiscal
policy!

Finally, Section V considers the old "rules versus
discretion" debate from the particular perspective of this paper.

Rules are viewed as ways to resolve the coordination problem
and to alter the fiscal-monetary mix..

I conclude that the

celebrated k—percent rule for money growth is unlikely to score
highly on these criteria, and suggest two other rules that
might do better.

PAGE 5

II. TARGETS INsTRUMENTS., AND THE GAINS FROM COORDINATION

A. TARGETS AND INSTRUMENTS
The traditional targets and instruments approach of
Tinbergen and Theil provides a useful framework -for thinking

about monetary— fiscal coordination because the coordination
problem is basically one of an effective shortage of
instruments.. Were there, for example, as many fiscal
instruments as targets, the administration might not have to
worry about coordinating its actions with those o-F the
central bank.

As we know from Tinbergen and Theil, simply counting up

instruments and targets is not enough; we need to know how
many independent instruments we have, and this depends on
both the model of the economy and the precise list o-f
targets.. For example, a plausible set of targets -for

stabilization policy might be the level of output (y), the
price level (P), and the share o-f GNP invested (I/Y).

If the

fiscal instruments are government spending (6) and the
personal income tax rate (t), then, provided that supply—
side effects a-f tax cuts are big enough, we may have just the

number of instruments we need ——

but

only i-f monetary policy

is perfectly coordinated with fiscal policy. Lack of
coordination will make a suboptimal outcome inevitable.

PAGE 6

But what if we add a third fiscal instrument:
investment incentives such as accelerated depreciation or an

investment tax credit? Then, at least in principle, fiscal
policy can go it alone: it can achieve the desired levels of
the three targets regardless c-f what monetary policy does.

Now, the notion that monetary policy is a redundant
instrument may not sit well within the Federal Reserve

System. Nor should it, for there surely are additional

targets. For example, we may want to shift the mix of
investment spending away from housing and toward business

fixed investment. To this end, we may want to keep interest
rates high to discourage residential construction while
simultaneously providing strong tax incentives for industrial
capital formation.

In fact, precisely this policy mix has

been advocated by Feldstein (1980a) and others, and appears
to have been put in place by the Reagan administration. <1> A

second example is the foreign exchange rate which is strongly
influenced by the level of short—term interest rates, and
hence by central bank behavior.
-

The likelihood that we have surplus instruments at our

disposal is further diminished by a number of other

considerations. One is that there may be many more targets
than the three traditional ones. For example, the use o-f
tax—and—transfer policies may also be influenced by important

distributional and allocative objectives. The same may be
true of government expenditures; and defense spending

PAGE 7
involves a host of other complex criteria.

In addition, the

mix between monetary and -fiscal policy may be influenced by

regional or sectoral objectives, or perhaps just by a desire
not to force one region or sector to bear too mLtch of the

burden of stabilization policy. For example, a desire not to
devastate the housing industry may be a reason not to rely
entirely on restrictive monetary policy to limit aggregate

demand. Like fiscal policy; monetary policy also has
important allocative effects.

In fart, the situation is a good deal worse than this

because the instruments themselves may be targets. It may
be, for example, that the government has an explicit
objective for the ratio o-( 6/? which limits the use of S as a

stabilization tool. Or perhaps sizable movements in policy
instruments entail significant costs of their own ——

costs

which preclude moving all the way to the global optimum.

Timing considerations make it still less likely that we

have more instruments than we need. Policy instruments like
6 and M may have rather different effects on target variables
in. the short and long runs. For example, both probably have
strong (and rather similar) effects on unemployment in the

short run, but little if any effects in the long run. This
makes it crucial to coordinate monetary and fiscal plans as
they un-fold through time.

Uncertainty may also reduce the effective number of

instruments. For example, we may feel less uncertain about

PAGE 8
the effects of particular monetary— fiscal combinations than
we do about the effects of individual instruments used in

isolation. If so, then coordination becomes that much more
critical.

The conclusion seems to be that, while it is logically
possible that we have more instruments than we need, the real
world seems to be characterized by a shortage of instruments

in the relevant empirical sense. Consequently, we should
expect failure to coordinate fiscal and monetary policy to
lead to losses of social welfare..

B. THE CAPITAL—FORMATION ISSUE

As I mentioned at the autset concern that our current
policy mix will prove damaging to capital formation seems to
be the potential loss of social welfare that is at the heart
of contemporary worries about monetary—fiscal coordination.

Because of their effects on investment, each of the tools
of demand management also has long—run implications for

aggregate supply. Put most simply, fiscal expansion probably
pushes up real interest rates, thereby inhibiting capital
formation and slowing the growth of aggregate supply.
Monetary expansion should have the opposite effects on

interest ratesand investment. Therefore, it is argued, a
tighter fiscal policy and a looser monetary policy would
provide a climate more conducive to investment and growth.
But just how large are these effects in practice?

PAGE 9
To get a serious quantitative answer, I see no place to
turn but

to

the much—maligned large—scale econometric models.

Otto Eckstein and Christopher Probyn (1981) recently reported
the results of a simulation exercise

with the DRI

model in

which the actual fiscal and monetary policies of the
1966—1980 period were replaced by a mix of policies less
expansionary on the fiscal side and more expansionary on the
monetary side.

The period in question was one in which DRI's version of
the full—employment deficit averaged about $27 billion,

varying between ahcut zero and $64 billion. In the
alternative scenario simulated by Eckstein and Probyn the
fLd 1 —empl oymerit

monetary

budget was rough I y

bal ariced every year, and

policy (defined by nonborrowed reserves) was

adjusted to maintain approximately the same time path for the
unemployment rate. How different would the economy's
evolution have been under this alternative monetary—fiscal
mix?

According to the
would

DRI model, the investment share in GNP

have been about one—half percentage point

higher in a

typical year of the simulation, leading to a cumulative
increase in the capital stock over the 15—year period of
about 5.37.. As a consequence, potential (and hence actual)
real GNP in 1980 would have been about 1.67. higher than in

the historical record. The GNP deflator in 1980 would have

been 2.67. lower, which translates to an average reduction in

PAGE 10

the

annual inflation rate of

about 0.2 percentage

points.

As Robert Solow once remarked, the nice thing about
large—scale econometric models is that they always have an
answer for

every question. What

we want to know, of course,

is whether the DRI model's answer to this particular question

is roughly correct. This, unfortunately, is unknowable. The
next

the

best thing is to get another large—scale

model to answer

same question, and then compare the responses.

Fortunately,

Albert Ando kindly volunteered to run more or

less the same policy change on the MPS model. Some
modifications had to be made because of the different

structures of the two models. (Examples: Neither
full—employment GNP nor the full— employment deficit is a

variable in the MPS model; the simulation period was
1967—1981 instead of 1966—1980.,) But an effort was made to
come as close as possible to duplicating the Eckstein—Probyn
policy of tighter budgets and looser money with no effect on
Linempi oyment.

The MPS results were generally less sanguine about the

potential gains from a switch in the policy mix. For
example, the share of business fixed investment in GNP was
only about 0.3 percentage point higher in a typical year of
the easy—money, tight—fiscal simulation with the MPS model.

Correspondingly, the gains in real output were smaller: real
GNP in the final year of the simulation was just 1V. higher
(versus 1.67. with the DRI model).

PAGE 11
Bigger differences emerged on the price side of the

model. Whereas the DRI simulation said that the GNF deflator
would be 2.67. lower by the end of the 15—year period, the MPS
model put the de-Flator 0.57. higher. The difference here

seems to stem from the divergent behavior of the money supply

in the two models. According to the DRI model, the "easier
money" policy actually leads to a slightly lower money

supply whereas the MPS model shows the money supply
increasing slightly.

Beauty is in the eye of the beholder. But these
effects, while generally favorable, seem quite modest to me
especially when you realize that the swing in fiscal policy

was extremely substantial. Under the historical
stabilization policy mix, the cumulative increase in the
national debt during this 15—year period was more than $350

billion for DRI and about $450 billion for MPS. Under the
hypothetical policy with a balanced full—employment budget,

the debt would have declined by about $45 billion according
to DRI and by about $19 billion according to MPS.
-

Thus, according to these models, an enormous change in

the policy mix would have caused only a modest increase in
real output.

And the two models cannot even agree on whether

prices would have increased or decreased as a result.

C. THE GOVERNMENT BUDGET CONSTRAINT AND EXPECTATIONS
Dynamic constraints across choices of policy mixes

PAGE 12
arise from the so—called government budget constraint, the
accounting identity that insists that every budget deficit
mLlst be financed by selling bonds either to the public or to

the Fed. This identity points out that today's fiscal—
monetary decisions have implications for the number o-f bonds

that will have to be sold to the public today, and thus for
the feasible set of fiscal—monetary combinations in future
periods. <2>
For example, suppose an expansionary -fiscal policy today

leads to a large deficit that is not monetized. Future
government budgets will therefore inherit a larger burden of
interest payments, so the same time paths of 6, t, and M will

lead to larger deficits. What will the government do about

this? That depends on its reaction function. For example,
large deficits and high interest rates might induce greater
monetary expansion in the future (the possibility emphasized
by Sargent and Wallace (1981)).

Alternatively, it might

induce future tax increases (the case stressed by Barro
(1974)), or cuts in government spending (the apparent hope of

Reaganomics). Yet another possibility is that the government
will simply finance the burgeoning deficits by issuing more
and more bonds. <3>
All of these are live options, and have different
implications for the long run evolution of the economy.

In

fact, under rational expectations, they may have different
implications for the current state of the economy.

PAGE: 13

Consider, as an example, the effects on consumer

spending of a tax cut financed by issuing new bonds. Such a
tax cut today enlarges current and prospective future budget
deficits, thereby-requiring some combination of the following
policy adjustments:
(1) increases in future taxes;
(2) decreases in future government expenditLires;

(3) increases in future money creation;
(4) increases

in

future issues of interest— bearing

national debt.

To the extent that

and firms

the

current decisions made by individuals

are influenced

by their expectations about the

future, each of these alternatives may have different
implications for the effects of the tax cut today.

For example, if people believe that a tax cut financed

bonds simply reduces today s taxes and raises future taxes
in order to pay the interest on the bonds, then consumption
may not be affected.. This is essentially Barro's (1974)

by

argument.

Alternatively, people may believe that the policy will
so, the
eventually lead to greater money creation.
inflationary expectations thereby engendered may affect their
I-f

decisions in ways that are not captured by standard
behavioral 4unctions. This is essentially the point made by

current

Sargent and Wallace (1981)
inflationary.

in

arguing that tight

money may be

PAGE

Still

different reactions would be expected if people

thought the current deficit would lead to lower government

spending or to more bond issues in the future. The
theoretical possibilities are numerous,

limited

only by the

imagination of the theorist. <4>
Rational expectations interact with the government budget

constraint in an important way. Feopie's beliefs about the
futL(re consequences of current monetary—fiscal decisions are

conditioned by their views of the policy rules that the

authorities will follow. To the extent that these beliefs
affect their current behavior, different policy rules
actually imply dif-ferent short—run policy multipliers under

rational expectations.

A key question for policy formulation is: how impnr1nt
are these expectational effects in practice? This seems to
depend principally on how forward—looking current economic

decisions really are. Take the tax cut example again. Under
the pure permanent income hypothesis (PIH) only the present
discounted value o-f

lifetime

after—tax income flows affects

current consumption. <5> So expectations about future budget
policy should have important effects on current consumption.
But if short—sightedness. extremely high discount rates, or
capital market imperfections effectively break many of the
links between the future and the present, then current
consumption may be rather insensitive to these expectations
and rather sensitive to current income. Even under fulJ.y

PAGE 15

rational expectations and the pure PIH, consumption may
depend largely on current income if the stochastic process

generating income is highly serially correlated. These are
issues

about which knowledge is accumulating; but

remains
the

to be learned. The

evidence to

much

date does not lead to

conclusion' that long—term expectations rule the roost.

<6:::.

The other two places where expectations about future

fiscal

and monetary policies might have significant effects

on current behavior are wage and price setting and
investment.
Investment., of courses is

the

quintessential example o-f

an economic decision which is stronqly conditioned by
expectations about the -Future. Even Keynes knew this
once again, there are some

interfere
as

the

But

real—world considerations that

with the strictly neoclassical view of investment

unconstrained solution to an

intertemporal

optimization problem. One is that capital rationing may
interfere with a firm's ability to run current losses on the
expectation of

future

profits. A second is that management

may use ad hoc rules such as the payback period criterion in

appraising

investment projects. A third is that management

may be more shortsighted than it
that there may be ——

"should be." A

fourth is

and probably is —— a strong accelerator

element in investment spending, which ties the current
investment decision much more tightly to the current state of

PAGE 16
the economy than neoclassical economics recognizes. As in
the consumption example, each of these things diminishes the
importance of the fLiture to current decision making and

thereby renders expectational effects less important.

Wage and price setting is another important example. Ad
hoc rules which adjust wages or prices in accordance with
"the law of supply and demand," or which are mainly backward
looking, render expectational effects rather unimportant.
But rules which are based on forward looking considerations
(such as expected future excess demand) make expectational

effects crucial. Again, this is an area where we must learn
much more before we can make any definitive judgments. <7>
A word on uncertainty seems appropriate before leaving

this topic. It seems to me that people probably attach great
uncertainty to their beliefs about what future government
policies will be.

If so, the means of their subjective

probability distributions may have far less influence on
their current decisions than the contemporary preoccupation

with rational expectations would suggest. For example, how
much influence does the two— week— ahead weather forecast
have on your decision about whether or not to plan a picnic
on a given date?

Similarly, the importance of expectations for
macroeconomic aggregates is diminished by the likelihood that
different people hold different expectations about what
future government policies are likely to be. <8> If some

PAGE 17
people believe today's tax cuts signal higher future taxes,

some believe they signal higher future money creation, and
some believe they signal lower future government spending,
then expectations about the future may have meager current
effects in the aggregate.

The conclusion seems to be that, while we should not

forget about expectational effects operating through the
government budget constraint, neither should we get carried

away by them. There is no reason to believe that they are
the whole show.

III. REASONS FOR LACK OF COORDINATION

Is more coordination necessarily better? At first
blush, this question seems to admit only an affirmative

answer. But further reflection suggests that things are not
quite so clear.

If the central bank and the government agree on what

needs to be done, but a coordinated approach cannot be
promulgated because of perverse behavior by one o-f the two

authorities, then it is clear that coordination must improve

things. Indeed, the type of coordination we want is also
clear: the sensible policy maker must dominate the perverse
one. Would that things were so simple'

PAGE 18

So let us ask why, in reality, fiscal and monetary

policies are sometimes so poorly coordinated. If we assume
that both authorities are basically sensible, then lack of
coordination can stem from one of three causes (or, of
course, from combinations of the three):

(1) The fiscal and monetary authorities might have

different objectives, i.e. different conceptions of what is
best for society.

(2) The two authorities might have different

opinions about the likely affects of fiscal and/or monetary
policy actions on the economy,, i.e., they might adhere to

different economic theories.
(3) The two authorities might make different

forecasts of the likely state of the economy in the absence

of policy intervention. Divergent forecasts could result
either from different economic theories (as in (2) above) or
from different forecasts of exogenous variables.

In each case, if we were certain about which of the two
authorities was correct, then we would know what to do about

the coordination problem. We would simply put all the policy
levers in the hands of the authority with the proper
objective or correct theory or accurate forecast, just as we
would want the instructor, not the student, to have ultimate
control over the learn—to—drive car.

PAGE 19

But, in fact, we rarely know this in any particular

case. And we certainly have no basis for setting out a
general constitutional rule predicated on one or the other
authority "always" being right. As a consequence, we may
conclude, as in the student driver example, that the best
strategy is to give some power to each authority, but at the
same time to give each some ability to cancel out the actions
o-F the other.

Let us examine each of the three possible reasons for
lack o-f coordination in turn, using the simple targets—

instruments framework. To keep the discussion as elementary
as possible, I assume (for thissection only) that there are
to targets and two instruments.

A. A FRAMEWORK

Figure 2 there are two targets: the gap between
actual and potential real output (y — y*), which serves as a
proxy for both unemployment (via Okun's law) and inflation
(via the short—run Phillips curve), and the share of
In

investment in GNP (I/Y). Similarly, there are two
instruments: monetary and fiscal policy. Point A indicates
the position which the economy is forecast to attain if
neither policy instrument is changed.

I-f the origin is

interpreted as the global optimum, then real output is too
high and the investment share is too low.

The vectors m and f, emanating from point A, indicate

Page 19A

Y

PAGE 20

the effect of a unit expansionary move of the monetary and
fiscal instrument, respectively.

monetary policies each raise output

Expansionary fiscal and

(thereby

lowering

unemployment and raising inflation), but monetary expansion
raises investment while fiscal policy expansion lowers it.
The line from A to 0 shows that a fully coordinated fiscal
and monetary plan can in this case achieve the global

optimum. And the dotted lines from A to B and from B to 0
indicate the two pieces of the coordinated policy plan:

fiscal restriction pushing the economy from A to B and
monetary expansion pushing from B to 0.

Having outlined this ideal situation, let us now
consider the various reasons for lack

of

coordination.

B. DIFFERENT OBJECTIVES

First assume that the monetary and fiscal authorities
agree both on the relevant economic theory and on forecasts

for all the important exogenous variables. They disagree
only over the objectives of economic policy.
-

Figure

3 adds one new wrinkle to Figure 2.

The target

of the fiscal authority is assumed to be point F, while the
central bank wants to push the economy to point N, which has

a lower level of real activity, instead. If the
administration is given control over both instruments, then

point F will result along the path ABF. But if the central
bank is dominant, then point N will result along the path

PAGE 21
ADM. Monetary policy will be less expansive and fiscal policy
more restrictive.

-

But what will happen if neither authority is in complete
control? That is difficult to say One possibility ——

though certainly not the only one ——

is

that the central bank

will put the monetary portion of its optimal plan (line DM)

into effect while the government follows the fiscal portion
of its own optimal plan (line AB). This is certainly an

instance that we would call "lack of coordination." But is
the outcome so bad?
Figure 3 shows that the economy will reach point C,
which is a kind of compromise between point F (the
administration's target) and point M (the Fed's target).

If

the truesocial optimum —— whatever that means! —— remains
point 0, then the "uncoordinated" outcome may conceivably be
superior to either of the two "coordinated" outcomes.
But, you may object, would it not be better still if the
fiscal and monetary authorities Jointly agreed to pursue

point 0? 0+ course. But this objection misses the point.
When there is true disagreement about what best serves the
commonweal, how can we expect a joint decision to be reached

except as a political compromise? And why should we think
this political compromise will be any better than point C?
The solution, of course, is simple to state and

impossible to achieve. We want policy makers to agree on
truly optimal targets, and then to pursue them in a

Page 21/i

F
0

b

3

PAGE 22
coordinated manner. But this is a counsel of
which gives

us

perfection

no gL(idanc.e in any particular instance. If

fiscal and monetary policy makers agree to pursue
inappropriate goals, the policy we get, while well

coordinated, may leave us unhappy.

C. DIFFERENT MODELS OF THE ECONOMY

issues arise if the Fed and the administration
on the objectives and the forecasts, but disagree about

Similar
agree
how

fiscal and monetary

instruments affect the

economy. To

cite a not— too— hypothetical example, suppose a supply—side

administration believes that it can expand the economy by tax
cuts without harming investment, while a monetarist central
bank believes that deficits crowd ut private investment.

Figure 4 depicts what may happen in such a case. The
fiscal authority believes that movements of the two
instruments in the expansionary direction have the effects
indicated by vectors I (tax cut) and m (money supply

increase). Its optimal plan shoots for point 0 by combining
expansionary monetary policy (line DO) with a tax hike (line

AD). But the monetary authority believes the relevant policy
multipliers are as indicated by vectors t and m, and so feels

that path ABO is the way to reach point 0. Along ABO, fiscal
policy is less contractionary and monetary policy is less
expansionary than along ADO.

What will happen? Once again there are many

Page 22A

.

//
•c:

yc1

PAGE 23

possibilities. If the fiscal authority's concept a-F the
optimal plan is promulgated, we will get point 0 if its model

is correct but point F if the Fed's model is correct. On the
other hand, if the Fed's optimal plan is accepted, we will
get point 0 i-f it has the correct model but point M i-f the

administration's model is correct.

An "uncoordinated" system, in which the Fed pursues its
version a-f optimal monetary policy while the administration
pursues its version a-F optimal -fiscal policy, leads to point

C if the Fed has the correct model and point 6 i-f the

government has the correct model. Coordination is obviously
better only i-f a probability blend o-F points 0 and F

(representing domination by the fiscal authority) or a-F

points 0 and M (representing domination by the monetary
authority) is clearly superior to a probability blend a-F
points C and 6.

It is by no means inevitable that this must

be true.

D. DIFFERENT FORECASTS
The case- in which the -fiscal and monetary authorities

agree on both the goals for economic policy and the model of
the economy —— a remote possibility, it must be admitted ——

requires

no further analysis. Since it is the discrepancies

between the targets and the state the economy would attain
with no change in policy that really matter, the formal
analysis a-f the case of different targets applies here

PAGE 2L
directly. We need only read Figure 3 backwards and view ABF
and ADM as two paths that emanate from different initial
points but lead to the same terminal point.

As before, the principle is obvious, but impossible to
implement: we want to give all the power to the policy maker

with the correct forecast. Good luck' Alternatively, if
neither policy maker has a monopoly on knowledge, we want a

weighted average forecast with appropriate weights. But who
decides on the weights, gets both authorities to use them,

and then makes sure that neither party shades his forecast to
make the weighted average come out more to his liking?
E. CONCLUSION

Where does all this leave us? It seems that whenever
fiscal and monetary policy appear to be uncoordinated e must

ask ourselves: who is right? If there is one clearly
correct policy maker, then the right thing to do is to
achieve coordination by giving it control over all the policy

levers. But if this is not the case, as it often will not
be, we are left with no clear a priori argument that more
coordination is better.

This should not be a foreign notion in a country that
has always prided itself on its constitutional system o-F

checks and balances. Dispersion of power is one safeguard
against misuse of power, in economic policy as elsewhere. We
know that checks and balances can sometimes lead to

stalemate, or to conflicts between different branches of

PAGE 25
government, but

in

many cases we view this as a reasonable

price to pay for protection against abuse of power. Is
economic policy so different?
One plausible viewpoint is that the fiscal authorities,

being elected officials, have the right social welfare
fLinction, and so their targets for policy should be accepted.

This seems a tenable attitude in a democracy. But consider
the following possibility. Suppose the body politics in its
1914 wisdom, realized that the president and Congress would

be Linduly swayed by short—run considerations, and so created
the

Fed as a counterweight to make sure that the long run did

not

get ignored.. Then we might

the

social welfare function of each newly— elected

not want to accept blithely

administration.

Besides, evon if we accept the validity of the
administration's objectives, we are still in a muddle over

what to do if we simultaneously believe that the Fed has a
better model of the economy and is better (or at least more

honest) at forecasting. Can we then force the Fed to reveal
its model and forecasts to the

a!1ministration? Freedom of

information argues that we should try, but past experience

suggests that we may not succeed. But in any case, how can
we be sure that the administration will accept the Fed's
model of the economy?

think we must face up to the obvious, though
uncomfortable, conclusion. When no one can be sure what is
I

PAGE 26

the right thing to do5 no one can ensure us that a unified
fiscal— monetary policy authority will do better than the
two— headed horse we now ride.

PAGE 27

IV. ALTERNATIVE MODELS OF COORDINATION

With the previous two sections as background this
section considers a variety of models of fiscal— monetary

coordination (or lack thereof). Two questions occupy our
attention here: What kinds of outcomes are likely to arise
from alternative interrelationships between the fiscal and
monetary authorities? and, Are these outcomes socially

attractive or not? The focus in this section is clearly at
the "constitutional" level, that is, on the kinds of
coordination mechanisms, if any, we would like to put in
place.

A. A SINGLE, UNIFIED POLICY MAKER
At one end o-F the spectrum is the case of. a single,

unified stabilization authority with control over all the

relevant instruments, whether fiscal or monetary. This
system could most plausibly be achieved in the United States
(and in other democracies) by subordinating the central bank
to the administration, as in Friedman's (1982) suggestion.

<9> But whether this would be a better system than what we
have now depends on the considerations outlined in the
previous two sections.
(1) How severe is our shortage of instruments in

PAGE 28
the relevant empirical sense? The greater the shortage,
relative to the targets we are pursuing, the greater the
potential gains from better coordination..

(2) How uncertain are we about the proper goals
and methods of stabilization policy, and also about which of

the two authorities has sounder views on these questions?
The

greater the

our eggs in one
On

uncertainty, the more risky it is to put all

basket.

balance1 it is far from clear that these

considerations lead to support for Friedman's suggestion.

If

we take output (or unemployment), the price level (or the

inflation rate), and the fraction of NP invested as the
three principal target variables, then the shor-tage of

instruments may not be a serious one. s pointed out in
Section II, the fiscal authorities cane in principle, use
control over government purchases, personal income tax rates,

and investment incentives such as depreciation allowances and
the investment tax credit to push all three of these target
variables to their desired level.s. regardless o-f what

monetary policy is doing. It may be that the more serious
coordination problem is getting the disparate elements of the

fiscal

team to work together.

On the other hand, it would seem that uncertainty about
which policies are best is pervasive in these days of

macroeconomic agnosticism. Debates over the appropriate
goals for policy and the effects of policy changes on the

PAGE 29
economy are perhaps more heated now than at any time since

the early days of the Keynesian revolution. While my own
feeling is that the extent of contemporary agnosticism is not

quite merited by the evidence, this is a minority view. And
I rather doLlbt that we would want a constitutional convention

today to place all authority over macroeconomic policy in the
hands of either the devoutly supply— side administration or
the putatively monetarist Federal Reserve.

It seems unlikely that the model of a single, unified
monetary— fiscal authority is descriptive of actual policy

making arrangements in the United States. The only
econometric study of fiscal—monetary coordination in the U.S.

that I know of, by Coldfeld and myself (1976) some years ago
concluded that "the abstraction of a single authority
conducting stabilization policy in the United States is Just

that

—— an abstraction with little or no empirical validity"

(p. 792). Using the MPS model to assess the effects of
policy on real GNP, we found a slight positive correlation
between the effects of fiscal and monetary policy over the

whole 1958—1974 period. But this was the net result of a
substantial positive correlation while Republican presidents
were responsible for fiscal policy and a negative correlation
during the Kennedy—Johnson years.

One final observation on the fully—coordinated case is

pertinent in this context. A single, unified policy maker
with an entire portfolio of fiscal and monetary instruments

PAGE 30

to manage may find it optimal to couple expansionary monetary

policy with contractionary fiscal policy or vice versa, Just
as an investor may find it optimal to buy one share long and
sell another short.

Thus the fact that we sometimes see fiscal and monetary
policy tugging aggregate demand in opposite directions is not

evidence that the two policies are uncoordinated. For
example, Figure 2 offered an example in which a properly
coordinated policy package requires contractionary fiscal

policy and expansionary monetary policy. While the example

certainty and an equal number o-f targets
instruments, the basic lesson is probably very robust and

is a simple one o-f

and

holds —— though not so sharply ——

in an uncertain world with

a shortage of instruments. It suggests that policy may
sometimes appear uncoordinated when it is not.

This point is neither academic nit—picking nor a
theoretical curiosum.. For example, the policy mix that

many

economists advocate right now combines a more expansionary
monetary policy with a more contractionary fiscal policy in

the coming years. This is offered as an example of well—
coordinated monetary and fiscal policy while the current

policy mix (tight money with loose fiscal policy) is supposed
to illustrate lack of coordination.. Clearly, coordination
does not imply correlation.

B. TWO UNCOORDINATED POLICY MAKERS
At

the

opposite end of the coordination spectrum comes

PAGE 31
the case of two independent authorities, one in charge of
fiscal policy and the other in charge of monetary policy,

with neither one dominating the other. This model may
approximate actual policy making arrangements in the
contemporary United States. <10>
When the two policy makers are at loggerheads, a policy
mix of tight money and loose fiscal policy frequently
results, with deleterious effects on interest rates and
investment. <11> What outcome does theory lead us to expect
when fiscal and monetary policy are in different hands and
the two parties cannot (or do not try to) reach agreement?
A natural way to conceptualize this situation is as a

two—person non—zero—sum game. And a natural candidate for
what will emerge, it seems to me, is the Nash equilibrium.

<12> Why the Nash equilibrium? Both policy makers
understand that they do not operate in a vacuum.. Each
presumably understands that he is facing an intelligent

adversary with a decision making problem qualitatively
similar to his own. Furthermore, this is a repeated game;
each policy maker has been here before and assumes that he
will be here again.' It seems natural that each would assume
that the other'will make the optimal response to whatever
strategy he plays.

If so, each will probably play his Nash

strategy.

Let us see how the Nash equilibrium works out in a

moderately realistic example. (See the payoff matrix in

PAGE '32

Figure 5.)

I assume that each policy maker has two available

strategies: contraction or expansion.

I also assume that

they order the outcomes differently, but know each other's

preference ordering. Specifically, the fiscal authority
(whose preference ordering appears below the diagonal in each

box) is assumed to favor expansionary policy. From its point
of view, the solution where both play "expansion" is best
(rank 1) and the solution where both play "contraction" is

worst (rank 4). The monetary authority (whose ordering
appears above the diagonal) wants to contract the economy to
fight inflation, and so orders these alternatives in the

opposite way. However, as between the two outcomes which
combine expansion and contraction, I assume that the two
players agree that easy money with a tight budget is a better
policy mix than tight money with a loose budget.

This explains the entries in the payoff matrix (Figure

5). Now where is the Nash equilibrium? If the Fed plays
"expansion," the administration will also play "expansion,"

and the Fed will wind up with its least— preferred outcome

(the lower righthand box). So the Fed will play
"contraction." Knowing this, the administration's best
strategy is "expansion," so the outcome will be the lower

lef€hand box. Clearly, this is the only Nash equilibrium for
this game. It also seems to be the most plausible outcome o-f
uncoordinated but intelligent behavior.
But notice something interesting about this outcome.

;it L

—r

—

-H t

-

-

Page' 3?A

H
Cot'-

_
___ ——

4:11 ii
-

I

i:ti1 1111

___

—-_-

—

—.-—

___

-t---4-—•--— —f— — —

__

—

___

5

-r-—r——r— ' —4----r-—y--H——---"--4---f—----T---

-

_±J

-

.

IlL: II
I

:i:
)':i

-

LlI

__

::: LT

Tf—r --—•----— r—-r--—-L--

_t
.

-l

.

...—.——.

--.-—-±--

PAGE 33

Both the Fed and the fiscal authority aQree that the upper
righthand box —— easy money plus tight fiscal policy ——

is

superior to the Nash equilibrium. Under full monetary—
fiscal coordination, they might well select this policy mix.

But, if they cannot reach an agreement, then the Nash
equilibrium —— a Pareto— inferior outcome ——

is

likely to

arise. Here is a case in which some degree of coordinatian
——

at

is

better than none even if we cannot decide which authority

least enough to avoid the inferior Nash equilibrium ——

has the right social welfare function. <13>
If this example

is

typical, then switching from a system

of two uncoordinated policy makers

to

one with a single,

unified policy maker miçht yield substantial gains. And
there is good reason to think that it is typical, because
Nash equilibria in two—person non— zero— sum games are very
often not Pareto optimal.

The problem, of course, is that achieving greater

coordination is more easily said than done. The two
authorities have reasons for disagreeing —— reasons which may

not be easily ironed out. However, this example illustrates
that full coordination (which is probably impossible in any
case)

may not be critical. What we need in this case is no

more than an agreement to consult with one another enough to

avoid outcomes that both parties view as inferior. Maybe
this is not too much to ask.
However, things become far less

clear if one

policy

FAGE 3Lt

maker lacks knowledge of either the preferences or the
economic model of the other. Then there is no particLilar
reason to think the Nash equilibrium will result, and other

solutions become equally plausible. For example, each player
may simply pursue his global optimum, ignoring the decision
c-f the other. <14> There are other possibilities as well.

C. LEADER—FOLLOWER ARRANGEMENTS
An alternative model of fiscal—monetary coordination,
intermediate between the two extremes, is a leader— follower

arrangement according to which policy maker A goes first nd
then policy maker B decides what to do in view a-f the prior
decision by A.

This scenario may sound moderately descriptive of
current U.S. institutions in that fiscal policy first
determines the budget deficit and then monetary policy

decides how mLch of this deficit to monetize. However,
things are a bit more complicated because monetary policy
decisions are made much mare -frequently (monthly?) than

fiscal policy decisions (annually?), so sometimes the Fed is
the leader.

Under a leader—follower arrangement, the follower runs
the show, albeit subject to same constraints placed on him by
the leader's prior decision.

If the follower has enough

instruments at his disposal, these constraints may not be
binding.

In this case, the leader—follower system is

PAGE 3 5

equivalent

to having a single stabilization

authority

(the

follower). But if the follower does not have enough
instruments, then the constraints imposed by the leader are
real ones and may preclude the attainment of the (follower's)
first—best optimum.

For this reason, the leader—follower system may work

very differently depending on whether the Fed or the
government is the leader.

I have noted above that, at least

in principle, a fiscal authority interested in targetting y,

P, and I/V can achieve its aims regardless of what monetary
policy does. Under these ideal circumstant:es, the leader—
follower system with the Fed as
giving

leader is

equivalent to

full control to the fiscal authorities.

However, the central bank enjoys no such luxury. Its
three traditional instruments (reserve requirements, open
market operations, and discount policy) probably give it only
one independent instrument for stabilization purposes. If
so, a leader— follower arrangement with the Fed as follower

is not at all equivalent to vesting full control in the Fed.
This asymmetry, it seems, is something of which the Fed is
fully aware. It may be why Chairman Volckersmiles so
infrequently.

Even without this asymmetry, the outcome will depend on

who leads and who follows. Suppose, first, that the fiscal

authority is the leader. It
and transfers where it

sets government spending, taxes,

wants them, in full knowledge that

PAGE 36
these decisions will evoke some response from the Fed.

In

the case of the simple game in Figure 5, the administration
can predict with confidence that the Fed will play
"contraction" regardless of

it will surely

the

fiscal—policy decision. So

play "expansion." We

get the Nash equilibrium

once again.

By a similar line of reasoning, it is easy to see that
the same Nash equilibrium will arise if the Fed is the leader

and the administration is the follower. However, this is not

a general result. In general, the two leader—follower
solutions are different, and each differs from the Nash
equilibrium <15>.
Under a leacier—follcwer arrangemEnt, the follower's

attitudes clearly influence the leader's decision because
when the leader makes his decision he takes into account the
anticipated response of the follower. For example, -Fear of
the high interest rates that the Fed might cause probably led
Congress to adopt a less expansive budget this year than it
otherwise would have chosen.

In a dynamic framework, still more possibilities for
policy interactions arise. The -follower knows, for example,
that his decision in period 1 will influence the
circumstances facing, and thus the decision made by, the
leader in period 2. He will probably take this into account

in making his period 1 decision. <16> At least potentially,
this dynamic interaction can reduce the loss from lack of

PAGE 37
coordination by getting the leader to adopt policies more in
tune with the objectives of the follower.

Continuing the

same example, by keeping a tight rein on credit the Fed

exercises a kind of discipline (albeit a minor one) over
fiscal policy so long as Congress abhors high interest rates
and believes that deficits will not be monetized at the

margin. This pushes fiscal decisions more in the direction
favored by the Fed. The follower is not a toothless tiger
even i-f he has but one instrument and many targets.

D. ONE PARTY FOLLOWS A NON—REACTIVE RULE

One way for the leader to avoid being manipulated by the
folJ.ower is to adopt a non—reactive policy rule such as the

famous k—percent rule for monetary policy. The key word here
is not "rule," but "non—reactive."

If the Fed (the follower)

knows that the government (the leader) is following a fiscal

rule that reduces spending whenever interest rates rise, it
can induce the government to cLit

spending by pushing up

interest rates. But no such possibilities arise if the
government follows a non—reactive rule..

While many fiscal rules (balancing the budget, balancing
the high—employment budget, etc.) have been suggested, none

of them seem to be non—reactive. No one, to my knowledge,
has advocated a k—percent rule -for government spending or for
tax receipts, though some o-F the suggestions for
constitutional restraints on spending come close.. <17>

PAGE 38
However, the most frequently suggested rule for the
conduct of monetary policy is non—reactive. And the desire

to free the Fed from the pressure to monetize bLidget deficits

may be one of the major motivations behind this rule.
If one policy maker follows a non—reactive rule, then
policy is —— by definition ——

perfectly

coordinated. One way

to think about non—reactive rules is as a way to give up some
freedom of action (the loss of one or more stabilization

policy instruments) in return for greater policy
coordination. If

the

non—coordination problem is big enough,

it may actually make sense to do this. To extend a well—worn
metaphor, if one o-F

your hands will simply fight with the

other, it really may be better to tie one hand behind your
back.

PAGE 39

V. SOME EXAMPLES OF MONETARY—FISCAL RULES

Let us consider some specific rules that have actually
been suggested for monetary and/or fiscal policy.. Are these
rules likely to increase or decrease

policy

coordination?

Are they likely to improve the fiscal— monetary mix? How are
they

likely to

function in the

short rung when the emphasis

is on stabilization, versus in the long run when the
emphasis is on growth?

A. HARD—CORE MONETARISM
The most famous and most

widely—discussed suggestion for

fiscal and monetary rules can be attributed, more or less
accurately, to Milton Friedman. Under Friedman's suggested

regime, which I will call

"hard—core monetarism," the Fed

would keep the money supply growing at

some constant rate and

the government would fix its spending and tax—transfer
schedules according to allocative considerations.. Both would
refuse to deviate from these r-ules for cyclical reasons.

Notice that under this regime both policy makers would be
following non—reactive rules..

One new element has entered the debate in recent years..

Some years ago, Solow and I (197.) showed that

policy of

holding the money supply constant and financing all deficits

PAGE 40
by issuing bonds could destabilize the economy, whereas
•financing deficits by money creation probably led to a stable

system. This finding, while derived in a very simple and
special case with fixed prices, has proven to be remarkably
rc,bLIst. Tobin and Buiter (1976) established a parallel

result for a full—employment economy with perfectly flexible
prices. Pyle and Turnovsky (1976) and others showed that
analogous results obtain in models intermediate between these

two extremes such as models with an expectations— augmented
Phillips curve.

Recently, McCallum (1981, 1982), Smith (1982) and
Sargent and Wallace (1981) have re—emphasized the importance
of this result for the hard—core monetarist policy rule.
Though using rather different models, each has made the same

point: that the system is liable to be dynamically unstable
under a policy that holds both fiscal policy (defined in

various ways by the different authors) and the money supply
(or its growth rate) constant.

The mechanism behind these results is not hard to

understand. Suppose some shock (such as an autonomous
decline in demand in a Keynesian model) opens up a deficit in
the government budget, and the hard—core monetarist regime is

in force. Bonds will be issued to finance the deficit. With
both interest rates and the number of bonds increasing,
interest payments on the national debt will be increasing.

But this increases the deficit still further, requiring even

PAGE i

larger

issues o-f bonds in subsequent periods, and the process

repeats..

population
will

I-f the real rate of interest exceeds the rate o-f

growth, then the real

supply of bonds per capita

grow without limit. Consequently, unless bonds are

totally irrelevant to other economic variables (as in the
non— Ricardian view o-f Barro (1974)), the whole economy will

explode. <18>

So the stabilizing properties of the hard—core
monetarist rule are open to serious question, to say the

least. What

about its longer—run

effects?

As a long—run defense against inflation, the monetarist
rule seems to be very e-ffective.. Although academic

scribblers can, and have constructed examples of continuous
inf].aton without money growth, my feeling is that policy

makers can justifiably treat these models as intellectual

curiosa and proceed on the assumption that a maintained money

growth rate will eventually control th rate of inflation.
But what about capital formation and real economic

growth? When a recession comes, the hard—core monetarist
rule takes no remedial

action.

I-f there is an important

accelerator aspect to investment spending, the slack demand
will retard capital formation. At the same time, the
issuance c-f new government bonds to finance the budget

deficits that recession brings will push up interest rates.

And this, too, w-ill retard invesment spending. The likely
result is

that

hard—core monetarism will not create a climate

PAGE

conducive to investment unless long—run predictability of the
price level is a more important determinant of investment
than I think it is. <19>
It seems to me that much of

the

concern over fiscal—

monetary coordination derives from concern over the

implications of the policy mix for investment. If so, then
hard—core monetarism, which eliminates the coordination issue

by eliminating policy, does not look to be a very good
sol ut i on.

B. BONDISM

As McCallum (1981) first pointed out, a potentially
better monetary—fiscal rule was actually suggested by
Friedman in his earlier 'A Monetary and Fiscal Framework -for

Economic Stability" (1948), but subsequently abandoned. For
lack of a better name, Gary Smith (1982) has suggested that

-we call the policy "bondism" because it treats bonds in much
the same way as monetarism treats money.
Under the old Friedman policy, both fiscal and monetary
policy

would be governed by rules, but the monetary rule

would be reactive. In particular, Friedman suggested that
government

spending and tax rates

allocative

considerations, as in the monetarist rule, but

be

set in accordance with

that all deficits be financed by money creation. Both
McCallum (1981, 1982) and Smith (1982) observed that this
policy regime is equivalent to. the "money financing" scenario

I-

PAGE '43

in Blinder and Solow (1973), and hence probably leads to a

stable system. On this score alone, it has much to recommend
it over monetarism.

But there is more to the story. Consider what would
happen when, for example, a deficiency o-F

aggregate

demand

brought on a recession. Falling incomes would open up a
budget deficit, and this would automatically induce the Fed

to open the monetary spigots. The economy would get a strong
anti—recessionary stimulus from monetary policy. And I do
mean strong. Think about the empirical magnitudes involved.
In the current U.S. economy, a 1 percentage point rise in the

unemployment rate adds about $25 billion to the budget

deficit. But the "money" that would be issued to finance the

deficit would be high—powered money. Adding $2 billion in
new bank reserves is a colossal injection of money; it would
increase total bank reserves by nearly 50 percent! Thus the

old

Friedman rule would seem to be an incredibly powerful

stabilizer. <20>
How does it score on the more long—run criteria? The

fact that recessions would automatical 1 y engender easy money
under the "bondist" policy augurs well for capital formation.

So does the notion that cyclical disturbances would probably

be quite muted. The one potential worry is over inflation.
The rule can concEivably lead to a lot of money creation in a
hurry, with subsequent inflationary consequences. But i-f the
fiscal part o-f the rule keeps the high—employment budget

PAGE '4
balanced, and if the economy fluctuates around its high—

employment norm, this should not be a major worry. Monetary
expansions should subsequently be reversed by monetary
contractions. <21> If the rule is believed, even large
injections of money should not raise the spectre of secular
inflation.

Finally, note that the old Friedman rule completely
eliminates the possibility that monetary and fiscal policy
might act at cross pLirposes. Under the rule, monetary policy
is expansionary if and only if fiscal policy (defined by the

automatic stabilizers) is expansionary. Also, the game—
theoretic considerations raised in Section III cannot arise
because neither policy maker has any decision to make.

While I have never been an advocate of rules, it seems

to me that all this adds up to a clear conclusion: the old
Friedman rule ought to get serious quantitative attention.

C. SOFT—CORE MONETARISM

The rule just discussed would make fiscal policy non-

reactive and monetary policy reactive. A symmetric approach
would call for a rule in which monetary policy is non—
reactive but fiscal policy reacts in a counter—cyclical
fashion.

John Taylor (1982a) has mentioned just such a

possibility as a way to put a meaningful counter— cyclical

policy regime in place without creating expectations that

inflationary shocks will be accommodated. Under this regime,

PAGE L5

monetary policy would adhere to a k—percent rule., but fiscal
policy would be used for counter—cyclical purposes. The
latter could be done either by rules or by discretion.
What can we say about this policy regime? Not much., of

course! until it has been given more theoretical and
empirical scrL(tiny. But a few observations can be made.
First, the coordination problem is de-Finitionally

solved. With no monetary pOlicy, it can hardly be in

opposition to fiscal policy. Second, the game—theoretic
aspects of stabilization policy would necessarily disappear.
The government could hardly try to "game" a k—percent rule.

Would cyclical stabilization be strong enough? That
cannot be answered in the abstract, since Taylor's policy mix

does not specify the strength of the fiscal stabilizers. But
it does not seem likely that they vould be as strong as the

stabiliz.ing

forces in Friedman's "hondist" rule.

Finally, there is the long—run capital formation issue.

Reducing the severity of recessions, I believe, can only do

good things for investment. But doing so with fiscal policy
probably means that interest rates would be pushed up by the
counter—cyclical policy. <22> So there could conceivably be a
trade—off between short—run stabilization and long—run
growth.

Page i6

APPENDIX

This appendix considers a monetary-fiscal policy game in

which each authority has three strategies: to expand aggregate
demand, to contract aggregate demand, or to do nothing. The
outcomes are ranked from 1 to 9 in the payoff matrix in Figure 6,
with the rankings of the fiscal authority once again below the
diagonal and the monetary rankings above.

Circles indicate the best fiscal response to each monetary
strategy and squares indicate the best monetary response to

each fiscal strategy. It 1s clear that box G, in the lower
lefthand corner, is the only Nash equilibrium. As in the
2 by 2 example in the text, monetary policy is contractionary

and fiscal policy is expansionary. We can also see that the
Nash equilibrium is Pareto dominated by a variety of other

outcomes: boxes B, E, C, and F.
If the Fed is the leader and the government is the follower,

the solution is box F; this is the best the Fed can do if
constrained to the fiscal reaction function (the boxes with

circles). By similar reasoning, we see that box B will arise
if the government leads and the Fed follows. In this example
either leader-follower equilibrium is superior to the Nash
equilibrium (though the leader has more to gain).
Another possible outcome of complete lack of coordination is
that each authority ignores the other and shoots for its

global optimum. In the example, that would mean that each
does nothing and box E results. This outcome Pareto dominates
the Nash equilibrium, but is in turn Pareto dominated by box
C (in which fiscal policy is contractionary while monetary
policy is expansionary).

Monetary Policy

contract

0
.0
I-I

Nothing

fitS

.0
Cl)

n-I
[t4

Expand

Figure 6

Page 6A

PAGE 7
FOOTNOTES
1. The irony of having such a subtle policy mix advocated by
those who deride "fine tuning" is almost overwhelming.

2 The former has been stressed by, among others, Christ
(1968) and Blinder and Solow (1973). The latter has been
stressed by, among others, Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1981) and
Sargent and Wallace (1981).
3. The stability of the economy under this last policy has
been called into question. More on this later.

4. For a more detailed discussion of this issue, see
Feldstein (1982).

.

Indeed, under the hypothesis advanced by Barro (1974) ——

that

each generation has an operative bequest motive based on
the next generation's lifetime utility —— the period from now
to the end o-F time is relevant.
6. See, for example, Blinder (1981), Hall and Mishkin (1982),
Hayashi (1982), or Mankiw (1981). Bernanke (1981) is more
optimistic about the PIH.

7. For an interesting discussion of forward—looking versus
backward—looking wage contracts, and how we might distinguish
between them empirically, see Taylor (1982b).
8. Divergent expectations have been emphasized recently by,
among others, Phelps (1981) and Frydman (1981).
9. It is hard to conceive of the other roLte: putting all the
fiscal policy instruments in the hands of the central bank.
10.
In reality, things are more complicated still because
the President and Congress often disagree over national
economic policy. A model of three stabilization authorities
may be better.

11. The opposite policy mix —— tight budgets and easy money
—— while conceivable, seems to be rarely encountered.

12. The Nash equilibrium concept is defined as follows. Each
player does what he would if he knew what the other player
was going to do.
It is an equilibrium in the sense that the
two resulting strategies are consistent with one another;
once the game is played, neither player has any desire to
change his decision. Not all games have a unique Nash
equilibrium. The fiscal— monetary game to be considered here

PAGE'8

does.
13. The example analyzed here is a case of what game
theorists call the Prisoners' Dilemma..
14. In the simple example of Figure 5. this pair of
strategies also leads to the Nash equilibrium. But this is
not generally true. A more complicated example in which the
Nash and other alternative solutions differ is offer-ed in the
Appendix.

15. See the example in the Appendix.
16. And, a-F course, the leader understands this when he makes
his period 1 decision! No wonder game theory is so hard.

17. Indeed, it may be possible to view the Reagan economic
program as a non—reactive fiscal rule that will cut the
ratios a-f government spending and tax recipts to GNP
regardless a-f the consequences for interest rates,
unemployment, and inflation.
18. In a complex system, many mare things are going on than I
can describe in a single paragraph. For example, income and
prices are changing, with important consequences -for the
budget deficit. Yet the basic mechanism described here seems
to come shining through in all the models.
19.
Or unless inflation itself is damaging to investment
via, for example, the deterioration of the real value a-f
depreciation allowances. Thi.s last factor has been stressed
in a number o-f places by Feldstein. See, among others,
Feldstein (1980b).

Maybe too powerful. This exercise in casual empiricism,
in conjunction with the fact that the effects a-f high—powered
money on income come with a distributed lag, raises worries
that the rule might acti.tally destabilize the economy by
over—reacting to disturbances. The theoretical papers
mentioned earlier deny this possibility, but they ignore
distributed lags. The issue seems worth investigating.
20.

21. This statement is predicated on defining high employment
as approximately the natural rate. With a Humphrey—Hawkins
type definition of high employment, the old Friedman rule can
lead to inflationary disaster.

22. This could be avoided if expansionary fiscal changes
took the -form, say, a-f liberalizing depreciation allowances
or raisjnQ the investment tax credit. But the personal
income tax and certain government expenditures appear to be
the prime candidates to bear the stabilization burden.

Page 9
REFERENCES

Alan J. Auerbach and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "National Savings,

Economic Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation," NBER
Working Paper No. 729, August 1981.
Robert J. Barro, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," Journal of
Political Econorny, November/December 1974, pp. 1095-1117.

Ben S. Bernanke, "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Expenditure on

Automobiles: Evidence from Panel Data," mimeo, Stanford
University, September 1981.
Alan S. Blinder, "Temporary Income Taxes and Consumer Spending,"
Journal of Political Economy, February 1981, pp. 26—53.

Alan S. Blinder and Stephen M. Goldfeld, "New Measures of Monetary
and Fiscal Policy, 1958—1974," American Economic Review,
v. 66, 1976, pp. 780—796.

Alan S. Blinder and Robert M. Solow, "Does Fiscal Policy Matter?",
Journal of Public Economics, 1973, pp. 319—337.

Carl F. Christ, "A Simple Macroeconomic Model with a Government
-

Budget Constraint," Journal of Political Economy, v. 76,
January/February 1968, pp. 53—67.

Martin S. Feldstein, "Tax Rules and the Mismanagement of Monetary
Policy," American Economic Review. v. 70, 4ay 1980a, pp.
182—186.

Martin S. Feldstein, "Fiscal Policies, Inflation, and Capital Formation,

American Economic Review, v. 71, September 1980b, pp.
636—650.

Page 50

Martin S. Feldstein, "Government Deficits and Aggregate Demand,"
.Journal of Public. Economics,v. 9, 1982, PP. 1—20.

Milton Friedman, "A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic
Stability," American Economic Review, v. 38, June 1948, pp.
245—264.

Milton Friedman, "Monetary Policy: Theory and Practice," Journal
of Money, Credit, and Banking, v. 14, February 1982, pp.
98—118.

Roman

Frydman, "Individual Rationality, Decentralization and the
Rational

Expectations Hypothesis," mirneo, New York University,

November 1981.

Robert E. Hall and Frederic S. Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on
Households," Econometrica, 1982.
Fumio Hayashi, "The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption:
A Cross-Sectional Analysis," NBER Working Paper No. 882,
April 1982.
-

N. Gregory Mankiw, "Hall's Consumption Hypothesis and Durable Goods,"
mimeo, MIT, January 1981.

Bennett T. McCallum, "Monetarist Principles and the Money Stock Growth
Rule," American Economic Review, v. 71, May 1981, pp. 134—138.

Bennett T. McCallum, "Are Bond—Financed Deficits Inflationary? A
Ricardian Analysis," mimeo, Carnegie—Mellon University,
May 1982.

Edmund S. Phelps, "The Trouble with 'Rational Expectations' and the

Page 51

Problem of Inflation Stabilization," mimeo, Columbia University,

October 1981.

David H. Pyle and Stephen J. Turnovsky, "The Dynamics of Government
Policy in an Inflationary Economy: An 'Intermediate Run'
Analysis," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, v. 8.
November 1976, pp. 411—437.

Thomas J. Sargent and Neil Wallace, "Some Unpleasant Monetarist
Arithmetic," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
Review, v. 5, Fall, 1981, pp. 1—17.

Gary Smith, "Monetarism, Bondism, and Inflation," Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, v. 14, May 1982, pp. 278—286.
John B. Taylor, "Establishing Credibility: A Rational Expectations

Viewpoint," American Economic Review, v. 72, May l982 pp.
81—85.

John B. Taylor, "Rational Expectations and the Invisible Handshake,"
Forthcoming in volume in honor of Arthur Okun, 1982/.

James Tobin and Willem Buiter, "Long—Run Effects of Fiscal and Monetary
-

POlicy

on Aggregate Demand," in J.L. Stein (ed.), Monetarism,

North—Holland, 1976, pp. 273-309.

