                    NBER WORKING. PAPER SERIES




          EQUILIBRIUM AND DISEQUILIBRIUM EXCHANGE RATES




                        Rudiger Dornbusch



                      Working Paper No. 983




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          September 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBERts research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #983
                                                    September 1982




                      ABSTRACT



   EquiliiDriurn   and Disequilibrium Fchange Rates

The paper reviews theoretical develorents in the field of exchange
rate theory and assesses the empirical evidence. Since the empirical
evidence does not lend support to the nrdels that have been formulated,
a number of reasons for that failure are suggested. These include
the argument that the current account has been overrated as an
exchange rate determinant and that the role of "news" as yet remains
to be tested in an extensive way.
Four exchange rate problems are identified as possibly giving justification
to exchange market intervention or other policies. They are the possibility
of speculative bubbles, the peso problem, the use of irrelevant information
and the problem of real appreciation in the case of monetarist stabilization.
In each case the exchange rate can deviate fran furidarrentals, following
the asset market rather than the goods market,and thus disturbing
macroeconanic equilibrium.




                                                  Rudiger Dornbusch
                                                  E52—357 M.I.T.
                                                  Cainbridge,Mass. 02139
                                                      (617) 253—3648
                                                                        Revised

                                                                      June 1982




                  EQUILIBRIUM AND DISEQUILIBRIUM EXCHANGE RATES*

                                Rudiger   Dornbusch

                       Massachusetts Institute of Technology



          Milton Friedman's 1950 essay "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates"

    brought persuasive arguments against exchange control and fixed exchange

    rates and established firmly the profession's preference for flexible rates.

The case rested on a triple advantage: no need for direct controls and

inefficiency, the advantage of monetary sovereignity and the convenience of

adjusting the exchange rate rather than the entire domestic price structure.

The analogy with daylight savings time plainly made the case that "it is far

simpler to allow one price to change, namely, the price of foreign exchange,

than to rely upon changes in the multitude of prices that together constitute

    the internal price structure."1 When the collapse of the Bretton Woods

system led to flexible rates the profession accepted this as progress; that

belief continues and predisposes us to see the experiment with flexible

exchange rates as successful.

          It is not always easy to believe that the experiment has been an

outright success. We do observe large, apparently self—reversing movements

in exchange rates, both rioiuinal and real. More importantly, we often have no

good idea, either in theory or more Informally, in what manner the current

level of the exchange rate represents an equilibrium. It is at such times,


•      *Fiflaucial support was provided by a grant from The National Science
Foundation. I wish to acknowledge helpful discussions with Olivier
Blanchard, Jeffrey Frankel, Alberto Giovannini, Dale Henderson, Maurice
Obstfeld and Robert Shiller.

          1Friedman (1953), p. 173.
                                    —2—



of course, that we are reminded of the history of flexible exchange rates in

the 1920s, especially the French episode, and the argument of the time that

exchange rates were moved, under the influence of speculation, in ways

incompatible with fundamentals and aggravating the problems of domestic

stabilization. That view had been advanced by Nurkse (1944, p. 118):

•             "...anticipations are apt to bring about their own realization.
           Anticipatory purchases of foreign exchange tend to produce or at
           any rate to hasten the anticipated fall in the exchange value of
           the national currency, and the actual fall may set up or strenthen
           expectations of a further fall.... Exchange rates in such
           circumstances are bound to become highly unstable, and the
           influence of psychological factors may at times be overwhelming.
           French economists were so much impressed by this experience that
           they developed a special 'psychological theory' of exchange
           fluctuations, stressing the indetertainant character of exchange
           rates when left to find their own level in a market swayed by
           speculative anticipations." (p. 118.)



       Nurkse's view was challenged by Friedman (1953, pp. 176—77) who

argued that no professional case had been made to the effect that speculation

was destabilizing. On the contrary, speculation against the currency only

anticipated a depreciation bound to come of its own. That criticism has been

largely endorsed by the profession and ratified in exchange rate models where

the current equilibrium exchange rate correctly reflects the anticipated path

of future (exogeneous) money. The exchange rate then is merely a barometer

of a government's inflationary intentions.

      But such an interpretation misses an important point in Nurkse's

interpretation, namely, that there is an exchange rate indeternilnancy because

financial policies, which supposedly anchor the system, are in fact

endogeneous and may be substantially caused by movements in the exchange

rate. It is true that the exchange rate only reflects the possible paths the
                                    —3—



economy might take. But the likelihood of a particularly adverse path

becomes higher once speculators' recognition of that possibility is reflected

in the exchange rate and, from there, in prices and the requirements of

monetary accommodation. This, of course, was very much the scenario that

Nurkse was commenting on in pre—Poincare France.

         The possibility that flexible rates may adversely affect the

macroeconomy is certainly coming to be recognized. The idea of "virtuous and

vicious circles" makes that point, as does the notion that flexible rates

make the Phillips Curve steeper.2 But while it is certainly recognized that

flexible exchange rates may not do their work, this is not yet a commonly

shared belief. Indeed, it is only the controversy over sterling in 1979/80,

the Yen in 1978/79 and the current controversy over the dollar that loudly

suggest a fundamental problem with our exchange rate system.3

       In fact there appear to be several separate problems. One emerges

from international real interest differentials that arise in the course of

monetary stabilization which lead to real appreciation and disruptive

macroeconomic effects abroad. A second is associated with speculative

bubbles that remove the exchange rate from a path dictated by fundamentals.

In either event the exchange rate assumes a life of its own that may be

seriously at odds with macroeconomic stability and that calls for remedies.

This is also the case when extraneous beliefs join fundamentals in

influencing the market rate.

      There is certainly one thing the experience with flexible rates has

done and that is to disillusion even the true believer on the subject of

monetary sovereignity under flexible rates. That there is no sovereignity

       2See Gray and Wallich (1979) and Dornbusch and Krugman (1977).
       3See Appendix 6 to the Treasury and Civil Service Report on Monetary
Policy, U.K. House of Commons, London, 1981.
                                     —4—



but rather sharp conflict of interest is brought out by the present dollar

problem.

       The Financial Times of January 26, 1982 in a commentary entitled "$

Rise unaermines European Bid to cut interest rates" notes:


               "The fresh wave of higher U. S. interest rates threatens
           to wreck the independent initiative launched last week by the
           Bank of England, the West German Bundesbank and other EEC
           central banks to lower the cost of credit in Europe and speed
           up economic recovery.
               The sharp fall in sterling and other leading European
           currencies against the dollar yesterday may prolong the
           European recession just as an upturn had seemed likely.
               This is because EEC central banks may be forced to take
           action to prevent currency depreciation triggering off fresh
           inflation."



       That these concerns go beyond technicalities of day—to—day money

markets is represented in a follow—up article on January 28th: "Germans

worried by U. S. deficit" which notes:


              "However, despite the efforts of European central banks to
            coordinate a modest fall in interest rates. last week, it is
            stressed here that Europe's scope to "uncouple itself from
            U. S. developments remains very small. This is said to apply
            to West Germany despite its improved current account performance
            and relatively low inflation rate.
               Bonn feels that the upshot may well be a further fall in
            investment, a rise in unemployment and more social unrest. "All
            elements of a depression are there," one official stressed.



       This paper will take the perspective that exchange rates in the 1970s

have not worked well. From that point of view, we attempt to establish in

what ways the exchange rate system may have fallen short of what theory and
                                    —5—



policy beliefs suggest and what possible remedies there are. In the first

section exchange rate theories and some empirical evidence are reviewed. The

section concludes that theories have across the board failed to account for

exchang'e rate behavior. The next section identifies four specific policy

problems: bubbles, the peso—problem, extraneous beliefs and the dollar

problem. Each deals with the possibility of disequilibrium exchange rates,

although in different, possibly overlapping ways. The last section discusses

(and dismisses) intervention as a policy tool and makes a case for real

interest equalization taxes.



1. Exchange Rate Theories

       This section develops the main theoretical approaches to exchange rate

determination and comments cursorily on their empirical success. The

relevant theories are tha monetary approach and the current account

approaches in two variants emphasizing imperfect substitutability of assets

and goods respectively.

The Monetary Approach

       The monetary approach, no doubt, is the most popular model of

exchange rate determination, anchored as it is in two outrageous simplifica—

tions of the economic scene: purchasing power parity and the quantity

theory. The model assumes that national price levels are instantaneously

flexible and determined by money supplies and real money demands. Moreover,

with the "law of one price" prices are equalized internationally with

exchange rate movements offsetting divergent national price trends,
                                       —6—



       The monetary approach gives rise to an exchange rate equation that

includes relative nominal money supplies, relative velocities and relative

levels of real income. In log form the exchange rate equation then becomes:



(1)         e   nrm* + (v_v*) —   (y_y*)


where e is the dollar price of foreign exchange and m,v,y are nominal money,

velocity and real income, an asterix denoting the foreign country. Early

endeavors with this equation were not unsuccessful, but by now there are, I

believe, no more serious claims for the empirical relevance of this model.

The Terms of Trade Model.

       The monetary model is highly restrictive in its assumption of the law

of one price. This is apparent when we move to a transactions version of

this model. Suppose q denotes the log of the expenditure deflator, a, is

real spending and v now denotes the expenditure velocity. Home money market

equilibrium can be stated in terms of the determinants of the expenditure

deflator:



(2)         q   p+v—a



where q is a weighted average of home and import prices:



       For reference see, for example, Dornbusch (1980). See, however, the
discussion in the Economic Report of the President, 1982.
                                         —7—



(3)        q   xp + (l—x) (e+p*)



With a similar specification for the foreign country, and assuming foreign

expenditure on domestic goods to have a share x < x, we derive an exchange

rate equation of the form:



           e = [(m_m*) ÷   (v_v*)   —   (a_a*)]   + (x_x*)e
(4)




where e   e+p*_p denotes the terms of trade.

       The extended model maintains the prediction of the monetary approach

to the extent that changes in money or velocity are translated into

equiproportionate 4epreciation, given the terms of trade. But now there is

another source of exchange rate movement, namely, terms of trade changes.

Changes in the equilibrium terms of trade affect the equilibrium exchange

rate to an extent that depends, among other factors, on the differential in

expenditure shares, x-x.

       The extended model is readily applied, in the manner of Fleming and

Mundell, to the effects of a shift in demand toward domestic goods. Suppose

capital is perfectly mobile., and that the home country faces a given,

unchanging foreign level of spending and interest rates. Assume also that

product prices are given. Figure 1 shows the determination of the exchange

rate at point A. The IS schedule is positively sloped because a real

depreciation creates demand and raises output. The LM schedule is negatively

sloped since an appreciation lowers the price level and raises the real money
                          -7a-




     e




    e0



                                 LM

         Is          ,7
                    Is'
                                      V
     0                    yo
/
      Figure   1•
                                      —8—



stock thus making room for a real expansion. Figure 1 shows that a shift in

demand toward domestic goods will raise income and lead to an appreciation.

The expansion will be larger the larger the share of importables in the

deflator. By contrast, a large import share in the expenditure deflator will

tend to dampen the expansionary impact of a money expansion.

      Even before we move to issues of imperfect asset substitution or

expectations, exchange rate determination is already a macroeconomic problem

involving the interaction of goods and asset markets. Consider now the

extension to the case where output adjusts gradually to long—run excess

demand and exchange rate expectations conform to perfect foresight. Under

the assumption that capital mobility is perfect, home nominal Interest rates

equal those abroad plus the anticipated rat of depreciation:



(5)




In Figure 2, we show the phase diagram, noting that now the rate of

depreciation ,   Is   a determinant of home velocity. From an initial

equilibrium at A a monetary expansion leads to an immediate depreciation at

point A' on the saddlepath. The exchange rate in the short run must

overshoot as output expansion is sluggish. At A' the exchange rate has over—

depreciated and thus anticipated appreciation lowers velocity relative to a

static expectations world. Over time the economy converges to point A as

output expands to meet the increase in demand. The economy proceeds from A'

to A' along the perfect foresight path PP.

       The analysis of expectations is readily extended in three directions.

One is to add sluggish price adjustment and thus allow long run neutrality.

The second extension is to consider the impact of anticipated future shocks.
               -Ba-




e
                      Is



                                     P


                               'LM (=O)

                           LM(é=O)




                                         y

    Figure 2
                                      —9—



Third, and perhaps most important, we can introduce an explicit consideration

of the current account as a source of dynamics. Current account imbalances,

by redistributing net assets internationally, may affect demand to the extent

that marginal spending patterns differ. If this is the case, current account

imbalances lead to changes in equilibrium relative prices and thus to changes

in the exchange rate.

       We have reached the point where the current exchange rate is

determined not only by current monetary factors——the relative supply and

demand of money——but also by prospective monetary factors as well as the

present and future demand for goods. An anticipated fiscal expansion, for

example, will lead to immediate currency appreciation even though the demand

expansion has, as yet, not materialized. But there is one important

conplication still left out, namely, the possibility of imperfect

substitution among assets.

perfect Asset Substitutability

       If asset holders are risk averse, and returns on securities

denominated in different currencies are not perfectly correlated, risk premia

may emerge that depend on relative asset supplies.

       A risk premium modifies the relation between interest rates and

expected depreciation In (5). The equation now becomes:



(6)         i =   i* +   + (B/ ,   w/w)     l > O 2 0


where B denotes the supply of domestic outside nominal assets while W and W'

are home wealth and world wealth all measured in home currency. The extent
                                    —10—



to which the risk premium increases with a rise in the relative supply of

domestic currency assets depends on the degree of risk aversion and the

variance of relative asset returns. The exchange rate affects the variables

B/W and wIW since it influences the domestic currency value of world wealth.

A depreciation lowers the relative supply of domestic assets and domestic

relative wealth.

       The risk premium model of asset markets, in conjunction with money and

goods markets, extends the range of exchange rate determinants which now

include the current and prospective relative supplies of nominal outside

assets and, possibly, the distribution of world wealth. It is interesting to

note, in this context, that imperfect asset substitutability need, by no

means, establish a link between current accounts and the exchange rate.

Frankel (1979) among others, has noted that what is at issue in the risk

premium is the relative supply of nominal outside assets. Privately financed

current account imbalances will not affect the world supplies of outside

assets. Furthermore, even if the deficits were publicly financed there is no

necessity that they be financed in terms of home currency denomination. More

importantly, as has been noted, the relative supply of outside nominal assets

is also affected by intervention and budget financing, thus obliterating any

special role for the current account.

       There remains the question whether current accounts, by redistributing

world wealth, interact with a preferred domestic habitat in portfolios to

change the risk premium and therefore, affect exchange rates. As Krugman

(1980) has shown this possibility requires a coefficient of risk aversion

larger than unity. Again it must be borne in mind that the relevant measure

of wealth in the risk premium will also include real assets so that there is
                                      —11—




typic?      no direct relation between the current account alone and the

distribution of world wealth. A stock market boom will have much larger

effects on relative wealth than likely current account imbalances.

Empirical Evidence

         Claims for empirically successful exchange rate equations are

disappearing rapidly. Recent papers by Frankel (1982), Isard (1981), Rogoff

and Meese (1981) and Hacche and Townsend (1981) all conclude that

structural models of exchange rate determination all fail to account well for

actual exchange rate behavior. This is the case whether a monetary approach

is adopted, a Mundell—Fleining—Frankel model or models that include, in

addition, current account or relative wealth variables.

         Hacche and Townsend (1981, p. 253) summarize their findings as

follows:
                 "The predominant impresion left by our results is one
               of failure: we have not succeeded in finding empirical
               regularities in the data to help explain in any satisfac—
               tory way the fundamental determinants of sterling's effect-
               ive exchange rate during the floating rate period. Our
               research has failed, often dramatically to yield support
               for any of the theories tested...."



         The same conclusion is reached by Meese and Rogoff (1981, P. 23) who

conclude:


               "major bilateral exchange rates and the trade weighted dollar
               are all well approximated by a random walk. The representative
               structural models do not perform well out—of—sample; they
               predict poorly even when uncertainty about future values of the
               explanatory variables is removed."



         Isard (1981) and Artus (1982) similarly find that their tests are

unsatisfactory except with the inclusion of a Reagan—dummy.
                                       —12—



          There are some reasons why the tests may be fairing poorly. First the

models tend to give too much emphasis to money supply disturbances neglecting

shifts in money demand, fiscal and demand disturbances which, of course, are

as impotant as money supply changes. The neglect of demand and fiscal

variables in empirical work is, in fact, quite complete.

          The more important point is that exchange rate testing has given no

room to the role of anticipated future events. But it should be clear that

when major changes in the determinants of exchange rates are anticipated they

must affect the level of the exchange rate, given current values of the

exchange rate determinants. This point is readily made with the help of

Figure 3. The economy sits initially at point A and the expectation of a

future increase in money and government spending, respectively, occur. The.

exchange rate will immediately jump in response to the news. In response to

an anticipated future money increase it will depreciate to A', in response to

anticipated higher spending or tax cuts it will appreciate to A".5 Thus

given current money and fiscal policy, today's exchange rate may be any of

three, A, A' or A" depending upon whether we anticipate easier money or

easier fiscal policy or neither. Neglecting these "news" effects on exciange

rates may thus eliminate most of the explanatory variables for the observed

noise. This is more likely to be the case the more proximate and larger the

anticipated changes.

          The same point can be made, using the equation for the relationship

between interest differentials, depreciation and the risk premium. Noting

that in (6)      denotes the expected rate we can write:6

(7)                        actua1 =      + 4(B/W,W/W) + "news"


       5Wilson (1977) and Rogoff (1979) have studied the role of anticipated
future disturbances in exchange rate dynamics.
       60n this point see Mussa (1976), Dornbusch (1978, 1980) and Isard
(1980).
                    12 a—




e

                \\               Is




e0
                                 p1


                                  / /    / Is'

                              / / \
                            /
                       /          pi,
                                        "LM' (=O)




                                            y
               yo
    Figure 3
                                    —13--




where we have used the fact that with rational expectations the actual

depreciation rate is equal to the expected rate plus a white noise error or

"news." Equation (7) singles Out news as one of the determinants of

movements in the exchange rate. Given current income, money and prices as

well as the relative supplies of assets, the exchange rate may appreciate or

depreciate because the expectation of a change in exchange rate determinants

emerges. While that idea has been immediately accepted in the literature and

indeed, reminds us of the l920s discussion, it has received practically no

empirical testing.7

       The literature differs sharply from the extensive and careful testing

which expectations based macroeconomics has received in closed economy

applications. Research here has particularly focussed on questions that run

quite parallel: the effect of money, unanticipated versus anticipated, on

unemployment and the real rate of interest.8 It remains a question whether

the very poor empirical performance of exchange rate models is due to a

failure to distinguish news and anticipated realizations of the determinants

of exchange rates. The work on anticipated future disturbances on the time

path of exchange rates, for example, has amply shown that exchange rates may

well lead anticipated money.

       7See, however, Black (1972), Frankel (1981), Dornbusch (1980), Engle
and Frankel (1982) and Cornell (1982b).
       8For references see Mishkin (1982).
                                       —14—




2. Four Problems

          In this section, we sketch four problems that may have arisen under

the flexible exchange rate regime of the 1970s. The first is the adverse

side efect of inappropriate monetary—fiscal policy mixes. The second

concerns the role of expectations about future policy changes that render

current policy more difficult, a variant of the peso problem. The third

concerns the possibility of speculative bubbles. The fourth involves

extraneous beliefs.

Bubbles

          Important research on the volatility of asset prices has forced the

question whether asset prices move "too much" given the path of fundamentals

such as interest rates or dividends. (See, for example, Grossman and

Shiller (1980).) The same question arises in the context of exchange rates.

Observing real exchange rates in Chart 1, where we show the Yen and DM

rates, we might ask whether this large movement in real exchange rates is

warranted by beliefs about the fundamental determinants of exchange rates.

      Work by Blanchard (1980), Blanchard and Watson (1982) andTirole

(1980) among others discusses the conditions under which speculative bubbles

or cumulative divergences from the path warranted by fundamentals may arise.

An interesting model is that of Blanchard (1980) where risk neutral

speculators are aware that a particular asset price is off the path of

fundamentals. Indeed, they expect with probability a a crash and probability

1—a the continuation of the bubble.

          Suppose domestic and foreign assets are perfect substitutes. The

interest rate differential must equal the expected rate of depreciation:
                                              —14a-




                   CHART 1
                   Real Effective ExchancTe Rates
                     (1975=100)



125




95




       1      1         1.         1      1            I     1.     1
      1?4   1975       1976       1T?7   1973         179   1930   j93


       ource: II4F
                                      —15—




(8)                 =




where        is the expected future exchange rate. But given the

probabilities a associated with a craéh to the fundamental rate, eand 1 — a

of a continuing bubble, we have:




(8a)          e+1—e =
                        i1 +a—        —
                        1          (e—e)


         Equation (8a) describes a "rational" bubble. The exchange rate in the

absence of a crash depreciates at a rate determined by three factors: the

interest differential, the probability of a crash and the undervaluation,

e—e. The more undervalued the exchange rate and the higher the probability

of a crash the more rapid the rate of depreciation. A positive interest

differential implies depreciation, more so the higher the probability of a

crash.

         Leaving aside interest differentials, the equation shows the

fundamental problem of bubbles: the more overvalued the exchange rate the

more rapidly it is reciating, the more undervalued the more rapidly the

rate is preciating. Bubbles are not self—correcting except by a crash.

Bubbles, while they last, involve the possibility of temporary, cumulative

deviations from fundamentals.

         The presence of interest differentials introduces the possibility

that the exchange rate can remain unchanged even though there is over or

undervaluation. From (Ba) we have the special case where the exchange rate

remains constant:

(9)             —
                    e   (j_j*)/a
                                   —16—



Thus a positive interest differential in favor of the home country can

sustain an overvaluation while a negative interest differential can sustain

an undervaluation.9 The bubble will be larger the larger the interest

differential and the probability of a crash. For example, a 20% probability

of a crash and a five percentage point interest differential sustain a 25%

overvaluation!

       The analysis has shown the possibility of temporary deviations of the

exchange rate from the fundamental rate warranted by "the" model or

fundamentals. Why should we be concerned about such deviations? The

obvious reason is that given the path of policy variables an exchange rate

bubble will have real effects on competiveness, inflation, and employment.

It represents a macro—shock that, if possible, we would want to offset. The

possibility of rational bubbles is important to recognize because it

represents a fundamental departure from the view that markets do things

right, all the time.

The Peso Problem

       In the case of a bubble, all market participants are aware that the

current exchange rate deviates from the fundamental rate, but the bubble may

be sustained by new entrants and the belief that it may grow fast enough,

thus providing existing asset holders with a commensurate return. A

different kind of exchange rate problem emerges when expectations about the

path of fundamentals affect the current level of the exchange rate. Such a

possibility, particularly when it involves the consideration of a large

change in policy regime, has an effect on the current exchange rate and,

therefore, on the difficulty of macroeconomic management. Specifically, the

expectation of expansionary policy (whether justified or not) will lead to

       91n (8a) and (9) the fundamental rate e is constant. In a more
complete model the question must be raised whether this is consistent with
nominal interest differentials.
                                   —17—



current actual depreciation and thus to current inflationary pressures ahead

of any expansion. Conversely, the belief in tightening will lead to

appreciation and deflationary pressure.

       This is the so—called "peso—problem."1° Salant and Henderson (1976)

have shown that it is a generic problem of asset markets where speculators

have to recognize the possibility of a future change in regime that affects

future asset prices. The point is illustrated with a simple log—linear

monetary model of the exchange rate in the tradition oLMussa (1975).

Suppose there is full purchasing power parity and price flexibility and that

real money demand depends on expected inflation or depreciation:



(10)
            m_e_bCt+i_et)

Suppose also that next period and ever thereafter the money stock is with

probability (i—a) current in and with probability a equal to    + x. The

forward solution to (10) yields a level of the current exchange rate:



                        b
(11)
            em+i÷bax

Thus the higher the probability of an increase in future money the higher is

the current equilibrium exchange rate.

       The problem raised here is very much like that of a bubble if the

contingencies contemplated by the public are not in fact the intention of

policyniakers. The rate today is off the equilibrium path that policymakers

have in mind for the economy. But there is, of course, the possibility that

       10See Lizondo (1979) and Krasker (1980).
                                     -18—




the fact of a depreciation, due to the beliefs about the possibility of an

expansion, will force the actual expansion. Policies are rarely exogeneous

and they may be largely or entirely endogeneous. If this were the case, then

random variations in beliefs about future policies can shape actual policies

and the economy is without anchor.

       There is a sense in which the exchange rate, in this setting, behaves

exactly right. Asset holders are concerned about the possibility of capital

losses and in response to reassessments about the path of policies, they

shift their portfolios and thus move the exchange rate. But there is also a

sense in which this forward—looking, asset market—oriented adjustment of

exchange rates works with an overkill. By adjusting to the whims and fears

of the moment, the exchange rate moves, and possibly a lot, and it moves

relative to other more stable or sticky prices. Thus the real exchange rate,

which guides the international division of labor, is being moved in response

to conjectures about the future course of monetary and fiscal policies.

       The importance of the Peso—problem is well—illustrated by the French

experience in 1925—26. While the actual budget was in surplus and inflation

was under control, the expectation that debt service should possibly be

financed by money creation or capital taxation led to a flight out of the

Franc. Chart 2 shows the Franc exchange rate collapsing in early 1926 and

then, upon Poincare's assuming office with fiscal dictatorial powers, rapidly

appreciating again.

      The exchange rate links asset and goods market in a sticky price

world. The double allegiance creates trouble because the exchange rate moves

like an asset price and not as a real exchange rate should. But movements in
                                         -18a-


   CHART 2       THE FRENCH FRANC, EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE
                                     (1921 Jan. =100)



300




225.




150




      1      1        1       1      1       1       1        1      1      1
  1921    1922      1923 14 12S 1928               1927      1922   1929   1930
                                   —19—



the nominal exchange rate also affect the price level, through import prices,

wages and competitive effects. Therefore movements in exchange rates,
                                                  have immediate effects on
provoked by changing expectations about policy,
inflation. The moment the public comes to believe that a particular anti—

inflation program is less likely to succeed, the ensuing exchange rate

depreciation will make that a fact. Clearly here we face the unusual problem

of a price that may be too flexible.

Extraneous Beliefs

       There is another manner in which the public's perception of the world

can lead the exchange rate to deviate from fundamentals. This arises when

extraneous beliefs about the determinants of asset prices, via expectations,

actually come to influence asset price. This point has been made by

Blanchard (1976) in respect to the Phillips curve and by Shiller (1981) in

the context of the stock market. If fads, fashions or misperceptions are

highly autocorrelated asset prices can persistently and (in finite samples)

undiscoverably deviate from fundamentals. The same point can be easily

demonstrated in the context of exchange rates.

       Suppose the model of the exchange rate is in fact (10) but that market

participants believe the exchange rate is influenced by both the money supply

and the current account,




                 = E
(12)                   m÷1 ÷   E(C1)


where the actual current account follows a first—order autoregressive process

 and the money stock is a constant, m, plus white noise:
                                              —20—



(13)          Ct = OC_1       + u '       m+i     n + v1         0 < 9 < 1




with u and v white noise. Using (12) and (13) we arrive at the equilibrium

exchange rate:



(14)          e = in + kC ÷ v'        ,   k     be/(1+b)   ,    v'   =   v/(1+b)


Accordingly, the current account does affect the equilibrium exchange rate

even though it is not part of the structural model. Note next that the

forecast errors, e÷i •t+l are given by:



(15)          e+1 —    '+i    =
                                  ku+i + v1 — e(q
                                                      —
                                                          k)C


If the autocorrelation of the current account is high so that 9 is close to

unity and if the response of money demand to the alternative cost of holding

money b, is high, eb/(1+b) is close to unity and the coefficient of C is

close to zero. Regressions will not uncover that forecast errors are

predictable on the basis of the current account. They cannot reject, except

in extremely large samples, the hypothesis that the forecast errors are white

noise.

         The example is of interest because it suggests that extraneous beliefs

about exchange rate determinants may introduce persistent and large

deviations of the exchange rate from fundamentals and that these deviations

are undetectable. The full rational expectations exchange rate (setting            =

0) would be e =   v'   + in   and therefore the deviation from this "fundamentals
                                        —21—



rate," e, is equal to kCt. The variance of the fundamentals rate is s =
                                                                     account
       whereas the asymptotic variance of the rate including current

beliefs is:



               s2 = sv2 + k22
                                   2
(16)                        s /(1—8 )
                e       ,
                             u



It is immediately apparent that with 8 close to unity extraneous current

account beliefs introduce a potentially vast variability in the exchange

rate.

The Dollar Problem

          Since mid 1980, the US dollar has appreciated relative to other

currencies and the real exchange rate today is substantially above the levels

of 1973 or 1975. Chart 3 shows the movement of the real exchange rate

(relative value added deflators) and also shows the level of US real interest

rates. It is apparent that the real depreciation coincided with a move

toward positive and higher average real rates."

          Theoretical models built around the idea of sticky prices or inflation

rates suggest that a tightening in monetary growth, other things equal, will

lead to an immediate appreciation of the real exchange rate in response to

higher domestic interest rates and resulting portfolio shifts in favor of

domestic assets. But unless there is an ongoing tightening, the move toward

tighter money should rapidly translate into falling nominal interest rates

 and a reduction in inflation. In that adjustment process, the exchange rate

would be preciating (following the initial jump appreciation) at a rate

                  is   the "Reagan—dummy" referred to above.
                                         -21a—




      CHART 3        THE US REAL EXCHANGE RATE AND THE REAL
                     INTEREST RATE

     Real Interest                                       Real Exchange
     Rate (%)                                            Rate (1975=100)

10                                                                  115




5
                                                                    105




0                                                                   95




     1        1        1      1      1           1        1
            1S7 17 2.9'7 '3 1? 1Zo
                                                     1
 1'?4




Source:IMF and Morgan Guaranty
                                      —22—




that matches interest differentials adjusted for risk premia. Over the

medium term there would be no appreciable change in the real interest rate.

       Events, in a number of ways, do not fit the theoretical model. On one

side there is an accompanying fiscal expansion which both in the short run

and in the long run will tend to raise real interest rates. That Increase in

real interest rates in turn may have a long run effect on the equilibrium

exchange rate while reinforcing the short run portfolio shifts. On the other

hand, the experiment of monetary tightening is very much in the nature of the

"peso problem" that was discussed above. Continuing nominal and real

appreciation arises as the public reevaluates its belief in tight money in

the light of continuing Fed performance while the Fed itself assesses its

course in the light of performance and approval. Thus monetary tightening is

itself a medium—term exercise in which progressive tightening interacts with

resolve to keep up and belief that this will be the case. The mix allows the

possibility of continuing real appreciation over a two or three year period,

the more so if inflation is sticky.

       Monetary stabilization, certainly in combination with fiscal

expansion, cannot fail to raise the real interest rate in the short run and

therefore, to lead to international portfolio re—shuffling in favor of the

dollar. The portfolio shifts, in turn, induce currency appreciation both in

real and in nominal terms. That appreciation, which is an international side

effect of our domestic stabilization policies, is a serious macroeconomic

problem as the following evidence shows.
                                    —23—




       Table 1 shows estimates by the Federal Reserve, using their multi—

country trade and payments model, of the 20% dollar appreciation on a trade

weighted basis, on growth and Inflation.



                                  Table I

 Estimate of the Effects of a 20% % Dollar Appreciation in 1980:3 to 1980:4



                          Incremental Inf lation         Incremental Growth

                          1981     1982     1983         1981.   1982   1983




Germany                    1.6      1.4       .7           .3     2.4    2.1

US                        —0.4     —0.5     —0.1          —.5    —0.4    1.1




Source: Hooper (1982).



The OECD has also reported estimates of the effects of exchange rate

changes in their multilateral model. Here the effects of a 10% dollar

preciation are studied, with the depreciation occurring at the outset.
                                        —24—




                                       Table 2

          OECD Estimate of the Effects of a 10% Dollar Depreciation

                          (at annual percentage rates)



                          Incremental   Inf 1ation         Incremental Growth

Half—Year                 1st    2nd    3rd     4th        1st   2nd   3rd   4th




North America            0.4     0.7    0.3     0.1       —0.2   0.1   0.4   0.3

Europe                  —0.5    —0.1   —0.6    -0.3        0.0 —0.2 —0.4 —0.3




Source: OECD Economic Outlook, December 1981, pp. 124—125.



         The simulations of either model bring out clearly that exchange rates

have a very strong impact on inflation and that they also affect real

acitivity. A dollar preciation will reduce US inflation and raise

inflation in Europe. Either model suggests that within a year, a 20% dollar

appreciation would raise the European price level about 3% above what it

would otherwise be. That is a very large inflation shock; it certainly is of

the same order as the oil price shock. The inflationary shock is

particularly large when there is comprehensive indexation that translates

higher import prices into increased unit labor costs and thus speeds

comprehensively through the economy.

         The inflation shock Is accompanied by a change in real GNP growth made

up of two opposing tendencies. The terms of trade deterioration in Europe

lowers real GNP directly. But there Is an offset due to increased
                                       —25—



competitiveness that increases trade volume. Both sets of estimates show

that ultimately the gain in competitiveness increases growth of real GNP, and

quite strongly so in the Federal Reserve model. The OECD model, by contrast,

shows both slower and smaller responses of growth.

          Now it must be recognized that Europe can expand aggregate demand and

raise growth, should she wish to do so. We can therefore not count the

growth benefits of the dollar appreciation as an important offset against the

imported inflation. In fact, what we must assume is that Europe in an

attempt to contain inflation——after all, that is what every country is trying

hard to do——must spend the gain in growth and quite a bit more to confine or

offset the inflationary impact. This implies not only a reduction in growth

but quite possibly too an environment less hospitable to investment. On

balance then the dollar appreciation represents an adverse supply shock for

Europe. There remains some scope for Europe to affect the composition of the

shock between inflation and recession or reduced growth.

          In the US, the exchange rate appreciation exerts a favorable effect on

inflation, although the effect is small compared to those in Europe. The

impact on growth is negative but small. It is apparent, therefore, that the

US interests and those of other counties are sharply opposed. What to the US

is a favorable side effect to tight money represents an adverse effect

abroad. The question then must be whether these spill—over effects are part

and parcel of a well functioning exchange rate system or whether they

represent an important shortcoming that needs serious consideration and

remedy.

          There is another respect in which US policies, and the changed policy

envIronment, contribute to instability. Engle and Frankel (1982) report that
                                                —. —




money surprises——deviations of the Friday release of money data from

forecasts——exert a significant effect on short term interest rates and on

exchange rates. Cornell (1982) reports the astounding fact that these money

news move not only the very short term rate, as might be expected when Fed

correction of money is anticipated, but also the whole maturity structure up

to 30 years bonds. The fact that the entire interest rate structure moves up

in response to weekly money forecast errors reflects the fact that

expectations about long term rates have become very diffuse and that now the

short term is more nearly thought of as a random walk. In such a world

volatility of interest rates may well bring about larger volatility of

exchange rates.



3. What is to be Done?

           We have identified several problems that place in question the

effective operation of the flexible exchange rate system. All issues arise

because exchange rates are and behave like asset prices but do play an

important role in goods markets as well. We now have to ask whether there

are policy remedies to these problems and whether the possible remedies are

cost effective. It is important to say at the outset that these issues are

unresolved.

           There are two possible avenues for Influencing and controlling the

behavior of exchange rates: one is (sterilized) intervention, the other is a

real interest equalization tax (RIET). The case for intervention has been

and   is   an uncomfortable one. The case for a RIET Is, at first sight, more

controversial, but is an avenue that in view of North Atlantic discord and

disruption becomes increasingly realistic as an option.
                                    —27—




Intervention

       The case for intervention rests on the premise that domestic and

foreign currency securities are imperfect substitutes and that, accordingly,

changes in their relative supplies will induce portfolio disequilibria. At

going interest rates there is a pressure for exchange rate adjustments and

these adjustment in turn spread to other financial markets as well as to the

goods markets. It is thus possible, on the premise of imperfect asset

substitutability, to influence exchange rates by affecting the relative

supplies of home and foreign currency outside securities or by management of

the currency composition of world debt.

       Henderson (1982) offers a definitive analysis of the case for

intervention. He concludes that intervention is optimal (if feasible) in the

case of portfolio shifts, which of course is the traditional case for

accommodating financial policies. For disturbances to aggregate demand, by

contrast, a policy of maintaining non—interventionn in money and exchange

markets offers greater employment stability. The latter point is readily

made with standard aggregate demand and supply schedules as shown in Figure

4. The money wage is assumed fixed but prices are flexible. Thus there is

an upward sloping aggregate supply A. The aggregate demand schedule Ad,

embodies bond and money market equilibrium, given the alternative policy

assumptions. Along the steeper schedule exchange and interest rates are held

constant. Therefore, a decline in prices stimulates aggregate demand only

through the effect on competitiveness. Along the dashed and flatter

aggregate demand schedule money and debt are held constant. Therefore, a

fall in prices lowers interest rates and expands demand while at the same

time, for bond markets to clear, it induces a depreciation and thus
                                    —28—




reinforces the gain in competitiveness. Accordingly, a larger rise in output

is required to restore balance.

       A given autonomous increase in demand shifts the aggregate demand

scheduThs Out and to the right, the more so the more accommodating are

policies. If interest rates and exchange rates are held constant, the demand

expansion is not dampened by higher interest rates and appreciation.

Accordingly, under such a "rates constant" policy as Henderson concludes,

demand disturbances have a larger impact on employment and domestic prices

(point B") than is the case for an aggregate policy (point B'). There are

significant complications to the model once we allow, as we should, supply

side effects of exchange rate movements. Once these complications are

introduced it becomes much less clearcut whether rates constant policies are

preferred to policies that maintain aggregates. It also becomes more

difficult to identify what is the disturbance that is affecting the economy.

On both counts the case for an active intervention stance becomes less

clearcut, except for obvious portfolio shifts.

       The ambiguity in the assessment of intervention is increased once we

consider the imperfect substitution issue. There is, of course, rio question

that dollar and foreign currency assets are imperfect substitutes. This is

the case because their returns are not perfectly correlated and in some cases

are, in fact, negatively correlated. But there remains the question whether

the variance of relative returns and the degree of risk aversion are

sufficiently large to make imperfect substitutes an easy policy channel.

Long and short bonds are imperfect substitutes but twisting the term

structure through debt management never was a success. The same question
                                   —29—



arises in the exchange rate context: how large an intervention is required

to move the $/DM rate 1%? To that question we have no serious answer.

      If intervention does not look like a very reliable tool, are there any

options? One option is a (moving) wide exchange rate band within which rates

are flexible but at the margins of which rates would be defended. Such a

band might be reasonable as a proposition to eliminate extreme risk. But in

doing so we may also increase the mobility of capital and actually aggravate

exchange rate instability within the band. The only sense of a band would be

as a cooperative venture in forestalling disruptive policies to spill over

into excessive appreciation or depreciation. But it is also conceivable that

such band setting may well assume protectionist overtones. On balance, there

are serious doubts about such a policy.

       The case for intervention is usually made as one of countering

disorderly market conditions.12 But there is no very good case why small

noise in the market should be smoothed, and there is good reason that large

noise cannot effectively be dealt with. A massive disturbance such as the

dollar appreciation of 1980-82 probably cannot be dealt with by intervention,

unless we allow the exchange authorities to have swings in the size and

denomination of their assets. For such massive disturbances we need a more

adequate tool.

Real Interest Equalization Taxes

       History is aplenty with collapse and surges in exchange rates, whether

we look at France in the 1920s, the US in the last years, or the laboratory

experiments in Latin America. Invariably, the really vast changes in real

exchange rates are associated not with changes in comparative advantage but

rather with the medium-term adjustment to abandon of fiscal control or, on

       12See Economic Report of the President, 1982, pp. 189—191.
                                    —30—




the other side, monetary stabilization. Taking the case of monetary

tightening, real exchange rates easily move by 20 or 40 percentage points and

therefore have, of course, vast effects on the economy over and above what

tight ufoney implies. In a small country, these effects are largely domestic,

but when the policy is pursued in the US, unsynchronized with the rest of the

world, then the policy spills over as an adverse disruptive supply shock

abroad. In the trade field, market disruption is dealt with by quotas or ad

hoc compensating duties. This is felt to be an effective policy dealing with

a transitory disturbance. Much the same view should be adopted on capital

account. Whenever unsynchronized policies open up disruptively large real

interest differentials, we need ad hoc real interest equalization taxes that

close the gaps and avoid a major impact on the real exchange rate.13 There

is no sensible argument that tightening of money should involve as a

desirable side effect a loss of exports, an increase in imports, and

international redistribution of real income and borrowing abroad. Because

these side effects are undesirable, both here and abroad, we should attempt

to the maximum possible extent to immunize the world economy against these

spillovers.

       Ad hoc duties to offset trade disruption are neither totally efficient

nor totally effective. But nobody questions that they substantially

accomplish their purpose of insulating an industry from some transitory

foreign disturbance. The same applies to an RIET. There is little doubt

that some inefficiency is involved and that certainly more than the case of

trade disruption duties, there is room for circumvention. But that is also

       13Tobin (1978) has argued for a permanent tax on foreign currency
transactions. Liviatan (1979) argues for transitory taxes assoicated with
monetary stabilization.
                                       —31 & 32—


true for all kinds of taxation and taxes, roughly, do work. But it is also

true that a RIET is a highly desirable, second—best, instrument.

       A real interest equalization tax is a second—best instrument in that

at some efficiency costs, it avoids the even larger costs of adverse spill—

over of US policies abroad. The first—best world is one where transition to

lower inflation has no real effects whatsoever, but proceeds with full

employment and constant real interest harmony. The moment that scenario is

disturbed because prices or inflation rates are sticky, there is a

presumption that supplementary policies, both domestic and international,

should accompany tight money. The relevant criterion by which to judge

supplementary policies (tips, wage controls, investment tax credits, RIETs)

is whether on balance they make the economy operate more efficiently without

prejudicing the disinflation target. Surely, that must be the case for RIETs

since they avoid, if effective, the adverse and totally unwarranted effects

of US policies abroad. The argument against RIETs is that they are costly

since they interfere with the free flow of capital. But that argument is

empty since it fails to demonstrate that the costs of an RIET are larger than

the benefits gained thereby in avoiding the spillover of US policy abroad.

At present, we are spending a percent or more of GNP every year to try to

reduce inflation. We cannot seriously argue that the allocational costs of

RIETs are in any sense commensurate with the costs that are avoided by their

preventing imported inflation in Europe.
                                    —33—




References


Artus, J., "Effects of U. S. Monetary Restraint on the DM/$ Exchange Rate and
       the German Economy, unpublished manuscript, International Monetary
       Fund, 1981.

Black, S. W., "The Use of Rational Expectations in Models of Speculation,"
       Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1972, pp.161—165.

Blanchard, 0. J., "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes and £ational Expectation," in
       Economic Letters, North—Holland Publishing Company, 1979, pp. 387—
       389.

                  Three Essays on Macroeconomics, unpublished Ph.D.
       dissertation, M.I.T., 1976.

                and M. W. Watson, "Bubbles, Rational Expectations, and
      Financial Markets," unpublished manuscript, January 1982.

Buiter, W. H. and N. Miller, "Monetary Policy and International
       Competitiveness: The Problems of Adjustment," Oxford Economic Press,
       Volume 33, Clarendon Press, Oxford, supplement, July 1981.

Cornell, B., "Money Supply Announcements and Interest Rates: Another View,
       unpublished manuscript, University of California, Los Angeles, 1982a.

           ,'Money Supply Anouncements, Interest Rates and Foreign
      Exchange," unpublished manuscript, University of California, Los
      Angeles, 1982b.

Dornbusch, R., Open Economy Macroeconomics, Basic Books, 1980.

              "Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand?" Brookings Papers
       on Economic Activity, 1, 1980, pp. 143—185.

              "Exchange Risk and the Macroeconomics of Exchange Rate
       Determination," unpublished manuscript, M.I.T., 1980.

              "Monetary Policy under Exchange Rate Flexibility," in Federal
       Reserve Bank of Boston, Conference Series, Managed Exchange Rate
       Flexibility, 1978.

             and S. Fischer, "Exchange Rates and the Current Account,"
       American Economic Review, September 1980.

             and P. Krugman, "Flexible Exchange Rates in the Short Term,"
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 1976.
                                    —34—




Engle, C. and J. Frankel, "Why Money Announcements Move Interest Rates: An
       Answer from the Foreign Exchange Risk," unpublished manuscript,
       University of California, Berkeley, 1982.

Flood, Robert, •Stochastic Process Switching and Inflation, unpublished
       manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, 1982.

              and P. M. Garber, "Bubbles, Runs and Gold Monetization,"
       unpublished manuscript, University of Virginia, October 1981.

              and N. P. Marion, "Exchange Rates Regimes In Transition: Italy
       1974," International Financial Discussion Papers, No. 193, November
       1981.

Frankel, J., "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on Real
       Interest Differentials," American Economic Review, September 1979.

             "The Diversifiabillty of Exchange Risk," Journal of
       International Economics, September 1979.

             "Tests of Monetary and Balance of Payments Models of Exchange
       Rates," University of California, Berkeley, 1982.

Frenkel, Jacob. "Flexible Exchange Rates in the 1970s," Journal of Political
       Economy, August 1981.

Friedman, M., "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates," in Essays in Positive
       Economics, University of Chicago Press, 1956.

Grossman, S. and R. Schiller, "The Determinants of the Variability of Stock
       Prices," American Economic Review, May 1981.

Genberg, H., "Effects of Central Bank Intervention in the Foreign Exchange
       Market," IMF Staff Papers, September 1981.

Hacche, G. and J. Townsend, "Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy" Modelling
       Sterling's Effective Exchange Rate, 1972—80," Oxford Economic Papers,
       Volume 33, July 1981.

Henderson, D.., "Exchange Market Intervention Operations: Their Effects and
       Their Role in Financial Policy," unpublished manuscript, Board of
       Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1982.

Hooper, P., "Impact of the Recent Dollar Appreciation on GNP and Prices in
       Major Industrialized Countries: Simulations with the MCM,"
       unpublished memorandum, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,
       1982.

Isard, P., "Expected and Unexpected Exchange Rate Changes," unpublished
       manuscript, Federal Reserve Board, 1980.
                                    —35—




Krugman, P. "Consumption Preferences, Asset Demands and Distribution Effect
       in International Financial Markets," unpublished manuscript, M.I.T.,
       1980.

Liviatan, N., "Neutral Monetary Policy and the Capital Import Tax,"
       unpublished manuscript, Hebrew University, October 1979.

Lizondo, J. S., "Foreign Exchange Futures Prices under Fixed Exchange Rates,"
       unpublished manuscript, ITAM, May 1980.

Marris, S., "Exchange Rates: Too Fixed or Too Flexible?" unpublished
       manuscript, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
       1981.

Meese, R. and K. Rogoff, "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies:
       Are They Fit to Survive?" International Finance Discussion Papers,
       No. 184, June 1981.

Nishkin, F., "Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An Econometric
       Investigation," Journal of Political Economy, February 1982.

Mussa, M., "The Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and
       Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," Carnegie Rochester
       Conference Series, Volume 11, 1979.

           "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments," Scandinavian
       Journal of Economics, 2, 1976.

     ,     "Three Times the Transfer Problem Plus David Hume," unpublished
       manuscript, University of Chicago, 1969.

Nurkse, R., International Currency Experience: Lessons of the Inter—War
       Period, League of Nations, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New
       Jersey, 1944.

Obstfeld, M., "Can We Sterilize?" American Economic Review, forthcoming,
       1982.

Rogoff, K., "Essays on Expectations and Exchange Rate Volatility,
       unpublished manuscript, Ph.D. dissertation, M.I.T., 1979.

Salant, S. and D. Henderson, "Market Anticipations of Government Policies and
       the Price of Gold," Journal of Political Economy, 4, 1978.

Shiller, R., "The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market Efficiency,"
       Journal of Finance, May 1981.

Tirole, J., "On the Possibility of Speculation under Rational Expectations,
       unpublished manuscript, M.I.T., December 1980.
                                    —36—




Tobin, J., "A Proposal for International Monetary Reform," Cowles Foundation
       Discussion Paper 506, Yale University, 1978.

Wallich, H. and J. A. Gray, "Stabilization Policy and Vicious and Virtuous
       Circles," in J. Chipman and Charles P. Kindleberger, (eds.), Flexible
       Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments, North Holland, 1980.

Williamson, J., The Open Economy and the World Economy, Basic Books,
       forthcoming.

Wilson, C., "Anticipated Disturbances and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
       Political Economy, September 1979.
