                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           COVERED INTEREST PARITY, UNCOVERED INTEREST
               PARITY, AND EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS


                          Jonathan   Eaton

                       Stephen J.   Turnovsky


                      Working Paper No. 9814




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          September 1982




We wish to thank Gene M. Grossman for some helpful comments on this
paper. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #984
                                                     September 1982




              Covered Interest Parity, Uncovered Interest Parity,
                          and Exchange Rate Dynamics




                                 Abstract


           A number of macroeconomic models of open economies under

 flexible exchange rate assume a strong version of perfect capital

mobility which implies that currency speculation commands no risk

premium. If this assumption is dropped a number of important results

no longer obtain. First, the exchange rate and interest rate cannot be

in steady state unless both the government deficit and current account

equal zero, not simply their sum, as would otherwise be the case.

Second, even in steady state the domestic interest rate can deviate

from the foreign interest rate by an amount which depends upon relative

domestic asset supplies. Finally, introducing risk aversion on the part

of speculators can reduce the response on impact of the exchange rate

to changes in domestic asset supplies. In this sense rational speculators,

if they are less risk averse than other agents, can destabi'ize     exchange
markets.



Jonathan Eaton                              Stephen J. Turnovsky
Economic Growth Center                      Department of Economics
Yale University                             University of Illinois
Box 1987 Yale Station                       1206 South 6th Street
New Haven, CT 06520                         Champaign, IL 61820
(203) 436—8414                              (217) 333—2354
           The advent of floating rates among the major currencies has

 led to the development of increasingly sophisticated models of open

 economies in which exchange rates are market determined. As was pointed

 out in the early work of Fleming (1962) and Nundell (1963) the degree of

 international capital mobility is crucial in determining the response of

 an economy to both monetary and fiscal actions. And while the Fleming—

Mundell analysis is based on the traditional static short—run model, the

importance of the degree of capital mobility applies to the long—run

response as well.

          Perhaps because capital does seem to be very mobile among the

major industrial countries, the polar assumption of perfect capital

mobility has received most attention. This assumption may be inter-

preted in two different ways, however. The first, weaker version is

that bonds that are free of default risk domestically are also free of

default risk abroad; in Aliber's (1973) terminology, there is no 'political'

risk. When capital mobility of this degree obtains, foreign bonds on which

forward cover has been obtained are perfect substitutes for domestic bonds

and arbitrage brings the domestic interest rate CR) into equa.1.ity with

the foreign interest rate (R*) plus the forward premium on foreign exchange

(F). Thus covered interest parity (CIP) obtains


                              RR*+F                               (1)


where R, R* and F are defined over the same time interval. In fact,

empirical evidence suggests that among the major industrial nations,

deviations from CIP are not significant; see, e.g., Aliber (1973),

Frenkel and Levich (1975, 1977).
                                        —2—


            A stronger definition of capital mobility is one that adds to

the criterion for the first the requirement that attitudes toward exchange

risk be characterized by risk neutrality, either because there exists a

sufficient number of risk neutral speculators, or because exchange risk

is perfectly diversifiable. In this case, speculation will bring the

forward premium on foreign exchange into equality with the expected rate

of appreciation of the foreign currency; that is,


                                  F (/E)e                                      (2)



where E denotes the price of foreign currency in terms of domestic

currency, and where for any variable X, we define k              dX/dt   and

denotes the expectaticn of X. Substituting (2) into (1) yields the

condition


                                K = R* + (/E)e                                 (3)



a condition which is referred to as w2covered         interest   parity (UIP) and

which requires both (1) and (2) to hold.1

            However, the empirical evidence in support of (2) is not as

strong as it is for (1). Levich (1978), Bilson (1978) and Hansen and

Hodrick (1980) report some systematic deviations for several exchange

rates over long periods. These findings are consistent with financial

models of foreign investment which suggest that risk aversion among

rational, fully informed speculators will create a risk premium, thereby

causing (2) to break down. Solnik (1973), Kouri (1976), Adler and

Dumas   (1977),   Frankel (1979) and   Eaton   and Turnovsky (1981) derive various

expressions for this premium based on expected utility maximization.
                                   —3—


           But despite the lack of theoretical justification for UIP and

 the empirical evidence against it, most well—known results about the

 behaviour of macroeconomic models with perfectly mobile capital require

 this stronger definition to apply. This paper develops a model of a

 small open economy under the more general assumption that the forward

 premium on foreign exchange is determined by risk averse speculative

 behavior. Capital is still perfectly mobile in the weaker sense that

CIP obtains and a special case of our model is one in which the degree

of risk aversion tends to zero, in which case UIP applies as well. We

use this model to examine several propositions about the behaviour of a

small open economy with a flexible exchange rate. These pertain to: the

effects of changes in domestic asset supplies and foreign interest rate

on the steady—state levels of the domestic interest rate and exchange

rate; the effects of ongoing government deficits; and the dynamic

behavicurof the exchange rate between steady states. Our purpose in

this analysis is twofold. First, we wish to illustrate the implications,

some of them rather implausible, of assumptions that have been prominent

in the literature. Secondly, we wish to examine the behaviourof the

exchange rate under a more general specification that is consistent

with a more plausible set of outcomes.

          In Section I which follows we develop a dynamic model of an

open economy in which the exchange rate, interest, rate, and forward

premium are determined at each instant by money market and forward

market equilibrium conditions, together with CIP. At any moment, the

price of nontraded goods and asset supplies are predetermined, while we

treat the foreign interest rate and price level as exogenous. Over time,
                                  —4—


the price of nontraded goods adjusts gradually to the price of traded

goods; the supplies of domestic assets change through the government

deficit, while the balance of payments on current account determines

the change in foreign asset supplies. With risk averse speculative

behaviour, exchange rate and price dynamics, on the one hand, become

inherently linked with asset supply dynamics on the other. For the

system as a whole, and the exchange rate and interest rate in particular,

to be in steady state, all asset accumulation must cease and for this

to occur, both the budget deficit and the balance of payments on current

account must equal zero.

          In the limiting case in which speculators are risk neutral,

the conditions for the exchange rate and price level to attain steady

state may be relaxed. For example, with a bond—financed government

deficit, it is necessary only for the budget deficit and current account

surplus to awn to zero. Thus the exchange rate and price level can be

in steady state even if the government deficit is perpetually unbalanced,

as long as it is offset by an appropriate imbalance on the current account.

Thus when UIP obtains a small country can run a perpetual current account

deficit without affecting its exchange rate or its interest rate.2 If,

in addition to UIP, asset supplies do not affect the demand for money,

the exchange rate and the price level evolve independently of the govern-

ment deficit and the balance of payments on current account outside of

steady state. In this case, the exchange rate and price level can be

in steady state even if these two quantities do not sum to zero.3

          These observations are of relevance to a number of recent

studies of exchange rate dynamics (e.g., Dornbusch (1976), Gray and
                                   —5—


 Turnovsky (1979), and Wilson (1979)) who specify models of exchange

 rate and price dynamics in which domestic and foreign bond supplies

"play no explicit role. This exclusion is legitimate only under the

 strong assumption of UIP (an assumption all these authors make).

 Furthermore, Mundell's (1963) finding that under flexible rates a

 government deficit will not disturb the steady state exchange rate or

interest rate (because its effect on the total bond supply is offset by

the current account) also requires UIP to hold.

          In Section II we examine the properties of the steady state

itself. An important aspect of the income determination models of

Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962) and of the exchange rate dynamics of

Dornbusch (1976) et al. is that, in steady state, the domestic interest

rate equals the foreign interest rate and is independent of domestic asset

supplies.4 In addition, the steady state exchange rate and domestic

price level are homogeneous of degree one in the domestic money upp1y.

None of these results are preserved when speculators are risk averse.

Thus, even if CIP obtains, the domestic interest rate can be affected by

domestic policies in steady state, something that is not possible under

UIP. Also, the exchange rate and domestic price level are homogeneous of

degree one, and the interest rate homogeneous of degree zero, in the

supplies of both domestic assets taken together, and not just money.5

          Sections III and IV examine the transition between steady

states, a subject which has been receiving extensive treatment recently.

In Section III we show that once—and—for—all proportional unannounced

increases in the supplies of money and domestic bonds introduced simul-

taneously can, on impact, cause either a smaller than, or greater than,
                                          —6—


     proportional response in the exchange rate. This result contrasts with

     the previous models in which, under similar assumptions but with UIP
'S



     holding,     the exchange rate necessarily 'overshoots' its steady state
              6
     value.       The change in the exchange rate on impact can vary inversely

     with the degree of risk aversion. Our model thus suggests a sense in

     which speculation (or more properly, less risk averse speculation)

 destabilizes exchange rates; this is in the sense of increasing their

     short—run sensitivity to changes in domestic asset supplies. FinaLLy,

 in Section IV we consider the dynamic effects of once—and—for—all

 unannounced changes in the money supply, achieved via open market

 operations.


 I. A Dynamic Macro Model

                  We consider a small open economy in which private agents may

 hold as assets domestic money, domestic bonds, and foreign bonds, all

 of which, we assume, they regard as components of their net wealth.

The first two assets are denominated in domestic currency, and the

 third in foreign currency. Thus at any moment, private nominal wealth

Wisgivenby

                                   W=M+Ad+EBd                            (4)



where N denotes the supply of domestic money (which we assume is held

only domestically), Ad the number of domestic bonds held domestically,

       the number of foreign bonds held domestically, E is the spot rate

measured as the price of a unit of foreign exchange in terms, of

domestic currency.
                                      —7—


           We assume that there is no perceived risk of default on

 domestic or foreign bonds so that CIP obtains


                                  R=R*+F .                                (5)

 Since our analysis is in Continuous time, F measures the instantaneous

rate of forward premium on foreign exchange and is defined formally by



                        F(t) -   u    f.
                                           (t,t+h)-
                                                      E(t)j
                                                                          (6)



where E(t,t+h) is the price at time t         of   one unit of foreign exchange

in period t+h. Since as the time unit h-+O, the spot and forward rates

must converge, E(t) =   E(t,t),    in which case the limit in (6) may be

expressed by the following partial derivative


                         F(t) =
                                  E(t,t)/E(t,t)        .
                                                                         (6').

          Since domestic and covered foreign bonds are perfect substitutes

we shall assume that all domestic bonds are held domestically. Thus we

let Ad = A, where A denotes the total supply of domestic bonds. We allow

   to assume negative values when domestic agents issue liabilities

denominated in foreign currency.

          Individuals consume both traded and nontraded goods, which are

imperfect substitutes. Perfect goods arbitrage ensures that the prices

of traded goods are determined by the law of one price. We assume that

because of long term contracts, the prices of nontraded goods at any

instant are fixed at P, say. An index of the domestic cost of living

C is therefore
                                       —8—


                          C =   P(EP*)1       0 <       <1             (7)


where d denotes the share of nontradad goods in consumption and P* is

 the exogenously given foreign price level (i.e., the foreign price of

traded goods). For notational simplicity we set P*           3..


              We assume a demand for money function of the form



               =L(Y,R,H) LO ,                LO O1L<l
                                                    ,              ,   (8)

where Y is real output and H W/C denotes real wealth. Note that we

have deflated by C, reflecting the fact that real wealth depends upon

the price of both traded and nontraded goods in accordance with their

shares in consumption. Note that only R, the domestic interest rate

is included in the money demand function. Elsewhere (Eaton and Turnovsky

(1981)) we have derived optimal savings and portfolio behaviour for a

single consumer in a two period model in which money provides utility

via   its   transactions services. In this analysis, since domestic bonds

and money are assumed to be equally risky, the division of assets denominated

in domestic currency depends only upon the domestic interest rate.7

             Together, equations (4), (5), (7) and (8) determine, at any

moment, equilibrium values of C, R, F, and W as functions of P, E, A, Bd,

M, and the exogenous foreign variables R* and

             We   now turn to the dynamic equations of the system. First, con-

sider forward market equilibrium. Participation in the forward market

may be for two reasons, speculation and arbitrate.8 We assume that the

real demand for speculative foreign exchange forward, denoted by J, is

an increasing function of the expected rate of return on speculation,
                                     —9—


 given by the difference between the expected rate of depreciation of

 the domestic currency (E/E)e and the forward premium F. We shall assume

 expectations are realized on average. Since we suppress stochastic

 elements in our model, except for unanticipated once—and—for—all changes

 in asset supplies, this is equivalent to assuming perfect foresight.

 Thus (IE)e =   E/E except   at the moment when asset supplies change.9

Forward market equilibrium requires that J equal the supply of foreign

exchange forward for arbitrage; i.e., that which is sold to cover

domestic holdings of foreign bonds:



                       = {_ F]             J' O .                   (9)

Such a specification follows from financial micro models of the forward

market; see, for example, Kouri (1976), Adler and Dunias (1977), and Eaton

and Turnovsky (1981). Frankel (1979) has emphasized that this specifica-

tion relies on the assumption that domestic government debt constitutes

a component of private national wealth, an assumption we make here. As

shown by previous authors, J embodies attitudes to risk taking. In

particular, J' varies inversely with the degree of risk aversion,

with   J'     in the limiting case of risk neutrality; when CIP obtains.

            By appropriate choice of units, the steady—state price of non—

traded goods can be equated to the domestic price of traded goods. We

assume that the price of noritraded goods is determined by long term

contracts, so that the nontraded goods price cannot jump instantaneously

to its equilibrium level, but can adjust only continuously over time,

as contracts expire. When the average price of non—traded goods exceeds
                                    —10—


its normal level, we assume that their output exceeds their steady state

supply and conversely. Consequently, we specify a relationship for the

supply of real output as


                 Y — Y =   Z(E/p)       Z' > 0    ,   z(1) = 0    (10)


where Y denotes the steady state value of Y, which we treat as exogenous.

We also assume that when Y > Y the price of non—traded goods is revised

upwards and conversely. This adjustment is specified by the relationship'°


                  P = G(E/P)        G' > 0   ,   G(l)   = 0   .   (11)

          The rate of change in the supply of domestic assets is determined

by the government budget constraint


                    M+A=PG+EG_T+RAg                               (12)


where Gd and G represent real government expenditures on nontraded and

traded goods, respectively, and T denotes nominal tax revenues. The rate

of change in the domestic holdings of foreign assets is equal to the

balance of payments on current account


                     EBd = EX(•) — EG      + R*EBd      b         (13)


where X() denotes real net exports of the private sector.

          Together with an assumption about how the government finances

its expenditures, equations (9), (10), (11), (12), and (13) determine the

evolution of E, P, Y, A, H, and Bd. From the description of the system

it might appear that the spot rate E is constrained always to move con-

tinuously. This is not so. Because of the assumption of perfect foresight
                                        —11-


 embodied in (9), the dynamics will generally involve (at least) one

 unstable root. Following the rational expectations methodology, this

"root may be eliminated by allowing the exchange rate to undergo an

 endogenously determined initial jump at points where the system is

 subject to an exogenous disturbance. Simple examples of this are given

 in Sections III and IV below.

             Define total nominal bond holdings B as


                                  BA+EBd
Adding (12) and    (13)   and using the CIP condition (5), we obtain


                M+B=pGd_T+EX+RB+(/E_F)EBd.                                (].4)



From this equation it is evident that in general the evolution of the

system depends upon the breakdown of B between domestic and foreign

bonds. Thus, for example, if 1 = 0 (the deficit is bond—financed), E,

P and B cannot assume their steady state values unless           =   A = 0;   that

is, unless both the government deficit (g) and the balance of payments

on current account (b) are zero. And        the   same applies in the case of

money financing.

            Consider, however, the limiting case in which J'(•) ,             i.e.,
the speculative demand for foreign exchange forward becomes infinitely

elastic. In order for the speculative demand to remain bounded, (2)

must hold. In this case (5) and (9) reduce to the tlIP condition (3),

so   that (14) becomes

                          N+B=    PGd
                                        — T + EX + RB   .                (14t)
                                    —12—



Writing   (4) as


                                H = (M + B)/C                        (4')

equations    (4), (7), (3), (8), (10), (11), (14') constitute a dynamic

system in which A and Bd do not appear (assuming of course that A and

    do not enter separately in the specifications of Gd, G, T, or X).

If the government deficit is bond—financed 1 =    0.   The dynamics depend

only upon the sum of the government deficit and the currant account

deficit (g + b) and not the separate components. Steady state now

only requires that B E P = 0.        The government may sustain a deficit

in steady state as long as it is offset by a current account deficit of

equal size, since the steady state requirement ñ       0 is equivalent to
A = _EBd.     With money financing, both components must be zero.

             A special case widely adopted in the literature, and therefore

of importance, arises if the demand for money is assumed to be independent

of real wealth H. Consider first the limiting assumption of risk neutral

speculation. If the government deficit is bond—financed, the dynamics

of P and E become independsnt of g + b and these variables can attain

steady state equilibrium with wealth, in the form of bonds, being

accumulated indefinitely. With a money—financed deficit, steady state

for E and P requires only that the government deficit be zero; the

current account balance can be non—zero, with domestic residents con-

tinually accumulating (or decumulating) foreign bonds. In the general

case where 3' is finite, no variable can be in steady state unless

g   b = 0.    However, under bond financing E and P can attain steady
                                         —13—



 state   with only b = 0, provided one imposes the additional restriction

 that net exports be independent of H.12

            In formulating dynamic macro models such as the one above,

it is often convenient to specify real savings behaviour (or asset

accumulation) directly. Thus, if one postulates


                              End +M + A =
                                           SC.)                        (15)


it follows from (4), (13), and (15) that the rate of net capital inflow

EBd can be derived as


                   EBd =   CS(•)   —   (1 + A)
                       = cS(•)     —
                                       [PGd
                                              + EG] + T —   BA   .     (16)

By   comparing (13) and (16) it is      clear that S(•), X(), and the govern-

ment financing decision caimot be specified independently.

            These observations about the appropriate specification of

dynamic models under perfect capital mobility have important implications

for various models appearing in the literature. First, the model of

exchange rate dynamics introduced by Dornbusch (1976) and studied by

other authors ignores the balance of payments and savings behaviour iii

analyzing the dynamics of the exchange rate. This is possible only because
they assume UIP and that there are no asset supply effects on money demand.

Under the less restrictive condition of CIP, however, the dynamic adjust-

ment of the exchange rate, on the one hand, and asset accumulation, on

the other, are jointly determined, even in the absence of wealth effects

in the demand for money.
                                 —14—


          Second, a well known result of Mundell (1968) is that a govern-

ment deficit has no effect on the steady state of a small open economy

under conditions of perfect capital mobility and flexible exchange rates.

This is certainly true under the conditions of UIP when any change in

the deficit will be offset by a change in the current account deficit,

leaving the system unchanged. However, it is not generally true under

CIP, when indeed steady state requires the deficit to be zero.


II. Steady State Properties

          Models of exchange rate determination based on the assumption

of UIP and the absence of an ongoing inflation yield the following

steady state relationship


                                R=R*                              (17)


where   is used to denote the steady state value of a variable. Thus

-the domestic interest rate is completely tied to the world rate, from

which we immediately infer:

          (i) Changes in the foreign interest rate yield

               equal changes in the domestic interest

               rate;

         (ii) the domestic interest rate is independent

               of the supply of domestic money or domestic

               bonds.

          Other steady state properties depend upon the policy specif 1—

cation and the dynamic system so generated. If one adopts the frequently

postulated savings function13
                                       —15—


                             S =    (i(Y,R*)    —    H,Y)                     (18)


where H is some long—run desired level of real wealth, the steady state

monetary equilibrium relationship becomes


                               = L(Y,R*,H(Y,R*))            .
                                                                              (19)

From this equation, two further propositions follow:

        (iii) A given change in the domestic money supply

                 leads to a proportionate change in the

                 exchange rate;

         (iv) the exchange rate is independent of the

                 supply of domestic bonds.

None of properties (i)—(iv) characterizes the steady state of the model

presented in Section I, except in the limiting case when the speculative

demand for foreign exchange forward is perfectly elastic.14

          We adopt the savings function (18) and assume, for simplicity

and without   essential   loss of generality, that H is exogenous and inde-

pendent of the interest rate. The steady state of the model presented

in Section I is attained when E = P = A = M                     0. Imposing these

conditions yields the equations

                               — M+A             d
                                                                             (20a)
                                       E

                                   R=R*+F                                    (20b)


                                      L(Y,R,H)                               (20c)
                                E

                                      = J(—F)
                                                                             (20d)
           •                           —16—


                           E(Gd+Gm)_T+=O .                             (20e)

\Given H, these five equations involve the seven variables, H, A,      d
 R., F, T. We shall assume initially that the monetary authorities peg H = N

and A = A, continuously adjusting T to balance the budget.

           Thus M, A, along with R*, may be treated as exogenous parameters.

Totally differentiating the system with respect to these variables we

obtain the following effects on the domestic interest rate R


                                 —=
                                 dR  A
                                    ——-< 0                             (21a)
                                 dN       EL


                                               0                       (2lb)
                                     dA E
                                 dR J'M>0
                                                                       (21c)

where   E J'M —          + A) > 0.
                  LR(N

Thus a once—and—for-all increase in the domestic money supply reduces

the steady—state domestic interest rate, while an increase in the

domestic supply of bonds increases it. An increase in the foreign

interest rate leads to a reduction in the forward premium, causing the

domestic interest rate to rise by a smaller amount. In the limiting

case when J' -   , the response      becomes proportional and in this extreme

case changes in M and A have no effect on R. Thus, unless speculators

are risk neutral or perceive no exchange risk, the domestic interest

rate is not totally determined by the interest rate abroad and responds

to domestic asset supplies in the manner indicated.
               V                             —17—



                ultiplying (21a) by M and (21b) by A and sununing yields an

 expression equal to zero. Thus an increase in the domestic money

 supply accompanied by a proportional increase in the domestic bond

 upply i.s     neutral   in ts effect on the steady state domestic interest

 rate,

               changes in   1 and A have the following proportional effects

cn    the steady state     spot rate E


                              g(J'-L) [>0
                                                               -




                                                                                      (22b)


both elasticities are positive and less than one, ihIle summing to unity.

Thus,    contrary   to propositions (ill) and (Iv), an increase in the money

pply leads to a less than proportional increase in the exchange rate,

w4le the       supply of domestic bonds also affects the exchange rate.

rprtional increases          i    the    supplies of the two nominal assets together

         o proportional iflcreases in the           exchange   rate and the domestic

rce levels         As   3' ,     (22a)   tends tounity     and (22b)       tends   to zero.

Thus   only in this ljmi.     ting case do prOpOstjfls             (iii) and   (iv) hold.

           isal plicy          Involves changing A.        A well—known propositton
f     iundeU (1963) and Fleming          (1962) is that   under      flexible rates and

pect capital mobility          fiscal po1cy has no effect on the steady

t4te     of a small     open economy. It     is evident   from our analysis that again

for    this   result o apply, perfect capital mobility must be interpreted

o   mean that UIP obtains, i.e., that foreign ecchange speculation requires

    risk premium.
                                            —18—



                The same general characteristics of the steady state described

by (20a)—(20e) obtain under alternative policy specifications. If, for

example, tax receipts are held at a constant real level, say r, and the

government finances its deficit with bonds, the steady state relations

(20a)—(20e) will continue to determine the steady state values of

R, F, E, and A. Now, however, (20e) requires the stock of domestic

bonds to adjust in proportion to the exchange rate, since T = Er.

Under UI? propositions (i) and (iv) still obtain but if UIP does not

hold these propositions will be violated as before. The responses of R

and E to changes in R* and M can be calculated (A is now eridogenous) and

will    generally differ from the expressions given in             (21), (22) above

because    of   the difference in policy specification.

             We conclude this discussion with a further comment on (21c),

which asserts that an increase in R* leads to a fall in the forward

premium, thereby leading to a smaller rise in the domestic interest

rate.    This result turns out to depend upon the specification of the
savings function and under an alternative specification the domestic
interest   rate may actually increase         by more. To       illustrate this,
suppose    that instead of specifying a savings function as we have done,

we specify a net export function


                    X —   X(E/P,Y)   ,   3XI(E/P)   > 0   ,   xIaY . 0

The steady      state of the system now consists of (20a)—(20e), together

with the steady state of (13)


                             X(l,Y) — G      +   R*Bd     0 .                      (20f)
                                     —19—



 Since   in steady state E = 1', and Y = Y, X is now fixed. H is now endogenous

 and, given A and M, is determined together with B', E, R, F, and T.

               Consider an increase in R*. Since in steady state X — G           is
 independent    of R* it follows from (20f) that in order for the balance

 of payments on current account to remain in equilibrium, Bd must         fall.
 If d falls, forward market equilibrium condition (20d) requires the

 forward premium to rise, in which case the CIP condition (20b) implies

 a larger increase in the domestic interest rate than the rise in the

 foreign rate.


 III. Exchange Rate Dynamics: Proportional Increases in Money and
       Domestic Bond Supplies

            We now consider an economy in which steady state is disturbed

by once—and—for—all, increases in the money supply and domestic bond

supply of equal proportion and examine the behaviour of the exchange

rate during its transition to the new steady state. For convenience,

we assume a log—linear version of the model developed in Section I.

Other simplifications are introduced not only to expedite the dynamic

analysis, but also to make our results as comparable as possible with

the existing literature.

            Following, for example, Driskill (1980), we take the follow-

ing log—linear approximation to wealth


                 h 1a + 2(e+bd) + (l-p1-i2)m    -       c   w - c        (.23)



where     is   the share of domestic bonds in domestic wealth and         is
the   share of foreign bonds.15 We denote r E   R   —
                                                        R, f    F—
                                                                     F0 and
for all other variables let x Zn X — Zn     X0, where for any variable
             d                            —20—



 X0 denotes      the value of X in the initial steady state. Thus x is the

 percentage deviation in X from its initial steady state value.

             Assuming that the foreign interest rate remains unchanged

 at R*, the interest rate parity condition (expressed in deviation form)

 is


                                          r=f                                (24)


while the price index now becomes


                                c     5p + (l—iS)e .                        (25)

A log linear approximation to the supply function (10) is


                             y (e—p)                p   0                   (26)


and a similar approximation to money market equilibrium is given by


                     m — C = —a1r + '2 + a3y                  > 0           (27)

             Imposing the assumption of perfect foresight (except at points

where asset supplies change), the log—linear approximation to the condi-

tion    for forward market equilibrium becomes

                       e+bd_c=y(_f)                                         (28)

where   y is the elasticity of speculative demand for foreign exchange

forward with respect to the risk premium. y varies inversely with the

degree of risk aversion with y -              as risk neutrality is approached.16

The adjustment of prices is specified by17


                             — O(e   —
                                         p)        0>   0 .                 (29)
                                              —21—


            Since our analysis treats the nominal supplies of money and

 domestic bonds as fixed everywhere except at one instant, savings must

"take the form    of   accumulating foreign bonds. Assuming that interest

 rates do not affect desired wealth, we approximate the asset accumula-

 tion function (16) by


                       b =           + c72y           20          0 .            (30)
                             —cy1h


This expression can also be interpreted as a log linear approximation

to the current    account equation.
            Equations    (23) to (30) constitute a complete dynamic system.

Equations (23) through (27) determine at any moment values of h, c, r,

y and £ as functions of e, p. and b, whose dynamic behavicuris described

by equations (28) through (30).

            For the special case in which            2 =   0 (zero wealth effects in

the demand for money) p = 0 (fixed real output) and y -                 (currency
speculation   requires no risk premium) the model outlined in            equations

(23)   to (30) reduces in essence to the one examined by Dornbusch               (1976),

Gray and Turnovsky (1979), and Wilson (1979). As we               mentioned in
Section   I, when y +    , exchange       rate dynamics are independent of Bd and

A. For this reason these earlier studies did not require any assumptions

about the bond—financed component of the government deficit or about sav-

ings behaviour.

           Dornbusch et al. consider the effects of a once—and—for—all

change in the money supply on the path of the exchange rate and price

level. As we pointed out in Section II, in the special case they con-

sider, the steady state effect of such a change is a proportional change
                                      —22—


In the exchange rate and the price level, with the domestic interest

rate remaining unchanged. To maintain this long—run neutrality in our

more general model, the change in the money supply must be accompanied

by a proportional change in the supply of domestic bonds. This policy

is a once—and—for—all transfer of money and bonds and is considered in

this section.

            Consider an initial steady state in which all variables in

equations (23) through (30) are zero (i.e., in X in X, etc.) and

assume that the supplies of money and domestic bonds are both increased

once—and—for—all by rn percent.18 In the new steady state,                        =     =      =

while   all other variables return to their initial (zero) levels.

           Solving equations (23) through (27) for h, c, r, f, and y,

and substituting the resulting expressions into (28) through (30)

allows us to describe the equations as a third—order system of differential

equations in e, p, and bd


                      e
                                a1    a2        a3
                                                         e        lao
                            =8        —O Op +0                                          (31)
                                                    dI

                      bj        C1    c2        c3jb


                   + 22 + (1—c2)(l—S)                                  c3p — (l—c*2)5
    a1 —+
        y
                                                 ;a 2        ''



                                                                  — 1
                      1
                   a E—+ ____         ;a        a2(12)                  m
                                           0



                 C1       c1(12) + a2p ;                           —



                           C3   1'2        c0
                                                    —23—



 Letting

                                              e — e     ,           p    — p


where      = = m,     we may write            the      nonhomogeneous system (31) in

homogeneous form



                                              a1         a2     a3 x1
                                      =       8          —o     0                                 (31')

                                              C1         C2     C3

The solution to the equation is


             e(t) =        +                                                                      (32a)
                               A1 exp(X1t)          + A2 exp(X2t)              + A3 exp(X3t)

             p(t) =   rn+
                               B1 exp(A1t)          + B2 exp(A2t) + B3 exp(X3t)                   (32b)

             bd(t) = C1 exp(X1t)                                                                  (32c)
                                              + C2 exp(X2t) + C3                 exp(X3t)


here X1, A2, and      A3
                           are      the solutions to            the characteristic equation of

(31')


                 —
                     (a1+c3-O)A2
                                          -                             —
                                               [8(a1+a2+c3)                 a1c3+c1a3]X

                 —                        —                     = 0                               (33)
                     O[(c1+c2)a3               (a1+a2)c3]

and   where given the arbitrary constant A1,                                and A3,   the   remaining
                                                                    A2,
constants B. C, i              1,2,3 are determined by the relationships


                Iii        Ea
                                2
                                      a            11.-a1
                                                   H          1JA           i = 1,2,3             (34)
                L1J        2          c3AiJL cjj
                                      —24—


The constant term in (33) can be shown       from   the definitions of a. and c
                                                                       1
to   be unambiguously negative, implying that the product of the roots,
         > o.      Thus (31) has either one or three positive eigenvalues.
A1A2X3

Moreover, the coefficient of A in (33), which equals —(X1X2 + A2X3 +
                                                                               X3X1)
is almost certainly positive, in which case some of the roots must be

negative, so that in fact there can be only one unstable root. A

sufficient, but by no means necessary, condition for this to be so is

     <          imposing an upper limit on the fraction of foreign bonds

held. We shall treat the case of a single unstable root, denoted by A3,

as the normal one and impose the requirement that. the system converge

to its steady state, i.e.,


                urn e(t) =     ; urn p(.t) = p ; urn bd(t)        0


Convergence then requires that the coefficients of the unstable root

equal zero.2° Thus A3 = 0 and via, (34), B3           C3 =   0.
           In keeping with the literature on exchange rate dynamics, we

assume that, while    discontinuous   jumps in the exchange rate are possible,

the price of nontraded goods is constrained to move continuously. The

fact that the exchange rate is determined by virtually continuous trad-

ing in an auction market, while the prices of nontraded goods are determined

mainly by a large number of longer—term contracts, makes this assumption

plausible. This constraint implies the initial condition


                        p(o)    0 ; or B1 + B2 =      —rn               (35)


Similarly, the requirement that foreign assets can be acquired only con-

tinuously over time requires that the asset disturbance cannot move bd

from its initial level on impact, so
                                           —25—



                        bd(o) =    0   ;   or C1 + C2 = 0     .              (36)

 Equations (35) and (36), together with the four equations contained in

 (34) for 1     1,2, determine the six coefficients of the stable roots,

namely,        B1, C, I =   1,2.
           Assuming stability, consider now the value of the exchange

rate immediately after the increase in the supplies of money and bonds

takes place at t = 0.     This value, denoted by e(o+), is given by

A1 ÷ A2 + i.    Thus the exchange rate overshoots or undershoots its new

steady state level, according as the values of A1 and A2, derived from

(34)—(36) yield A1 + A2      0.


          For the general case, an explicit analytical expression for

e(o+) proves to be rather intractable, and because of the complicated

nature of the calculations, not particularly illuminating.21 However,

a good indication of the likely response of the exchange rate to propor—

..tional increases in domestic assets can be obtained by focusing on two

polar cases; one in which asset accumulation proceeds very slowly,

another in which assets adjust very rapidly.


III. Slow Asset Adjustment

          The first case we consider is one where the savings adjustment

to the shock is very slow relative to the price level adjustment. We

consider the limiting case in which               =   = 0.   Portfolio adjustment

costs may provide one justification forexamining this limiting case in

our example. The reason is that the steady state level of bd is

unaffected by the shock we consider. If price adjustment is relatively

rapid, wealth holders may not find varying their holdings of bd during

the transition to be worthwhile.
                                            —26—


             In considering this special case, then, we may set bd(t) = 0

for all c.     Defining    x1 and x2 as before, we can write the system in the

homogeneous second order form




                                 1=Eai               a2lFll                           (37)
                                 [x2J      [0        -OJ[xj

where              and a2 are as defined above.
         a0, a1,
             The solution to this equation is


                     e(t) = rn + A1 exp (X1t) + A2 exp                                (38a)
                                                       (A2t)

                                                             A2—a1
             p(t) =   m   + A1
                                 ______
                                          exp(X1t) +    A2           exp(X2t)         (38b)
                                  a2                          a2


where A] X2, are the solutions to the characteristic equation of (37)

                             +    (0—a1)A
                                             —
                                                 0(a1+a2)
                                                             = 0 .                    (39)

From the definitions of a1 and a2 we observe

                                            1-t2 +
                            a1+a2=                           >0                       (40)
                                                   a1

if and   only if 2 < l/(1—2).             If the country is a creditor, this condi-

tion will   certainly be met if the         wealth elasticity         of   the demand for

money does not exceed unity, a condition which seems reasonable to

impose. Thus (40)      implies     that the system (37) has one negative and

one positive root, which we shall identify as A1 <                   0,   A2 >   0,
respectively.22
                                             —27—


            To complete the solution requires the determination of the

 arbitrary constants A1, A2. Imposing the requirement that the system

 converges to its steady state,


                       urn e(t) =        ;           urn p(t) =



For   this to be so the coefficient of the unstable root A2 =                      0.   The
other constant is obtained from the condition that p start from its

initial steady state value of zero, i.e., that



                          p(o) =    A1       a
                                                      + —=
                                                 2

This condition in turn implies that

                                             a
                                                      in.                               (41)
                                         a1 1

           Substituting the values for A1, A2 into (38a), (38b), recalling
that e = p = rn, yields the following solutions for the exchange rate and

price of nontraded goods


                                             a2
                        e(t) =    1 +                                in
                                                                                        (42a)
                                                      exp(X1t)
                                         a1       1

                         p(t) = [2. —                                                   (42b)
                                             exp(A1t)]           .




Consider now the value of the exchange rate immediately after the

increase in the money and   bond supplies at t = 0.                       This value, denoted

by e(o+) is given by

                                                     a2
                          e(o+)    =     1   +                                          (43)
                                                      —x
                                                  a1 1
                                             —28—                                  -




 It   can be established from (39) •that the smaller root A1 satisfies



                                       X1<a1—O<a1
so    that e(o±)   e   (=   in)   as a2     0 or, equivalently, as

                             y[(1—c2)ô—c3p1 — cc5             0 .                      (44)

            The exchange rate overshoots or undershoots its new steady

state value as e(o+)          rn and (44) provides a simple criterion for

determining which of these two cases occurs. In the limiting case of

the Dornbusch model,              =   0, p = 0,   and ''   - , ensuring   that overshoot-

ing takes place. Dornbusch also considers the case in which income is

endogenous and shows how the income effect in the demand for money can

lead to undershooting. But even when income is fixed (p =                   0),   however,

the presence of imperfectly elastic speculation can lead to undershoot-.

ing. Given that speculators are risk averse, undershooting is more

likely to occur when the wealth and interest elasticities of money

demand are large.23 Furthermore, differentiating e(o+) with respect

to y indicates that as long as c2 <               1, de(o+)/dy > 0; an increase in
the elasticity of speculation raises the impact effect on the exchange

rate of a change in nominal asset supplies.

            The phenomenon of overshooting has been cited as a reason for

the observed volatility of exchange rates; changes in asset supplies

create movements in exchange rates that exaggerate the implications of

these changes for steady state. According to this interpretation,

specu1aton acts to destabilize the foreign exchange market. As risk

aversion on the part of speculators falls, making the supply of
                                      —29—


  speculative funds more elastic, the exchange rate reacts more sharply

  to changes in asset supplies.24

             To understand this result observe that since the prices of

 nontraded goods are sticky, changes in nominal asset supplies constitute,

 on impact, changes in real asset supplies. The exchange rate and

 interest rate must adjust to restore asset market equilibrium. An

 increase in the nominal supplies of money and domestic bonds increase

 both the supply of and demand for money, the second via a wealth effect.

 Taking the likely case a2 < 1, the net impact on the money market is to

 create an excess supply. To maintain equilibrium in the money market

 during the adjustment period requires a lower domestic interest rate,

 which in turn requires a lower forward premium on foreign exchange, f.

            When speculation is perfectly elastic, f = e. In this case,

 a lower domestic interest rate requires a continuous apprecizticn (e < 0)

 during the adjustment period. If the exchange rate is to appreciate to

 its new, higher, steady state value it must initially depreciate to a

 value above     that   is, the exchange rate must overshoot.

            When speculation is less than    perfectly   elastic, (y < co), how-

 ever, an exchange rate depreciation also impinges on forward market

 equilibrium by revaluing domestic holdings of foreign bonds. This

revaluation creates an excess supply of foreign exchange forward which

acts to bid down the forward premium on foreign exchange f. If the drop

in f required to restore forward market equilibrium excees the drop

required to restore money market equilibrium, then a continuous depreciation
   >   0) is needed to maintain equilibrium in both markets. For this con-

tinuous depreciation to converge to the new steady state exchange rate,
                                        —30—


the depreciation on impact must be less than the steady state deprecia-

tion; that is, undershoocing of the exchange rate must occur.


111.2. Rapid Asset Adjustment

          The second case we consider is one in which wealth adjusts very

fast relative to the price level. We consider the limiting case in which

     = while 2 = 0.       Thus bd adjusts to keep wealth at its desired level.

In this limiting case we allow the private sector to adjust its stock

of foreign bonds discontinuously in response to a change in domestic asset

supplies by running a large current account deficit or surplus. We no

longer impose the initial condition bd(O) = 0.                For simplicity, we assume

that desired wealth is constant, so that h =             0,   throughout.

          In considering this case we use equations (23) through (27) to

solve for bd, c, r, y, and f, setting h =           0,   as functions of e and p,

whose behaviourcontinues to be described by (28) and (29). Equation (30)

-no longer applies. The system may now be described by the following homogeneous

pair of differential equations

                              S

                              x.,       a1     a2   x1
                                                                               (45)
                                        0      —o


where x1 and x2   are   again as before and now


      (l_2) (l—S)___________
                   3p     + (l—S)
      ___________+                    ;a2    — (l1.12)
                                                _______— _____      ;a0I — I ____
aI
 1
         '2                                     '2                          LT2 1
The system can be solved exactly as before, with a and a replacing a1

and a2. Its solution can be written as                          -




                   e(t)   =   +
                                    A exp(Xt) + A exp(Xt)                      (46a)
                                         —31—



              p(t) = in +
                                 1 1
                            A          ex(At) +           A _2,_ exp(At)            (46b)


"where A and       are the characteristic roots of (45). Since


                             a'
                             1
                                +a'
                                2
                                    _21 0                                          (47)
                                            '(1.12      CL1

 there   is again one negative and one positive root, which we identify

 as A1 < 0 and A2 > 0,
                       respectively. This result applies to the net
 debtor as well as to the net creditor case, since                      > 0 in both cases,

 while 12 < 1.

            Again we can use the condition for convergence and the initial

 condition (35a) to establish that


                                            —a
                                  A1                                              (48a)
                                            11
                                         A'—a'



                                       A=O                                        (48b)


implying the solution



                        e(t) =
                                      + ajAj                                      (49a)
                                 [1                  exP(Xjt)J

                            p(t) = [1 —
                                             ex(Xt)J               rn
                                                                                  (49b)


Immediately following the increase in the supplies of money and bonds,

the exchange rate is given by


                            e(o+) =
                                       r
                                       Jl   -1
                                                     a1       rn
                                                                                  (50)



As before a —      is   positive so that e(o+)                 e as a 0, i.e., as
                                          —32—



                                         + c&1(l—i.i2)S     0 .                (51)
                          yj.i2(6—a3p)

\Again, when p = 0 and y =       , overshooting        necessarily occurs. When

 wealth   is maintained at a constant level, however, the result can be

 reversed only by an income effect (p >          0).      In addition, differentiat-

 ing (50) with respect to y yields an expression ambiguous in sign;

 increasingly elastic speculation may raise or lower the impact effect

on the exchange rate of a change in nominal asset supplies. When 6 is

near one, so that nontraded goods are the major component of the price

index, then increasingly elastic speculation will, as before, increase

the degree of overshooting. The opposite occurs as 6 approaches zero.

            The reason for the different result from before is that, when

the private sector can dishoard foreign bonds instantaneously, the

exchange rate depreciation caused by the increase in the domestic asset

supplies leads to a decrease in the real value of foreign bonds held by

the public. The change is given by


                          +   6e(o+) =
                bd(o+)
                                               'a'X'      (1—6) —       m     (52)
                                         2Ll1                       J
which   is always negative. Since the shock wr consider now leads to a
fall rather than to a         rise in the real holdings of foreign assets, the

forward   exchange premiun f      is increased. Our previous reasoning is

reversed.

            Since e(o+)   >   0, while (52) is negative, bd(o+) < 0.         Thus
the   effect of a proportional increase in domestic nominal assets is to

create an initial balance of payments deficit, which is then offset by

a surplus as the nominal foreign bond supply is restored to its initial
                                         —33—


 level. The rate of change in foreign bond holdings, and hence the current

 account, during the return to steady state is given by


                       =
                           2(ali)[2[al          J_
                                                     +    xj
 which      is   always positive. Thus there will be a simultaneous exchange
 rate   appreciation (       < 0) and balance of payments surplus if overshoot--
 ing   occurs on impact and simultaneous depreciation (       > 0) and surplus
in    the event of undershooting.

                 In considering the extreme situations in which wealth adjusts

infinitely slowly or infinitely fast to monetary shocks, we have shown

how the presence of risk averse speculation can complicate considerably

the exchange rate dynamics. In addition, our results for these special

cases suggest some implications for intermediate situations in which the

portfolio response is positive but less than infinite.          First, even if

real income is unaffected, an increase in the supply of nominal assets

can lead to undershooting or overshooting. A reduction in speculators'

risk aversion makes an overshooting response more likely, and as speculators

become more risk neutral, overshooting is guaranteed.          Secondly, an increase
in    the   supply of nominal assets will create initially a balance of pay-

ments deficit. A balance of payments surplus will         eventually   emerge
that restores the nominal level of foreign assets to its initial position.


IV.    Exchange Rate Dynamics: Open Market Operation
                 In Section III we analyzed a change in nominal asset supplies

that was neutral in the sense that generated proportional changes in

the steady state domestic price level and exchange rate with no change
                                              —34—



in   the steady state domestic interest rate. We now consider a once—and—

for—all increase in the domestic money supply of rn percent that is

achieved by a purchase of domestic bonds. The percentage change in

bond supplies required is given by


                                     a                    m               (53)
                                                 p1

             Starting from initial levels of zero, the percentage changes

in the steady state exchange rate, price level, and forward premium are


                                 -
                         -
                         e=p=            P 1 +   ,,           m
                                                              —
                                                                          (54a)



                             -
                             f=           +           .   0               (54b)


respectively, while domestic holdings of foreign bonds change by


                             b =
                                     P 1 • .,
                                         (1—p2)ym
                                                          >0.             (54c)


As our analysis in Section II indicated, only when speculators are risk

neutral (y -   ) do   the exchange rate and price level change in propor-

tion to rn, and the interest rate remain unchanged. Otherwise, there is

a less than proportional increase in e and p, while f falls. Note that

as y rises, so does the steady state response of bd to the open market

expansion.

             The transition to the new steady state can again be described

by the system (31), the only difference being that a and c are

replaced by a =              C   = 0,     respectively. The same boundary condi-
                    -rn/c,
tions on p, e, and bd apply. As before, an analytic solution in the

general case proves to be intractable and instead we focus on a special

case.
                                       —35—


            In the first case considered in Section III in which asset

 adjustment is infinitely slow (o, =
                                          2=      0),   the new steady state is
"never reached. Hence we consider only the other polar case of very

 rapid asset adjustment (c =            = 0).      The analysis proceeds as in

 Section 111.2. Equation (45) continues to describe the dynamics of

 adjustment, with a" replacing a', and can be solved as before.

           Our criterion for the overshooting of the exchange rate in

 Section 111.2 continues to apply. An interesting question emerges,

however, concerning the effect on impact of the operation on the domestic

holdings of foreign bonds, which is given by

                                       l_â_1.12
                            bd(o+) =              e(o+)   .
                                                                            (55)

           This expression is ambiguous in sign. The open market opera-

tion can, on impact, create a current account surplus or deficit depend-

ing upon whether the share of traded goods in consumption exceeds or is

exceeded by the share of foreign bonds in wealth.

           The expression may also be smaller or larger than b          .
                                                                            Foreign
bond holdings may overshoot their new steady state level, requiring a

subsequent deficit. Conversely, they may undershoot, so that a surplus

will always be maintained. Which takes place is independent of whether

exchange rate overshooting occurs. Consequently, the variety of simultaneous

dynamic adjustments of e and bd is large.

          We cart also consider an open market operation in the form of a

purchase of foreign bonds in exchange for domestic money. To increase the

money supply by in   percent,   the authorities must purchase an amount
                                       —36—


                                                          —
                            b =e(o+)+                     m                        (56)


of foreign bonds. In terms of logarithmic deviations from the initial

equilibrium, the new steady state values of e, p, f, and bd are

respectively


                    -   -              + a1(112)              —   —
                   e=p=         112?
                                 112? +
                                                              m<ni                 (57a)
                                          CL1(l.12)


                                                      <   0                        (57b)
                              112?


                         -d =
                         b
                                 1121 +
                                        1.L1Ym
                                                    >0                             (57c)


Once again, only when speculators are risk neutral ('v' --            ) do   the

exchange rate and price level change in proportion to rn and the interest

rate remain unchanged. Comparing (57) with (54) note that when the open

market operation is performed with foreign rather than domestic bonds,

the effect on the exchange rate and price level is greater, while that

on the interest rate is reduced.

          For the case in which asset adjustment is very rapid (a =

     0), the dynamic analysis of Section 111.2 again applies. In the
a2
absence of income effects, overshooting of the exchange rate necessarily

occurs. Since e is greater, while                a and Xj are as before, e(o+) is

increased. Because the monetary authority has purchased foreign bonds

from the public and the exchange rate depreciation on impact is greater,

so is the initial current account surplus induced by the operation.
                                  —37—


 V. Conclusion

           The assumption that speculative foreign exchange positions

 require a risk premium has implications for a number of propositions

about open economies with flexible exchange rates. In particular,

propositions about the impotence of fiscal policy and the equality in

steady state between domestic and foreign interest rates based on the

assumption of perfect capital mobility require the strong version of

this assumption——uncovered interest rate parity——to hold.   They do not

obtain if only the weaker assumption of covered interest rate parity

holds.

          Furthermore, introducing risk aversion along with wealth effects

in the demand for money has implications for exchange rate dynamics. It

tends to reduce the presumption of overshooting of the exchange rate in

response to monetary disturbances, both the likelihood that it happens

at all and the amount by which it occurs if it does occur. To the

extent that the major sources of disturbances are changes in nominal

asset supplies, factors encouraging currency speculation, such as an

increase in the number of speculators, are likely to reduce the overall

risk aversion exhibited by the market and increase the volatility of

the exchange rates. In this sense speculators destabilize the market.
                                Footnotes



1Other authors draw the distinction between perfect capital mobility
 between countries and perfect substitutability between domestic and
 foreign bonds. The former term corresponds to the weaker definition
 of CIP, while the latter describes the strong definition of IJIP:
 see Frankel (1981). Elsewhere, (Eaton and Turnovsky (1981)),
 we explore the implications of this distinction for the efficacy of
 policy and the international transmission of disturbances.

2This result points to a deficiency with the assumption, at least
 as a basis for analyzing behaviourin steady state. As the size àf
 a country's debt grows, so does its incentive to depreciate its
 currency (if debt is denominated in domestic currency) or to default.
 Either will lead to departures from UIP or CIP. Credit rationing
 could eliminate capital mobility at the margin altogether. An addi—
 tional problem, of course, is that a small country running a perpetual
 deficit will eventually develop a debt that looms large in international
 capital markets, if its debt grows faster than the world economy. In
 this case its debt will have an impact on world interest rates.


3Steady states possessing varying degrees of stationarity are familiar
 from the literature; see, e.g., Dornbusch (1976), Turnovsky (1977).

4Th1s proposition is of course based on the presumption that the world
 is not characterized by conditions of secular inflation, an assump—
-tion made throughout this analysis. Under secularly inflationary
 conditions, the steady state relationship between the domestic and
 foreign interest rates under UIP is R R* + e, where e is the secular
 rate of inflation. It is clear that through e domestic policies are
 able to influence the domestic nominal rate of interest even if UIP
 obtains.

5.
This   result has also been obtained by Harris and Purvis (1979).

6We stress that this statement refers to models based on similar assump-
 tions to those we shall introduce. A good deal of attention has been
 devoted to the literature establishing the robustness of the overshoot-
 ing phenomenon and many models in which it does not occur now exist.
 Dornbusch (1976) shows that introducing variable output can eliminate
 overshooting. Turnovsky (1981) shows that introducing imperfect sub-
 stitutability between bonds and wealth effects can also eliminate the
 phenomenon in a model in which prices are assumed to be perfectly
 flexible. His analysis does not distinguish between imperfect sub-
 stitutability arising from exchange risk (leading to departures from
 UIP) and from political risk (leadingto departures from CI?). Else-
 where (Eaton and Turnovsky (1981)) we show that each has potentially
 different implications for the response of the economy to a monetary
shock.
  7Note also that we include real output, rather than real income in
   the money demand function. This allows us to ignore the effects of
   change in real income from foreign bonds on money demand. In the
   absence of any strong theoretical argument in fav.irof using real
   income rather than real output as a proxy for transaction demand, and
   in view of the simplicity that obtains when the latter is used, we
   have adopted this specification. See Dornbusch and Fischer (1980)
   for an alternative approach, although their analysis treats real
   income as fixed.


 8We find it analytically convenient to separate forward market partici-
  pation into pure speculation and pure arbitrage. We implicitly treat
  the acquisition of an amount of uncovered foreign bonds as combining
  a covered investment of x in foreign bonds and a speculative purchase
  of foreign currency forward in amount x. In a portfolio model of
  foreign investment we identify a third motive for participating in the
  forward market as hedging against domestic inflation. Forward positions
  for hedging purposes depend upon the relative variability of the
  domestic and foreign price levels and do not respond to the variables
  we are concerned with here. Thus we may treat the forward position due
  to hedging as a constant absorbed in     see Eaton and Turnovsky (1981).

 9The notion of a "risk premium" on forward exchange in a non—stochastic
  model is somewhat awkward, although no more so than having different
  rates of return on different securities as is commonplace in conven-
  tional deterministic macroeconomics. Our main reason for doing this
  is to preserve analytical tractability and also to enable us to pre—
  serve comparability with the existing literature, which is also
  deterministic. One interpretation of our approach is that while
  expectations are on average realized, nevertheless 'the returns are
  subject to risk, the magnitude of which will affect the function J;
  see Eaton and Turnovsky (1981).

10This form of price adjustment rule is specified by


                               = w(Y —   Y)


  Equation (U) is then obtained by combining this equation with (10)
  to yield


                            wZ(E/P) E G(E/P)


11To see this, observe that with bond financing the dynamics of E, P
  involve only equations (7), (3), (8), (10) and (11). With a money—
  financed deficit equation (12), with A   0, must be considered as
  well. The fact that bond accumulation may continue in steady state
  in the absence of wealth effects in relevant demand functions is
  familiar from the simple IS—LM model; see, e.g., Turnovsky (1977,
  Chapter 4).

12Another policy worth noting is the balanced budget. As long as H
  enters the money demand function, steady state always requires
  g = b = 0; irrespective of the elasticity of the speculative demand
  for forward exchange with respect to the risk premium. The same
  applies if L is independent of H, as long as J' is finite. The limit-
  ing case of infinitely elastic speculation, steady state requires
  only that g = 0.

'3This type of specification is used, for example, by Tobin and Buiter
  (1976) for a closed economy.

14Even in this limiting case, propositions (iii) and (iv) do not necessarily
  hold under alternative, plausible specifications of asset supply and
  asset accumulation behaviour. Consider the case in which taxes are
  maintained at a constant level in real terms. If the government deficit
  is band—financed and if the demand for money is independent of H
  propositions (iii) and (iv) do still hold. However, if the deficit
  is money—financed an increase in the stock of domestic bonds causes
  a proportionate change in E, which through the deficit leads to an
  eventual proportionate change in M. This contradicts proposition
  (iv), while the causality of (iii) is reversed. With a balanced
  budget the exchange rate is homogeneous of degree one in money and
  domestic bonds.


15For the case in which the country we are considering is a net debtor
  in terms of foreign currency denominated bonds, bd should be inter-
  preted as the logarithm deviation of this country's debt from its
  steady state level. The term     will then be a negative number,
  where —i.2 is the logarithm of the net foreign currency denominated
  debt.


16When the country we are considering is a net debtor in foreign
  currency denominated bonds, then b' should be interpreted as in
  footnote 15. The right hand side of (28) should then be reversed
  in sign.


      speculation deviates slightly from that adopted by Dornbusch et al.,
 in which prices are assumed to adjust in proportion to excess demand,
 as a result of which the domestic interest rate appears in (29) as
 well. We have chosen our specification not only for reasons of its
 simplicity, but also because it follows directly from a model based
 on long—term contracts.

181n interpreting this initial steady state in which all variables equal
  zero it should be recalled that all variables are measured in deviation form.
19This statement applies whether the country is a net creditor or a
  net debtor.


Oconvergence may follow by appealing to transversality conditions from
  appropriate optimizing models which, provided that the underlying
  utility function satisfies suitable restrictions, ensure that price
  movements remain bounded.


21Buiter and Miller (1981) also develop a third—order system to model
  exchange rate dynamics. They can obtain explicit solutions for only
  numerical examples, however.

22Even when the country is a net debtor     < 0), a positive and negative
  eigenvalue will obtain except for extremely high values of c2 and

231f we consider a net debtor, the role of speculation in determining
  the impact response of the exchange rate is much more complicated.
  Its analysis is left as an exercise for the interested reader.

    the other hand, dfX1/dy > 0 as well; a reduction in the risk aver-
 sion of speculators increases the speed with which the exchange rate
 and domestic price level attain their new equilibrium values.
                                 References


\Adler, N. and B. Dumas (1977), "The Microeconomics of the Firm in an
      Open Economy," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
      (February) 67, 1977, 180—189.

    Aliber, R. Z. (1973), "The Interest Rate Parity Theorem: A Reinterpre-
         tation," Journal of Political Economy, (November/December) 81,
        1451—1459.

    Bilson, J. F. 0.  (1978), "Rational Expectations and the Exchange
         Rate,"in  J. A. Frenkel and H. G. Johnson eds., The Economics
         of Exchange Rates, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.

    Buiter, W. H. and N. Miller (1981), "Real Exchange Rate Overshooting
         and the Output Cost of Bringing Down Inflation," NBER Working
         Paper No. 749 (September).

Dorabusch, R. (1976), "Exchange Rate Expectations and Monetary Policy,"
     Journal of Political Economy, (December) 84, 1161—1176.

Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer (1980), "Exchange Rates and the Current
     Account," Americczn Economic Review, (December) 70, 960—971.

Driskill, R. (1980), "Exchange Rate Dynamics, Portfolio Balance, and
     Relative Prices," American Economic Review, (September) 70, 776—783.

Eaton, 3. and S. J. Turnovsky (1981), "Exchange Risk, Political Risk
-    and Macroeconomic Equilibrium," Economic Growth Center Discussion
     Paper No. 388 (forthcoming American Economic Review).

Fleming, 3. M. (1962), "Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and
     Floating Exchange Rates," IMP' Staff Papers, (November) 9, 369—379.

Frankel, 3. A.  (1982), "The Diversifiability of Exchange Risk,"    Journal
     of International Economics 9, 379—393.

Frankel, 3. A., "Monetary and Portfolio—Balance Models of Exchange
     Rate Determination," in 3. Bhandari and B. Putnam (eds.), The
     International Transmission of Economic Disturbances under Flerible
     Exchange Rates, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Frenkel, 3. A. and R. N. Levich   (1975) "Covered Interest Arbitrage:
     Exploited Profits?" Journal of Political Economy 83, 325—338.

Frenkel, 3. A. and R. N. Levich (1975) "Transactions Costs and Interest
     Arbitrage: Tranquil Versus Turbulent Periods," Journal of
     Political Economy, (April) 85.

Cray, M. R. and S. 3. Turnovsky (1979) "The Stability of Exchange Rate
     Dynamics under Perfect Myopic Foresight," International Economic
     Review, (October) 20, 643—660.
                                                                           b
Hansen, L. P. and R. J. Hodrick (1980) "Forward Exchange Rates as
     Optimal Predictors of Future Spot Rates," Journal of Political
     Economy, (October) 88, 829—853.

Harris, R. G. and D. D. Purvis (1979) "Equilibrium Theories of the
     Forward Exchange Rate," Institute for Economic Research Dis-
     CU8SWfl Paper #354, Queen's University.

Kouri, P. J. K. (1976) "The Determinants of the Forward Premium,"
     Institute for International Economic Studies Paper No. 62,
     University of Stockholm, August.

Levich, R. (1978) "Tests of Forecasting Models and Market Efficiency
     in the International Money Market," in J. A. Frenkel and H. G.
     Johnson, eds., The Economics of Exchange Rates, Addison—Wesley,
     Reading, Mass.

Mundell, R. A. (1963) "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy
     Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of
     Economics and Political Science, (November) 29, 475—485.

Solnik, 3.   (1973) European Capital Markets, D. C. Heath, Lexington,
     Mass.

Tobin, J. and W. Buiter (1976) "Long—run Effects of Fiscal and Monetary
     Policy on Aggregate Demand," in J. L.Stein (ad.) Monetarism,
     North—Holland, Amsterdam.

Turnovsky, S. J. (1977) Macroeconomic Analysis and   Stabilization Policy,
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.

Turnovsky, S. J. (1981) "The Asset Market Approach to Exchange Rate
     Determination: Some Short—Run Stability, and Steady State
     Properties," Journal of Macroeconomics, (Spring) 3, 1—32.

Wilson, C.  (1979) "Anticipated Shocks and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
     Journal of Political Economy 87, 639—647.
