                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INFLATION, MONETARY VELOCITY, AND WELFARE


                         Paul B. Krugnan
                         Torsten   Persson

                        Lars E.O. Svensson



                      Working Paper No. 981




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RSSEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          September 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #987
                                                       September 1982



                  Inflation, Monetary Velocity, and Welfare



                                   ABSTRACT



       This   paper develops a simple general equilibrium model of a monetary
economy with a capital market, in which monetary demand arises from a
"cash—in—advancet' constraint rather than from any direct role in the

utility function. Uncertainty gives rise to a meaningful portfolio choice

between money and bonds. We show that monetary      velocity is increasing in
the rate of inflation, and that    the optimal monetary policy is that which

maximizes real balances. We also show that the      real rate of interest is
not   invariant to monetary policy: inflation lowers the real rate.



                                      Paul R. Krugman
                                      Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                      E52—254
                                      Cambridge, MA 02139


                                      Torsten   Persson
                                      Institute for International Economic Studies
                                      University of Stockholm
                                      S—l06 91
                                      Stockholm, Sweden


                                      Lars E. 0. Svensson
                                      Institute for International Economic Studies
                                      University of Stockholm
                                      S—106 91
                                      Stockholm, Sweden
                                      and
                                      National Bureau of Economic Research
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, NA 02138
INFLATION, MONETARY VELOCITY AND WELFARE*


by Paul R. Krugman, Torsten Persson and Lars E.O. Svensson




1.      Introduction

        The effect of expected inflation on the velocity of monetary

circulation is fundamental to an understanding of both the causes

and effects of inflation. In explaining how monetary expansion

can —   particularly   in hyperinflation — cause a more than propor—

 ional rise in prices, the conventional wisdom is that expected

inflation leads people to economize on their real money holdings.

In analyzing the costs of high inflation an important role is

assigned to the costs associated with reduced real balances; i.e.,

reduced "liquidity".

     In spite of the importance that is attached to the idea of a

demand for real balances which depends on expected inflation,

however, this idea has never been given a really secure micro—

economic foundation. The standard Baumol—Tobin model of the

demand for money is a model of a single individual, which has

never been integrated into a description of a market. Approaches

which place money in the utility function, such as Brock (1975),

are suggestive but essentially assume the result. "Cash—in—advance"

models, like that of Wilson (1979), seem to imply that a capital

market drives monetary velocity to its technological maximum

independently of the rate of inflation. Overlapping generations

models like that of Wallace (1980) seem to many to be inadequate
                             2




in their representation of money   in   actual economies, in that

they give money a role only as a store of value.

     In, this paper we develop a simple model of the effects of

 inflation on real balances and welfare in an economy with

maximizing agents. The model draws on earlier work on the

microfoundation of money, especially on Lucas (1980) and

Helpman and Razin (1982). From these we take the idea of

motivating the use of money by the 'cash—in—advance" constraint

associated with Clower (1967). We borrow Lucas' device

of introducing uncertainty at the individual level which washes

out in the aggregate. From Helpman and Razin we take the idea

that agents must decide on their capital market transactions

before they are fully infoed;1and we also borrow their

 'cashing in one's chips" assumption, which allows us to work

with a finite horizon. By combining these ideas, we arrive at

a model which is of course very special, but which     is   also very

simple. To a large extent we will be able to make our points

with graphs and simple algebra. Yet the model has, we believe,

important implications, since it may be viewed as giving a

microfoundation to Friedman's (1969) famous theory of the
                             2
optimum quantity of money.

     The paper is in eight sections. In Section 2 we lay out

the model's assumptions. Section 3 then formulates the individual's

decision problem. Based on this, in Section 4 we find market

equilibrium. In Section 5 we find the optimal monetary policy,

which we show is one which minimizes the velocity of money, i.e.,

maximizes real balances, and we also find the policy which

maximizes velocity. These two policies are shown to define the

boundaries of the region in which conventional views about
                              3




inflation are roughly confirmed. In Section 6 we examine the

effect of inflation on the interest rate. We show that more

inflation leads to higher nominal but lower real rates of interest.

In Section 7 we illustrate some of the points of the paper with

a numerical example. Finally, in Section 8 we review the results

and suggest directions for further work.


2.   Structure of the Model

      Our model is of a two—period, pure exchange economy. There

is a single composite consumption good, and agents receive

endowments of this good in each period. These endowments are

not known by agents at the time they must make some crucial

decisions, so that there is real individual uncertainty. These

individual uncertainties average out in the aggregate, however,

so that the model is deterministic at the macro level.

      The sequence of events is crucial to the story; it runs as

follows:

      Step 1: Agents enter the economy. They are given a start—up

sum of money M1.

      Step 2: A capital market is held. Agents can buy or sell

bonds B for money.

      Step 3: Agents learn their endowment. Everyone receives

     in the second period. In the first period, however, they may

get bad news, that their endowment is 7b or good news, that their endow-

ment is the larger quantity y The probabilities of bad and good news

are IT and 1—n respectively.

      Step 4: Agents buy first—period consumption. They must do

this with cash on hand; that is, with the cash left over from

Step 2. They have not yet received the income from sales of

their endowment, nor the repayment of interest and principal on

bonds.
                              4




        Step 5: Agents receive, in cash, the income earned from sale of their

first period endowment, i.e.,          or         for bad—news and

good—news people respectively; plus repayment of bonds, (1+r)B,

plus an additional (perhaps negative) money transfer from the

government, M2 —       M].
        Step 6: Agents buy second—period consumption, again

constrained by cash on hand.

        Step 7: Agents receive, in cash, the income from the sale of the

second—period endowment, P2 y2.

        Step 8:   Agents must return all the money they were given

to play the game with, i.e., M2.

        Even before specifying consumer preferences, we can say

something about the equilibrium. At step 6, agents will haye

no incentive to hold money beyond what they need to meet the

requirement that they cash in their chips in step 8 The obvious

result is that all money is spent, so that in the second period

a strict quantity equation holds:



        P2
              =    .                                                  (1)


        To simplify notation, we will assume without loss of generality

that y2 = 1.      Also, it is apparent that an equal proportional

increase in       âitd 112 will have no real effect, so we will set

112 =   1, implying P2 = 1.   This lets us use the simplified notation


        M1EM and                                                      (2)



        P1 ,                                                          (3)

where (1 — M)/M and (1 — P)/P become the rates of money growth and

price change4 respectively.. We will regard M as the policy instrument.
                                    5



       The average endowment in the first period is

       -
           =    b
                    +   (1 -   )g                                            (4)

Hence, the ex ante probability ri of receiving bad news

is equal to the ex post proportion of bad news consumers.

      Finally, we turn to consumers' preferences. We assume

that tastes may be represented by the Cobb—Douglas funtion

      U =
               c1 C2',                                                       (5)


which implies risk—neutrality — an important assumption, as we

will see. The problem of each agent is to choose a strategy

which maximizes the expected value of (5); we now turn to this

prob lein.




3.    The Individual Problem

      Each agent in our economy faces two decision points. At

step 2 of the process described above he must choose how many

bonds to buy or sell; at step 4 he must choose a consumption plan,

given constraints which depend in part on the previous decision.

The way to solve this problem is, of course, backwards: to find,

the optimal plan at step 4, then use the results of this optimi-

zation to find how expected utility depends on the capital market

transaction in step 2.

      Consider, then, the problem at step 4. Each agent originally

received an endowment of money H1, which he divided into a value

of bonds B (perhaps negative) and a remaining amount of cashM'.

He expects to receive M2 —              additional   cash, plus payment of

the bonds, plus income from the sale of his endowment; on the

other hand, the sum of money M2 must be returned. Thus the budget

constraint has the form
                                           6




       M' +                  M1) + (1 +        r)B   +         +        >         +        +
               (M2                                       Py1       y2       PC1       C2


or,   substituting H1 =            N' + B,

       rB +             +         > PC1 +                                                      (6)
              Py1            y2                C2.

      Note that money does not enter the budget constraint. In

the model money is not net wealth.

      The other constraint is that first—period purchases cannot

exceed available cash, i.e.,


      PC1 <   N'.                                                                              (7)



      These constraints and their effects are illustrated for two

hypothetical consumers in Figure 1. Constraint (6) defines a downward—

sloping line in C1,C2 space with slope —P;.constraint (7) a vertical

line at M'IP. As the figure shows, the liquidity constraint (7)

may or may not be binding. OZ is the expansion path corresponding

to the relative price P.                   One consumer, whose consumption is at

X, is not cash—constrained; he ends up carrying cash over from

period 1 to period 2. The other consumer, at Y, whose budget line is

further out, finds that he would like to spend more in the first

period than he can; his consumption is at the kink in the consump-

tion probability frontier.

      The position of these constraints depends upon the agent's

initial decision on how to allocate his endowment between cash and

interest—bearing assets. Consider how the location of the "kink"

changes when there is a change in this initial allocation.

If both constraints are binding, we have



      PC1
              N =       M — B and


      PC1 + C2      =       rB + Py1   +
        6a

     Figure 1


C2




                            2




                   y




0               M'/P   Cl
                                     7




As long as the nominal interest rate is positive, an increase

in B thus shifts the liquidity constraint in and the budget

constraint out, as illustrated in Figure 2. By varying the

purchase of bonds, we trace out what might be called an ex—ante

consumption possibilities frontier, which has a slope of —P(l +                    r).
     Suppose that there were no uncertainty. Then agents would

always choose to be on the ex—ante frontier, holding              just
the amount of cash needed to buy their planned first—period consumption.

The result would obviously be a strict quantity equation with

a velocity of one. What gives rise to a more complex notion of

liquidity preference is the assumption that agents do not know

which budget constraint they will face when they decide how much

money to hold. If they receive bad news, that their endowment is

low, they may end by having extra cash — as illustrated by point X

in Figure 1.     If they receive good news, that their endowment is

high, they may wish they had lent less, like the agent at point Y

in Figure 1. Ordinarily — we will define the range precisely

      —   .,-..-..-.-.WLLL
                      ....ii LIIUU       L-.1
                                     LU ilULU d 9UdLIL1L   Ut —-.—--
                                                              LUUL1    WLIiLLI

is intermediatebetween the amount they would have spent if they,

had known that the news would be good, and the amount they will

spend if the news is bad. And the amount of money held will be

sensitive to economic incentives.

     Let us assume that in fact bad—news consumers are not

constrained by the cash—in—advance requirement. but that good—news

consumers are. Then the actual consumption of a bad—news consumer

is


           = (b+ 1 + rB)/P               and                                     (8)


                                                                                 (9)



where we substitute y2          1. The good—news consumer is off his
                  7a


                Figure 2



C2




     (l+r)P '




0                          Cl
                                     8



 demand function; in the first period he consumes all he can:


             = (M   -   B)/P                                         (10)



 In the second period he spends the rest of his income:


             =   (1 +   r)B   +      + 1-   M.                       (11)


        The problem of the consumer is to choose B to maximize

expected utility,


     V =
           r(C1b)(C2b)l_0         + (1   _)(C)0(C)l                  (12)



Obviously, an increase in B increases the first term; but it may

lower the second. And the optimum B is where V/B              0.
        Surprisingly,     however, we need not solve for the optimum B

to find out most of what we need to know. Thus we will postpone

explicit solution of the consumer's initial portfolio choice

until we return to interest rate determination in Section 6. First

we will determine something else: prices, consumption, and

welfare.


4.     Market Equilibrium


Given monetary policy, there are two endogenous prices in this

model: the interest rate r and the first—period price level P.

In general we would expect to solve for these simultaneously.

The symmetry of this model, however, lets us take a shortcut.

In equilibrium, no agent takes a position in bonds. Thus at

step   4 each agent still has his initial money endowment M; and

we can go on to solve the model without further reference to

the bond market.
                                              9




       The reason for this is obvious on reflection. At the time

that the capital market is held (step 2) all agents are identical —

that   is, they have equal endowments of cash, and each has the same

prior distribution on endowments. An interest rate which clears

the capital market must be one in which each agent has zero excess

demand — so no bonds are actually traded. It is still interesting

to know the market—clearing rate of interest. But we shall

postpone that analysis until Section 6 below.

        The equilibrium in the goods market is illustrated in

Figures 3 and 4. In Figure 3, which corresponds to Figure 1,

we show the consumption of bad—news and good—news consumers.

The points Eb and               are their respective endowments; F is the

economy average endowment. Because no bonds are held, the budget

constraints pass through the endowment points. Both types of

agents share the same liquidity constraint, M/P. OX is the expansion

path corresponding to the price ratio P, A is the consumption of

a bad—news consumer, B the consumption of a good—news consumer.

The bad—news agent's liquidity constraint is not binding, and

he carries cash over to the second period. The good—news agent

consumes at the kink in his consumptiori possibilities.

       The consumption demands of these agents are as derived in

equations (8)—(lL), further simplified by the fact that no bonds

are held. Thus


       c1b
                  (b +        1)/P       ,                             (13)

       c2b =     (1 -    ) (b        +       1)   ,                    (14)

       C1 = H/F,        and                                            (15)


             =   (g     + 1   - H).                                    (16)
                      9a

                   Figure 3



C2




                                          x
                             B




0                      M/P                      C]




                   Figure 4
P
/'




                                 F
                                     /


                       -C                  b
     (1—Tr)C
                                         1TC1




               y
                                           10



                                                                                 -
      The market—clearing condition is that


      r   c1b
                 + (1 -
                             )C1
                                      =
                                           y                                         (17)

 which is illustrated in Figure 4. Equivalently, in
                                                                        Figure 3, the

 average endowment point is equal to the average of the consumption

 points, that is, on a line between them.

      Consider, now, the effects of a change in N. Recall that

 M may be interpreted as a measure of monetary deflation, with

 the rate of change of the money supply equal to (1 — M)/M.                     The

 effect of a reduction in N —                   that   is, a more inflationary monetary
 policy —   is      illustrated by the dotted line in Figure 4. As the

 figure shows, the result is a fall in P, which is a rise in the rate

 of inflation (1 -           P)/P.        But while the C1 line shifts down in

proportion to the fall in N, P falls by less; i.e., first—period

 real balances fall or velocity rises. Algebraically, from (13),

(15) and (17),
            (1 —     11)    N + vcx
                —
                               b      '                                              r18
                    — iTa
                y            y


which shows that an increase in M will raise P but will also

raise N/P. In this model, anticipated inflation does lead to

higher velocity, confirming the usual intuition. The next question

is whether this reduction in real balances has the conventional

welfare costs.


5.   Inflation and Welfare


     The welfare effects of monetary policy in our model arise

from the way inflation changes the intertemporal allocation of

consumption. As we have just shown, an increased rate of monetary

expansion means that bad—news agents consume more in the first

period, less in the second. Good—news consumers are cash constrained
                                         '1




 to do the reverse. The result — unless marginal utilities of

 consumption are equal —            is   a change in expected utility.

      From the utility function, and from the demand equations,

we can write the expression for the change in expected utility as


   dV =                         a -

                                                                                (19)
       +                        -

      Suppose the economy is in the situation described in the

previous section, where g—consuiners are cash—constrained but

b—consumers are not. Then                        <
                                                     c/c2,   because good—news

consumers have been forced off their first—period demand. Also,

dC1b/dP K 0, dC2b/dP > 0, from (13) and (14). Thus dV/dP > 0.

A reduction in the rate of inflation increases welfare. The

reason for this is basically that the liquidity con-

 straint introduces a wedge between the marginal rate of sub-

 stitution for the two kinds of consumers. The lower the rate

 of inflation, the smaller this wedge, and thus the greater the

 efficiency of exchange.

     A sufficiently large N will lead to a situation in which

c1bic2b = c1b/c2b, so that (19) becomes zero. This is the

optimum rate of inflation. It is illustrated in Figure 5.                 In

the figure, Eb and              are the endowments of bad—news and good—news

consumers respectively, E the economy average endowment. At the

optimum P*, both good— and bad—news consumers choose consumption

points on the ray from the origin leading through the aggregate

endowment, OX. Thus we must have c1bic2b =                       , implying
                 ci
           =                .
                        —                                                      (20)
               (1 —   a)y
    There are two important points to notice about the equilibrium
       Ua

     Figure 5



C2




0               M* / P *
                           Cl




     Figure 6
C2




      c'




           B'




                           Cl
0
                               12




depicted here. First, the rate of deflation equals the marginal

rate of substitution between present and future consumption for

both types of consumers; since both types of consumers hence have

the same marginal rate of substitution, this means that this

equilibrium in effect reproduces the result of a barter economy

with a perfect capital market.3 As we will show below, this

equilibrium also implies a zero nominal rate of interest. Second,

although good—news consumers are at the kink of their consumption

possibility sets, their indifference curve is tangent to the budget

constraint —   that   is, they would choose the same consumption bundle

even if they did not face a liquidity constraint. In effect, they

are saturated with liquidity. It is obvious from these points

that the situation we have depicted is very close to that of

Fliedman's optimal quantity of money, where the rate of deflation

equals the rate of time preference and liquidity is free, because

the nominal interest rate is zero. The gain from the optimal

policy, importantly, in our case does not come from any direct

utility attached to money balances; it comes from a better

allocation of consumption over time.

     What happens if we try to pursue a monetary policy even more

deflationary than the optimum? The answer is —      nothing.   If M is

increased above M*, it leaves the budget constraints of both

good—news and bad—news agents unaffected, and since neither group

is liquidity—constrained, behavior does riot change. P remains at

P*; increases in first—period money are held without effect, to be

returned at the beginning of period 2.

     What happens as we reduce M below M* is illustrated in Figure 6.

As P falls, i.e., the inflation rate (l—P)/P increases, the b—

consumers reduce their second—period consumption nd increase

their first—period consumption along the offer curve BB'. Cash—
                              13




 constrained, the g—consumers are forced to follow the mirror—

 image curve GO'. As we have already noted, this reallocation

 of consumption reduces expected utility. The process continues

 until P reaches the level P, at which b—consumers consume at B'

 and g—consurners at C'. Here the cash—constraint starts to

 bind also for b—consumers. For P below P, b—consumers' consumption

 point moves from B' towards E, and g—consumers from C' towards

E.


          At the price level P, the pessimum, expected utility

reaches a minimum, as illustrated in Figure 7. For price

levels lower than the pessimum level, expected utility improves.

Since we feel that that range of price levels where both types

of consumers are constrained is of less interest, we do not

ecamine that range in detail.


6.   Inflation and Interest Rates

     In the analysis so far we     have been able to ignore the bond
market. The reason we can do this is, of course, that the

structure of the model ensures that no agent actually ends up with

a net position in bonds. The mechanism which produces the

result, however, implicitly involves the interest rate: the

interest rate must be set at a level which gives no incentive

either to borrow or lend. And even though the bond market is     a

sort of "fifth wheel" in our setup, it is interesting to ask

how this market—clearing interest rate is affected by monetary

policy.

     Recall that in equation (12) we defined V as the expected

utility of a consumer at the end of step 2, i.e., before she knows

her endowment. Setting       E VB, what we need for capital market
      13 a


    Figure 7




V




               P*
                                           14




 clearing is that VBIBO = 0;                    that is, a consumer with zero bond

 holdings should have no incentive to acquire any.                        It is straight-

 forward if tedious to show from equations (8) — (12) that


      VB =                           [(C/C) +(l - ,)2Jr
                                                                                      (21)
           +    (1- )(C/C) [(C/C)() + (1 -°)(l                       +    r)].
     We might suspect that at the optimum monetary policy the market

clearing rate of Interest is zero, since agents behave as if they

were not liquidity—constrained; and this is in fact the case.

We know that P =              a/(l    a) and C/C =
                                                          C/C   =
                                                                    1/y   in the optimum.

Substituting these into (21), we find that                      =   0 when r     0.

     As we move away from the optimum monetary policy, the nominal

interest rate becomes positive. The change in the interest rate

when the rate of inflation changes as a result of a more expansionary

monetary policy may be found by

     dr/dP          —
                        BPRBr                                                         (22)


This derivative is in general a very complex expression; but

when evaluated in the vicinity of the optimum monetary policy it

reduces (after considerable calculation) to

     dr/dF =        - ;(1-       +     .
                                           C/C)/p   < 0     .
                                                                                      (23)

Thus in the vicinity of the optimum monetary policy an increase

in the rate of inflation — a fall in P— raises the nominal

interest rate.

     What about the real rate of interest? The real rate is

defined as

     p =       (1   +   r)P                                                           (24)
                                     15




In the vicinity of the optimum monetary policy we have

     dp/dP = 1 +      Pd   r/dP                                       (25)

             =   r(l - C/C)        > 0


     Even though inflation raises nominal interest rates, then,

it does not raise them in proportion: in our model inflation

lowers the real interest rate. We have unfortunately not been

able to come up with any simple intuition for this result.

     These are only local results, valid near the optimal monetary

policy. In general the effects of monetary policy on interest rates

when we are far from the optimum are extremely complex. We have,

however, constructed a numerical example which gives some suggestive

results.


7.   A Numerical Example

     Let us look at a numerical example which illustrates some of

the points we have made above. In the first period consumers

receive 2 units of output while bad news consumers receive none:

     2 and       =   0.    These events have equal probability: n =   1/2.
In the second period all consumers, as before, have the same

endowment, 2               Finally, we assume a syimnetric utility

function here ct =        1/2.
     Directly from (20) then, P' = 1, i.e., the optimal

inflation rate is zero. We know that the nominal interest rate

is zero in the optimum so the real rate is zero as well. From

(18) we find M* =         3/2.    In other words we need a rather strongly

deflationary policy to support the optimum rate of inflation.

It is easy to verify that in the implied equilibrium b—consumers

consume 1/2 units and g—consumers consume 3/2 units of output
                              16




 in each period. The endowment points,        and      and consumption

points, B and G, are illustrated in Figure 8, which is the

analogue to Figure 6.

        If M is lowered,making monetary policy more expansionary,

the inflation rate (1—P)/P becomes positive and increases. Bad

news consumers continue to consume according to their demand

functions


        C = 1/2P and C = 1/2

and hence their consumption points in the figure move horizontally

from B towards B' along their (dotted) offer curve. The g—

consumers, on the other hand, find themselves liquidity con—
                                           b      b
strained and off their offer curve. Given C1 and 02 their

actua1 consumption, to preserve equilibrium in the goods market

has to be


        C (4F—1)/2P and        =   3/2;

in terms of Figure 8 their consumption point moves west along

the GG'—line.

        The economy reaches the pessimum at     =   1/2 when both

types of consumers become liquidity constrained. This occurs

when they both consume one unit of output in the first period

at the points B' and 0' respectively. The pessimum is sustained

by a quite inflationary monetary policy since        = 1/2 via (18)

implies M 1/2.
       To determine interest rates we make use of the ondition
   =   0.   Substituting the values for C, C, C, C, we have just

derived into equation (21), we find
                 16 a


               Figure 8




C2




                C'
3/2




      Eb                                N
1
                     E




1/2
           B    B'
                         ---->


                            M*/P*=3/2
                                            C1
                                  17




       1 +   r   /3
                 V
                      4P—l


for the nominal interest rate. The real interest rate is then

defined by

       1 + p =   (l+r)P      =   ____


It   is interesting to note that the local results derived in the

last section —       i.e.,   that the nominal interest rate is increasing

in the rate of inflation but the real rate is decreasing —         hold
globally in this example for the total range between the optimum

and the pessimum, - P             1, as illustrated by Figure 9.



8.     Conclusions

       In this paper we have developed a simple model of the

effects of inflation in a monetary economy. Although the setup

is rather unusual, the results correspond to conventional

wisdom: inflation leads to lower real balances and to lower

welfare because of reduced "liquidity". In a sense, then, we

took a longer road to arrive at the same place. We believe,

however, that our paper provides new insights, in two

directions:
        (i) The welfare cost of inflation: In our model, money

does not yield utility in its own right, but is held because

it is needed for transactions. Inflation has a welfare cost

only because it leads to a misallocation of consumption.

       (ii) The determination of the interest rate: The real

interest is not the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution

in this model. Indeed, this rate differs between agents.

What we have suggested in this paper is thus a "liquidity

preference" rather than a "loanable funds" theory of interest,
                 •

                      17a


                  Figure 9




           (i+r)




 1




V'I7.
           (1+P)




         ____________________________ ——    I



        P= 1/2                             P*=1
                            18




where the proximate choice which determine the interest rate is

between money and bonds, not between current and future consimp—

tion. It is true that liquidity preference in turn depends on

tastes and expected consumption streams; but the theory of

interest rate determination is non-Fisherian, as shown by the

fact that the real interest rate is not independent of the

inflation rate.

      We do not seriously propose this model as a substitute

for the ad hoc models which still constitute most of monetary

theory. The setup is still far too artificial, and the range

of questions we can ask still far too narrow. But we believe

we have made some progress on the long road to a satisfactory

microfoundation for monetary theory.
                            19



Footnotes


*This paper was initiated when we were visiting Tel Aviv
University. We thank Elhanan Helpman and Assaf Razin,
as well as participants in the Stockholm Theory Workshop

and an M.I.T. seminar for useful comments.


1. Hence, we assume the absence of complete Arrow—Debreu
contingent markets.


2. Grandmont and Youns (1973) and Wilson (1979) also discuss
optimum monetary policies in cash—in--advance models with
maximizing agents. They arrive at the well—known result that
the optimum policy is such that the nominal interest rate is
zero but for different reasons than ours. Since agents in their
models act under subjective certainty the velocity of money is
independent of the rate of inflation. Therefore agents' choice
of.money holdings is not important in deriving the optimal policy
as it is in our argument.


3. Alternatively, we could start from the Pareto optimal
barter equilibrium where marginal rates of substitution are
equal and then reproduce that equilibrium in our monetary
economy. Note that risk neutrality is crucial here, since it
implies that expected utility is independent of distribution
of utility between good and bad states, once marginal rates
of substitution are equal.
                         20



References


Brock, W.A., 1975, "A simple perfect foresight monetary
  model", Journal of Monetary Economics 1, 133—50.

Glower, R.W., 1967, "A reconsideration of the micro—
  foundations of monetary theory", Western Economic Journal 6,
  1—9.


Friedman, M., 1969, The optimum quantity of money, Chicago.

Grandmont, J.M. and Y. Youns, 1973, "On the efficiency of
  a monetary equilibrium", Review of Economic Studies 40,
  149—65.

Helpman, E. and A. Razin, 1982, "A comparison of exchange
  rate regimes in the presence of imperfect capital markets",
  International Economic Review 23, forthcoming.

Lucas, R.E., 1980, "Equilibrium in a pure currency economy",
  Economic Inquiry 18, 203—20.

Wallace, N., 1980, "The overlapping generations model of
  fiat money", in Models of monetary economics, eds. J.H.
  Kareken and N. Wallace, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Wilson, C., 1979, "An infinite horizon model with money" in
  General equilibrium, growth and trade, Essays in Honor of
  Lionel McKenzie, eds. J.R. Green and J.A. Scheinkman, New
  York.
