NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF OVERLAPPING -GENEPAT I ONS
MODELS IN MONETARY ECONOMICS

Bennett

T. McCallurn

Working Paper No. 989

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

September 1982

Prepared for the Carnegie—Rochester Conference on Public Policy,
Rochester, April i6—i, 1982. I am indebted to Robert Flood and
Dan Peled for helpful discussions and to John Bryant, Karl Brunner,
Ron Michener, Sherwin Rosen, Jose Scheinkman, Bart Taub, Neil
Wallace, Larry Weiss, and seminar participants at the Universities
of Chicago and Virginia for comments on a preliminary draft. I am
also grateful to the National Science Foundation for financial support. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #989
September 1982
The Role of Overlapping—Generations
Models in ionetary Economics
Abstract

The main arguments of this paper can be summarized as follows.

(1)

The overlapping-generations (OG) structure provides a useful framework for
the analysis of macroeconomic issues involving intertemporal allocation.
(2) As a "model of money," the basic OG setup--which excludes cash-in-

advance or money-in-the-utility-function (MIUF) features--is inadequate and
misleading because it neglects the medium-of-exchange property that is the

distinguishing characteristic of money. (3) That this neglect obtains is
verified by noting that, in contrast with an axiomatic "traditional
presumption," the same aggregate leisure/consumption bundles are available

in equilibria in which "money" is valued and valueless. (4) That the model
may be misleading is demonstrated by examples in which three of its most
striking properties--tenuousness of monetary equilibrium, optimality of
zero money growth, and price level invariance to open-market exchanges-disappear in the presence of modifications designed to reflect the medium-

of-exchange property. (5) There is no compelling reason why cash-inadvance, MIUF, or other appendages should not be used in conjunction with
the OG framework.

Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie—Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(412) 578—2347

I. Introduction
A substantial and soDhisticated body of research has grown up, over
the past few years, in which the overlapping-generations framework of
Samuelson (1958) has served as the analytical basis for models designed

to explain monetary phenomena. A far-from complete list of examples
might include papers by Bryant (1981), Bryant and Wallace (1979) (1980a),
Kareken and Wallace (1981), Martins (1980), Peled (1982), Sargent and

Wallace (1981), Wallace (1980) (1981), and Walsh (1982). In fact, the
profoundly influential analysis of Lucas (1972) falls into this category.

Proponents of the overlapping generations or "OG" approach have
argued vigorously not only that it is useful for monetary analysis, but
also that ocher existing approaches are highly unsatisfactory--see, for
example, Kareken and Wallace (1980), Bryant (1980), and Cass and Shell

(1980). In Wallace's words, the OG theory "includes what's essential for
a good theory of money, Economists should recognize it as the •best
available, and the Fed should not ignore its policy implications" (1977,
p. 2).

Other leading theorists have disputed these suggestions. Most prominently, Tobin (1980) has expressed disbelief that nlthe overlapping

generations model is the key to the theory of money.7' Indeed, he suggests,
its analytical parable "should not be taken seriously as an explanation

of the existence of money in human society" (1980, p.33). More recently,
Hahn (1981, p. Il)

has

remarked "how very bad these models are." Arid, of

course, crucial implications of prominent OG models conflict sharply with
those of

ocher

types. For example, Wallace (1980) (1981) finds that the

2

method of financing government deficits has no impact on subsequent
inflation rates, while Friedman (1974) and Barro (1981) suggest that the
method of finance is of central importance.

The purpose of the present paper is to examine the issues underlying
this controversy and develop tentative conclusions regarding the appro-

priate role of the OG framework in macro and monetary economics. We
begin in Section II with a discussion of some general features of OG
models and an exposition of two examples, both non-monetary in nature.
Then in Section III the basic monetary OG model, as described by Wallace
(1980),

is

discussed together with some important implications. The

extent to which this model reflects the medium-of-exchange role of
money is considered next, in Section IV, while related methodological

controversies are taken up in Section V. A brief discussion of some
more elaborate models is included in Section VI, and a conclusion
appears in Section VII.

3

II. The Overlapping Generations Framework
The distinguishing characteristic of an OG model is that agents

in an everlasting economy have finite life spans of two or more periods.
These agents change as they age in the sense that behavior during youth
becomes sunk and choices are made with regard to consumption, leisure,

etc., in fewer remaining periods of life. Also, agents' endowments and
wealth may change as they grow older. At any point in time, then, the
economy includes agents of different ages who have different perspectives
on the accumulation of wealth, even if all agents are alike "before
birth"--if the lifetime utility functions and endowments are the same

for all generations. This feature provides a cogent rationale for some
kinds of economic activity that are hard to justify in other types of
models, without, that is, introducing the complication of agents that

are heterogeneous before birth. Thus OG models help to avoid analytical
difficulties that may be of no importance for various important topics

in monetary or macro economics. They do so, moreover, in a context in
which some agents--as yet unborn--cannot possibly meet in a marketplace

with those currently alive. This rules out certain types of exchanges
and thereby introduces an explicit and understandable "friction," some
type of which is widely considered to be necessary for providing a sound
foundation for the analysis of monetary phenomena.

In addition, OG models are typically characterized by the assumption
of perfect foresight or rational expectations, depending on whether the

analysis is deterministic or stochastic. While this characteristic is
not inevitable--one can imagine an OG model in which agents have static or
adaptive expectations--there seems to be something of a natural

4

relationship: the motivation for models with the virtues described above
arises more clearly in the presence of the severe discipline imposed

by the assumption of rationality. In any event, perfect foresight or
rational expectations will be presumed throughout the following discussion.

A large fraction of the OG literature employs the assumption that
agents live for but two periods, with a new generation born each period.
Clearly, it is not possible to explain high-frequency empirical phenomena--

with a periodicity of (say) 10 years or less--with such models. They
can be used, nevertheless, to acquire understanding of various types of

dynamic behavior of macroeconomic variables. Furthermore, some qualitative properties of two-period OG models will carry over to versions in

which a larger number of phases of life are recognized. For most of the
issues discussed below, it does not matter how many periods an agent
lives, so for simplicity a two-period lifetime will be used in all that
follows.

At this point it should be useful to describe a sample OG model, so
as to fix some notation and provide a warmup for subsequent discussion.
Since the more controversial aspects of OG analysis concern monetary
applications, it will be best to begin with a model involving only real

magnitudes. A notable example is provided by the model of Diamond (1965),
a version of which we now describe.

Let c be consumption during period t

(t = 1,2,...)

by a represen1/

tative young person and let x be consumption during t

When young, a person born in t

by an old person.

seeks to maximize u(c,x1), where u(.,.)

is a utility function that yields unique differentiable demand functions

for c and

It is assumed that c and x1 are normal goods and

5

that the marginal rate of substitution u1/u2 approaches zero (infinity)

as c1/c2 approaches infinity (zero). This assures that positive
quantities of

c

will be chosen whenever possible. Each young

arid

person is endowed with one unit of labor, each old person with none.
When old, a person's only object is to consume as much as possible.

Production is carried out by old persons according to
=

(1)

where n and

are the labor employed and capital held in t by a repre-

sentative old person, with y the resulting output. The production
function f(.,.,) has positive but diminishing marginal products, constant

returns to scale, and satisfies the Inada conditions (which assure that

positive quantities of n and

will be chosen). Capital, which is

stored output, depreciates at the rate 8.

In this setting, the consumption of an old person in period t is
=

(2)

where

f(nt,k) — wn

+

is the real wage. Since the only choice variable is

labor is employed so that

(3)

fi(n,k) -

w

=

0.

Given the degree-one homogeneity of f(.,.), then, f(n,k) =

+

r1f1(ri,k)
(4)

=

ktf2(ri ,k )

ktf2(rlt,kt)

so that

+ (l-)k.

6

At the same time, each young person seeks to maximize u(c,xi)
subject to
(5)

w = c +

where

is the competitive incerest rate on loans

x1/(l

+

2/
from t

to

t+1 and

where the left-hand side reflects the inelastic supply of one unit of
To determine the optimum choices, we form the Lagrangian function

labor.

L =

u(c,

x+i) +

\[w c x+i/(l +
—

-

3/
calculate first-order conditions,

(6)

ui(c, x+i) =

u,(c,

eliminate X, and obtain

x+i) [1 +

Demand functions for c and x1 are implied by (5) and (6); the former we
write as

c = c(w,

(7)

Market equilibrium requires n = 1 (and also

=

l)

so w and

are determined as functions of the predetermined variable k by relationships (3) and (4). Equilibrium also requires that the rate of interest
satisfy
=

2'

k+i) —

6

and that consumption plus investment equals output, viz.,
(9)

c +

x + kt÷l

—

(1

—

6)k

=

f(l,

ku).

Thus ecuilibrium values of c, ' and k+1 are determined by (7), (8), and
(9), again as functions of the state variable kt. Given an initial per4/
stock of capital, k1, the model in principle defines time paths
capita
for t =

1,2,...

for all of the system's variables.

7

While the foregoing describes an extremely simple model, it has

some substantial analytical merits. In

particular,

it is an internally

consistent model in which optimizing agents make non-trivial intertemporal allocation (saving) decisions, in which expectations are

correct, and in which markets clear. Since utility and production
functions are clearly specified, it is in principle possible to use
the model to obtain answers to questions in welfare economics-answers expressed, it should be emphasized, in terms of the utility of
5/

individual agents.

Before turning to monetary applications, let us briefly consider
6/
another simple model involving only real magnitudes.
In
particular, consider the model of Calvo (1978), in which the second

factor of production is not capital but land: i.e., a commodity that
is non-augmentable, non-depreciable, and non-consumable, but which is
useful in production. Output, moreover, is nonstorable.
In this model preferences are as above and (2) again describes

production possibilities but with kt ao denoting the number of land

units held during t by a representative old person. The per-capita
stock of land is fixed at k (say), but k÷i is nevertheless a choice

variable to each individual young person in period t. Claims to land
parcels, which are transferred after production takes place, are
bought from old persons (who supply them inelastically) at the market-

As before, old persons hire labor from

determined (real) price

the young at the real wage rate

w.

In this economy, consumption of

(10)

x =

f(n,k)

-

+

the

qtk

old during t is

8

is an old agent's only choice variable so (3) holds as before

Again

and with constant returns to scale we have

(11)

kt{f2(n,k) +

x,

With

Pt =

f2(nt+i,1t÷i)

taken parametrically as before, the

relevant Lagrangian expression for a young person is now

L =

(12)

After

u(c,xt

l + X[wt -

c

-

x÷1qI(P

+

elimination of X1, the first-order conditions imply

(13)

u2(cx÷i)

—

____________

+

Pt

and the budget constraint is

w -

(14)

c x1 /(÷1
-

+

These imply demand functions for ct and

' and

dependent upon

= 0.
with those choices

the expectation of

Market equilibrium in this model requires k =
as

=

n1

=

1.

k+1

=

k

as well

Thus (3) and the definition of Pt imply that

w

and Pt are constants, say w and p. The other equilibrium condition
is that the per-capita supply of land, k, equals the demand, which
from (11) is

(15)

kt+l =

x÷1/(q1

+ p).

9

Equations (13), (14), and (15) then determine
functions of

c and x1 as

Thus we write

=

(16)

an equation that is analogous to the "pseudo reduced form" expresthions

that

7 /

appear in linear stochastic rational expectations models.

Such an equation need not be treated as an ordinary difference

equation in

for

is in fact the expectation formed at t of the

price of land that will obtain in t+l, an expectation that happens to
equal the realization only because of the absence of stochastic

elements in the present model. In other words, equation (16) does not
describe the market determination of
market determination of

÷1 given

but

instead the

given the period-t expectation of

In light of this discussion, it is natural to look for a solution
expression that relates

to the relevant state variables. The per-

capita stock of land in existence, kt, is a state variable just as in
the previous model but now its value is constant through time.

Consequently, the solution for

is also a constant, say

Accordingly, the expectation of

=

q.

equals -q also, and we evaluate

q in terms of the model's basic parameters by solving q =

0(q).

Under

our assumptions there will be a single solution to this equation.

Nevertheless, the solution path for q that we have just described

may not be unique: for some admissible u(.,.) and f(.,.) specifications
there will be time paths other than
(13)-(l5).

= q

(t =

1,2,...)

that satisfy

Indeed, Calvo's development of this model was designed

to show that it is possible to have a multiplicity of rational

10

expectations solutions in a non-monetary model with optimizing agents.
This multiplicity arises, however, because Calvo treats (16) as an
9/

ordinary difference equation.

In McCallum (1981) it is argued at

length that such a treatment amounts to assuming that agents use
extraneous state variables in forming expectations of future values,
thereby inducing effects that occur only because they are arbitrarily

expected to occur. In a wide class of models, however, there is only
one solution that excludes such "bootstrap" or "bubble" effects. To
avoid the analytical paralysis that would result from the admission of

an infinity of solutions, therefore, it
attention

is

often desirable to focus

on the single "minimal state variable" solution that is free

of bootstrap effects.

10/

In the present case that happens to be the

= q but, in general, minimal-state-variable
stationary solution
solutions will not be constants. Focussing attention on minimal-statevariable solutions conforms to the practice and recommendation of
Wallace (1980, p.55), so it seems doubly appropriate for the discussion

of

iLl

monetary OG models of the type championed by Wallace.

Ii

III. The Basic Overlapping-Generations Model of Money
We now turn to the more controversial class of OG models, that
in which there is a non-productive and "intrinsically useless"

entity identified as fiat money. Since Neil Wallace has been an
influential leader in the development and application of such models,

we shall begin with an exposition of the basic setup in his 1980

paper. Substantively, this model is modified only by taking population growth to be zero, but our notation will differ considerably
from Wallace's.

In this model, as in those of Section II, young persons endowed

with one unit of labor seek to maximize u(c,x÷i). Now, however,
labor is the only input to the productive process, which is

characterized by

y =

(17)

f(n).

Consequently, production will be effected by the young and there will
be no loss in proceeding as if their endowments were directly in the
form of output, in the amount y =

f(l)

units per young person. This

output is in general storable, but depreciates at the rate 6. More
specifically, y

1/(1 + 8) units are available in period t÷l for

each unit stored in t. By letting 6--, we can then represent a
completely perishable commodity. We permit negative values for 6,
reflecting autonomous reproduction of output, but require that
8 > -1.

Let k denote the amount of output stored in t by a representative
young person. Output neither consumed nor stored can be traded for

12

money; the money price of a unit of output is

P.

The real quantity of

money held by a young person at the end of t is denoted

Old persons have zero endowments but each receives, in period t,
a lump-sum monetary transfer payment from the government of real

magnitude v. Consequently, each old person is able to purchase output
in the amount

v ÷ mt 1Pi/P in period t; per capita consumption by

the old is

+ v + miPi/P.

(18)

Given the present setup, the choice problem of a young person is

to select c,

and m to maximize u(ct,x+1) subject to

c+k+m =y

(19)

and to a version of (18) applicable to t+1. Our assumptions on
u(.,.) guarantee that c will be strictly positive, but non-negativity

'

constraints must be imposed for

and nit. Consequently, the

first-order conditions obtained from the Lagrangian expression

(20)

u(c,xi)

L =

i[y_c _k_m] + X2t[k +

are as follows:
(2la)

ui(Ct,Xt+i) lt = 0

(21b)

u2(c,x1) -

(21c)

x+i{u2(et,x1) -

lt

(2ld)

2t -

(2le)

k[\2 -

(21f)

2ttt+l

0

'2t'

=

0

lt1

=

-\ 1=0
m[
t 2tP/P
c t÷l
lt

+

-

xtl]

13

(21h)

y_ct_k_maO

(21i)

'k +

v1 +

"+1 -

x1 =

0

These conditions imply demand functions for
which the arguments are

v1 and

c, x1,

and k in

In particular, conditions

(21) imply a per-capita demand function for money balances,

(22)

Market equilibrium in the model at hand requires that supplies
and demands are equated for money and goods, but by using Wairas's Law
we can express equilibrium in terms of the single condition

(23)

m(v+i,P/P+1)

Mt/Pt,

where Mt is the per-capita supply of money. Following Wallace, we
limit our attention to monetary policies of the form

Mt =

(24)

with

(l+.) Mt1

-l

constant. Then we can write

v

(25)

t+1

M÷1_M

—

t+l

Mt
P
— ____

P.M

t÷l

t Pt+l

and express the equilibrium condition as

/ M P P
; t+l)
t+1

m(r—t

(26)

Mt

The task of this equilibrium condition is to determine
variable

the

is (as described above) an expectation. The sole state

14

variable is Mt so U

is finite the minimal-state-variable solution

should be of the form

(27)

If we guess that this function

is of the form

Pt =

(28)

with

ii a finite constant, then we find that the expectation is

't+i =

(29)

=

M1

T(l4)

Mt

and the equilibrium condition becomes

( 30 )

m

(Mt

'

\(l-I-)M
Cancelling

l4)Mt\1 —

____

TI

TI

M /

Mt

from the latter results in a single equation that

determines the value of IT as a function of .

Consequently, we

verify the guess reflected in (28) and conclude that (28) in fact

governs the behavior of P, when

17/

is finite, in the model at hand.

The possibility must be emphasized, however, that money will be

valueless in the model's equilibrium, i.e., that l/P = 0 for all t.
In this case we can nevertheless utilize the equations written above
if we define

as equal to l-, an equality which also holds

when l/P > 0. Let us consider, then, what conditions lead to monetary
and non-monetary equilibria--i.e., to equilibria in which money is
valuable and valueless, respectively, for all t = 1,2

15

First, consider the case in which money-stock growth is slow

relative to physical depreciation; that is, in which p < 8. Then
X2/(l+ó) < X2/(l-) so (21f) implies that (21d) holds as a strict

inequality. Equation (21e) then requires kt =

0;

i.e., that no

storage take place. But in this case x1 can be positive only if
money has value, and our conditions on u(c,x+i) imply the existence
of a solution with x1 > 0--see Wallace (1980, pp.54-55).
13 /

Consequently, we see that a monetary equilibrium will prevail if

< 8.

By contrast, when > 8, we have X2/(l+iS) > X2/(l-) so that
(2lf) is required by (21d) to hold as a strict inequality. Then

(21g) implies that m = 0 so that the equilibrium is one in which
money is not valued. More generally, if population grows steadily

at the rate v, money will be valueless whenever > V

+ V5•

Clearly, this "tenuousness" of monetary equilibria is an unusual

and striking feature of the OG model. In the case in which there is
no population growth or depreciation, the foregoing result implies
that money will be valueless if policy makes the money stock growth

rate any number greater than zero And even with growth and
depreciation taken into account, a money stock growth rate in excess
of (say) 107 per year would be predicted to result in a non-monetary
15!

equilibrium.

For many persons, a first reaction to this result might be, I
would guess, to conclude that the OG model is "obscenely at variance"
16/

with actual experience.

Kareken and Wallace (1981) have emphasized,

however, that such results presume that all agents confidently
believe that the constant money growth policy will be maintained

16

permanently. Furthermore, the result would be weakened by the introduction of stochastic elements--see, e.g., Peled (1982). So it is
actually not a straightforward matter to bring evidence to bear on

the empirical validity of the basic OG model. Let us then continue to
explore its properties, reserving judgment for the moment on its
merits as a model of money.

Doing so, we find that other striking implications are readily

obtainable. Prominent in Wallace's (1980) discussion, in particular,
are several strong propositions concerning the efficiency--that is,
Pareto-optimality--of monetary and non-monetary equilibria.

Consider, for example, Wallace's Propositions 5 and 6. These pertain
to the case in which p < 8, so that the stationary equilibrium has

valued money, and assert that this monetary equilibrium is efficient

< 0 and inefficient if > 0.

if .i

To demonstrate the latter result, let us designate the equilib-

rium values of c, x1, and

k = 0, c + x = y.

c, x, m and note that, since
:t a:

These c ,

x

values refer to young persons

alive during each period of the economy's evolution, t = 1,2
Also relevant to the Pareto-optimality criterion is the consumption
of the old during period 1, the initial period under con17/

Now, for each period t =

sideratioti.

of c and x
t

=

t+1

1,2,...

the feasible values

are those on or below the dotted line extending from

y to x1 = y in Figure 1. The budget line as seen by a young

person is, however, c = y + (P÷i/P)(v÷1 -

x+1).

Thus choices

are made relative to a budget line with slope -(l--), such as the

one shown in Figure 1. Thus with

> 0 there will exist consumption

17

C
c)v

dt tii

x

1

18

bundles-

preferred
c

*

x

t t+l

c ,

*

and x .

*

with c < c and x
t

t+l

*

—

that are feasible and

by the young of each period to their chosen values,

Furthermore, the old of period 1 would prefer a larger

value for x1, which is implied by c1 <
c ,

> x

cj', so

the equilibrium

x •is not efficient,

0,

=

If, by contrast, we had

the budget line faced by the

young would coincide with the socially-feasible tradeoff and the

equilibrium position would be optimal. And if p < 0 the budget line
would be less steep than the feasibility frontier so that feasible

reallocations

*
away from c ,

*

x

that are desired by the young would

involve c > c* and x1 < x, which would diminish the utility of
the old in period 1.

The results of these last two paragraphs are not affected, it
should be added, by population growth:

it is the aggregate, not

the per-capita, growth rate of money that is relevant. The slope
of the socially-feasible budget line differs from that perceived by
a young person when p differs from zero, not when the inflation rate

differs

iof
from zero.

Thus monetary equilibria with positive money-stock growth rates
are socially inferior, in the OC model, to monetary equilibria with

constant or decreasing quantities of (nominal) money. But how do
the latter compare with non-monetary equilibria, in which money is

valueless and intertemporal consumption patterns differ from

endowments because of storage (k >

*

0) of the consumable commodity?

The basic answer is extremely simple: unless the commodity grows

while in storage (8 < 0), storage is inefficient. That is, barring

19

6 < 0, intertemporal reallocations away from endowment patterns can
be brought about by the use of money as a store of value. None of
the good needs to be kept in storage, so depreciation (if any) can

be avoided and a one-time increase in consumption effected. Thus
any non-monetary equilibrium with 6 > 0 is inefficient.

Taken together, these results suggest, as Wallace points out
(1980, p. 58), "that the quantity of fiat money should not be

increased. For [they] imply that if [ < 01,

then

an optimal

monetary equilibrium exists whenever the nonmonetary (equilibrium]

is nonoptimal" (p. 58). This is, as Wallace emphasizes, a rather
drastic conclusion--one that contrasts sharply with the conduct of

monetary policy in most actual economics. The obvious question-indeed, the main issue of this paper--is, then, whether it is

reasonable to use the OG model as a basis for reaching conclusions
regarding monetary issues.

In this regard, some critics might be inclined to reject the
OG model simply because it does not incorporate labor or product
market disequilibria; i.e., because it is an equilibrium model.

But that reason for rejection seems unwarranted. Whether pure,
flexible-price equilibrium models--as opposed to sticky-price
equilibrium models of the type mentioned by Lucas (1980a, 712,
n. 14)--will ultimately prove fruitful f or the analysis of

cyclical fluctuations and stabilization policy is at present

unclear. But even if flexible-price equilibrium models do not
prove adequate for cyclical issues, they may nevertheless provide
a useful basis for issues involving inflation, monetary growth

rates, etc. There are various issues in monetary economics that

20

have traditionally been examined in full-employment models.

More serious, perhaps, is the question--mentioned by Kareken
and Wallace (1980, p. 8), Tobin (1980, p. 87), and many others-of whether the analytical entity called "fiat money" functions in

the OG model as a medium of exchange. That this entity serves only
as a store of value is suggested both by the OG model's structure

and by the tenuousness property described above. To investigate
this issue is the next task on our agenda.

21

IV. The Functions of Money
Let us begin the discussion by recalling that it has long been
agreed, by economists and laymen alike, that for something to be called
"money" it should function both as a store of value and as a medium of
19/

Indeed, as Wicksell (1935) observed, it is only the latter
2Q/
function that is distinctive;
many assets serve as stores of value.

exchange.

But the important issue is not, of course, terminological. It is, rather,
the entirely substantive matter of whether the OG model can provide
useful answers to questions regarding the behavior of actual economies
in which there is a medium of exchange.

To approach this issue let us first try to establish whether the
entity called fiat money does or does not serve as a medium of exchange

in the OG model. Now it might be thought that the answer to this question
is obvious; that one can simply look at the specification of the model
21'
and immediately see that there is rio medium of exchange.
Lucas (1972,

p. 107) has suggested, however, that the matter is not so simple-indeed, that the model is not rich enough to justify an answer one way

or the other. Presumably the idea is that the absence of an explicit
description of some activity is not enough to iriiply that this activity is

nonexistent in the modelled economy. A one-good model, for example, can
be given a many-good interpretation, as is done in Lucas's (l980b)

colored-marbles economy. That example, furthermore, shows that a onegood economy can reasonably be thought of as possessing a medium of exchange, one that serves to facilitate transactions of types--say, among
the members of a single generation--that are invisible in the OG framework.

22

This notion--that activities may exist even if not explicitly
described--may be accepted, however, without

impossible

agreement that it is

to make progress on the issue at hand. What the notion

implies is that the approach must be indirect: instead of merely

looking at the model, w must look at its implications. If some can be
found that are inconsistent with the absence (or presence) of a medium
of exchange, then we can conclude that the model's money does (or does
not) function in that capacity.

Taking that approach, it appears that a reasonably satisfactory
argument

can in fact be developed. This argument builds upon the

traditional presumption

that an economy

•

with a medium of exchange will
22'

be more productive than it would be if no such medium existed.

More specifically, the presumption is that leisure-consumption possibilities that would be unavailable under barter conditions become
feasible in the presence of a medium of exchange. The relevant cocnparison, it should be noted, is one that holds constant (or corrects for)

the stock of capital: extra consumption or leisure resulting from a
larger capital stock does not reflect any medium-of-exchange effects.

For a given value of k, then, agents in the aggregate are able to enjoy
more leisure and/or consumption (without loss of the other) than would

be possible under barter. Given this condition, it becomes clear
that money in the basic OG model does not serve as a medium of exchange,
for precisely the same leisure-consumption totals are available in the

monetary and non-monetary equilibria when k is the same in each. This
is clearest in the no-storage case in which v

consumption c+x equals y +

(y-l)k

= 0.

More generally,

regardless of the value of 'y.

23

Correcting for the magnitude of k, then, c+x is the same in monetary

and non-monetary equilibria. And to complete the argument, we note
that the entity called money certainly does not function as a medium
of exchange in the latter type of equilibrium, for its exchange value
is zero.

To the foregoing it might be objected by OG advocates that the
traditional presumption--that economies with a medium of exchange are
more productive than without--has not been firmly established by

evidence or analysis. In response, it must be admitted that conclusive

direct evidence is not available: the experiment of switching abruptly
from barter to monetary exchange has probably not been performed on an

economy-wide basis. And it might even be granted that the analyses of the
presumption carried out by Bruriner and Meltzer (1971), Clower (1970),

and Neihans (1978, pp. 99-117) are not marked by formal rigor and

explicitness to the extent that is typical in the OG literature. But
it is difficult to believe that any reader of these three items-or, for
that matter, of Jevoris (1875) or Pigou (l949)--would doubt the validity

of the presumption. The objection seems to me

unsustainable;

consequently, I contend that it is necessary to conclude that the OG
model's money does not serve as a medium of exchange.

Parenthetically, it might be noted that, while Wallace (1980) does
not mention the presumption,

it is implicitly denied by his "confession"

that, to him, non-monetary equilibria and commodity-money equilibria "are

simply different names for the same thing." 1ore specifically, in models
with several equilibria in which

=

0, "there will in general be rio

24

basis for classifying these into ... commodity money equilibria and

barter euiLibria' (1980, p. 52). Wallace attempts to justify this
position by suggesting that the main difference between commoditymoney and barter equilibria is in the differing patterns of transaction
velocities and conjecturing that 'most models with frictions are likely

to display some intermediate pattern" (p. 52). But while the pattern
of transaction velocities is directly and definitionally related to the
distinction under consideration, that does not rule out the possibility
of identification by means of implications for leisure—consumption

bundles (a possibility that may remain in settings in which transaction

velocities cannot be observed). Thus Wallace's denial of the presumption
seems unwarranted.

Next we turn to the question of whether it matters if the monetary
entity in OG models is riot a medium of exchange. But evidently it does
matter; some of the most striking properties of these models are cru11
.. .. J

.

V

4., s-..LL . .

,,4

.

.

T..
L.
.1..

..I..

Q IJ

i.J...

.1 1.

L...
I..

.L. ULLL L) 1.

exchange function, for example, that accounts for the tenuousness of
monetary equilibria in the model of Section III. For if the model's
money served as a medium of exchange, it would provide its holders with
enhanced leisure-consumption possibilities by reducing transaction costs.
And this would induce agents to demand the asset even when its rate of
return is exceeded by that of other equally-riskless assets; thus
> 5 does not require

=

0.

25

In

order to demonstrate this particular claim, let us provisionally

adopt the artifice of making real balances

t

ttP /p an argument of

each young perso&s utility function, which then becomes u(ct,xt+i,)
24,'

O.

with u3

Given this modification to the model of Section III, the

first-order conditions (21) are replaced with the folloing:

(31a)

ui(c,x+i,) -

(31b)

u2 (c
,x
t
t+l , t )

(31c)

x

1t =

- ?.

0

2t—<0
-

t+l [u2(ct

2t

< 0

(31d)

'y

(3le)

k f"( X2 —

(31f)

u3(c,xt+i,t

(31g)

m(u3(ct,x+i,)

(31h)

c
m =0
k +vt+1 +m P t+l
y

(31i)

-

-

t

Now in this case,

= 0

0

)P/p

<0
-Xit +X 2tp/P
t t+1 —
+

-

\2P/P÷j

= 0

-

t

t' -x

t+1

=0

> 6 implies 2/(1+5) > \2/(1+_) as before, but the

presence of u3(c,x+i,) > 0 in (31f) makes it possible for (31f) to
hold as an equality nevertheless. Thus m = 0 is not required by
.

> 5;

money may be valued when the money stock growth rate exceeds

the depreciation rate. In particular, money may be valued even though

> 0 and

5 < 0.

26

The claim of the last two paragraphs-- that tenuousness obtains in
the OG nodel because of the absence of the medium-of-exchange function-has been disputed by Scheinkmaci (1980). In particular, Scheinkman
examines OG, cash-in-advance, and money-in-the-utility-function models,

and finds that 'the mathematical conditions that insure the absence of
tenuousness are very similar in all three classes of models" (1980,
25 /

p.

91).

The basis for this statement is Scheinkman.'s demonstration

that all three types of models may have solution paths along which

0 as t-*

money

unless utility and production functions are such that

is in some sense 'essential" or "necessary to the system"

(1980, p. 95). It is important to recognize, therefore, that these
equilibria in which

equilibria

emphasized by Wallace and described above. Specifically,

ci = 0 for all t =

in

0 are quite different from the non-monetary

1,2,...

in the latter, while m > 0 for all finite t

Scheirikman's examples. In fact, examination indicates that the solu-

tion paths discussed by Scheirikman are bootstrap or bubble paths in

the sense defined in Section Il--paths along which effects arise only

because they are arbitrarily expected to arise. Those discussed by
Wallace, by contrast, are bubble-free, stationary paths along which

money is valueless in each period, Thus Wallace's tenuousness is much
more severe than the "asymptotic" variety considered by Scheirikman.

Consequently, the latter's examples shed no light on conditions
tending to bring about tenuousness of the relevant type.

27

It is of course a matter of considerable interest whether Wallace's

optimality conclusions are also invalidated by changing the young
agents' utility function to u(ct, x, cnP/P1). In considering this
issue it seems appropriate, given our argument concerning tenuousness,

to interpret Wallace's Propositions 5 and 6 as being applicable when-

ever money is valuable, a less restrictive condition than <8.
Doing so, we find that the former proposition-—that any monetary
equilibrium is efficient if

< 0--is not valid in the modified model.

This conclusion follows from consideration of a monetary equilibrium
in which storage is productive (8 < 0) and

satisfies 6 < .

<

0.

Starting from such an equilibrium, it is possible to increase the
stationary value of m without reducing c or x, since the relevant
physical constraint,

y + (-l) k = c + x,

(32)

does not involve m. Thus young agents' utility can be increased for
each t =

1,2,...

without any reduction in x1. Indeed, it is shown in

the Appendix that optimality of a monetary equilibrium with k > 0
requires

= , just

as in Friedman's (1969) essay on the "optimum

quantity of money."

It would obviously be possible to object to the reinterpretation
utilized in the last paragraph, but to do so would make the propo-

sitions too model-specific to be of much interest. It seems more
likely that objections by OG theorists would focus upon the use of
a specification in which real money balances are treated as an

argument of agents' utility functions. We need, then, to address
the implied issue in some detail.

28

V.

Methodological Issues

It is no doubt widely known that most OG theorists object strenuously
to the use of money-in-the-utility-function or 'NITJF" models.

In fact.,

the objection is shared by some monetary theorists who are not proponents
of the OG framework (e.g., Tobin (1980, p.86)); yet MIUF models continue

to be widely used. Let us consider why.
The rationale that users of MIUF models have in mind is presumably
26 /

something like the following.

Individuals do riot derive utility directly

from money balances; the only arguments of the direct utility function

pertain to consumption of commodities and leisure. Thus an individual
who lives for two periods (beginning with t) has a utility function such

as u(c,2,ci,2i). (Note that the notation is different from that
of previous sections.) But in order to obtain consumption goods, this
individual must acquire them in the marketplace--here a multigood interpretatiort like that in Lucas (1980b) is helpful--arid shopping takes time.

Thus leisure in t

= 1 -

(33)

where n and

is

constrained by

n s,
-

are amounts of time spent working and shopping, measured

in units that make the total time endowment per period equal to 1.
Finally, shopping time per unit of consumption is constrained by a
technological relationship that reflects the transaction-facilitating

properties of the medium of exchange. Specifically, we assume

(34)

St/ct

=

29

with - < . < 0 and 0 < '() < '(O) < , where m is t±e quantity of real
27/

money balances held at some point of time in period t.

Then sub-

stitution readily yields

(35)

ulc,

=

c1, n÷1 -

t t t t+l

U(C ,fl ,m

,C

,Z1

ct+i(mi/ci)j

t+l,Lflt+l

and it is a function analogous to 'ri'

that

appears in the MITJF models.

There are, of course, a number of issues concerning the specification of 'i.

In

addition to the timing ambiguity mentioned in foot-

note 26, there is the question of why this transaction specification is
28/
not as in the cash-in-advance models.
More fundamentally, Kareken and
Wallace (1980) have argued that such specifications involve implicit
theorizing, which makes it difficult or impossible to examine all aspects

of the model for logical consistency. Furthermore, the approach implies
a failure of the analysis to explainwhich physical objects are used as
the medium of exchange--something, they suggest, that should be determined
endogenously.

It is, I think, clear that the Kareken-Wallace criticisms of this

sort of approach have considerable merit. But there are several responses
that can be made. First, analogous criticisms are applicable to virtually
all of the "fundamental" relationships employed in neoclassical (and other)

economic theory. StRndard production-function specifications, for example,
are not actually dependent only upon the laws of

physics.

There is implicit

theorizing involved with the treatment of "capital services" and "tech29 /

nical progress," even at the purely theoretical level.

And at the

30

level of empirical application, the task of selecting a recorded time

series to represent "labor services' is not greatly different than when

the task is required for "money." Thus it appears that whole-hearted
adoption of the Kareken-Wallace principles would eliminate most existing
neoclassical analysis.

Second, whatever their merits, the criticisms

do not provide much support for the basic OG specification.

Specifically,

it is difficult to believe that the description of the medium-of-exchange

role of money provided by equation (34) could be more inaccurate than

one that requires this role to be nonexistent. To adopt the latter
condition would seem to be rather like erecting a theory of the firm
upon an assumption that makes output insensitive to the quantity of labor

services employed. In addition, one cannot explain what physical objects
serve as media of exchange by requiring that none do.

The upshot of this discussion seems to be that the use of MIUF models
31/
is not as unreasonable as some have suggested.
But it should be kept in

mind that the underlying rationale is provided by some sort of specifications like (33)-(35), and the implied properties of the indirect utility

function should be observed. Thus, for example, equations (33)-(35)

imply that /m =

-(u/)'/c,

tion such as /m__.1. as

0.

which is inconsistent with an assump-

With (0) < , the shopping-time

approach therefore implies that the medium of exchange may be abandoned

if its holding costs become too great. Also, a specification such as
that used to obtain equation (31) can be justified only with some very
special assumptions; more generally, one would expect labor time to enter

as an additional variable. More positively, the approach suggests that
agents can become satiated with finite magnitudes of cn.

31

Now it should be cLear that the foregoing argument has nothing to do
with the essential generational structure of OG models; it concerns instead the methodological predilections of some economists who happen to

be leading proponents of the OG framework. Thus there is no reason,
according to this argument, why OG models should not incorporate shoppingtime constraints such as (34)-(35) or even--if care is exercised--MItJF

specifications. Indeed, given the substantial merits of the OG structure
as a vehicle for the analysis of certain intertemporal issues, such a
combination seems attractive.

In fact, Helpman and Sadka (1979) have used a model of precisely

that type: an OG model in which young agents' utility depends upon cnnsumption while young and old, Labor while young, and real money balances
32/
carried into old age. A question that immediately arises, given the
foregoing discussion, is whether that particular specification is con-

sistent with the shopping-time approach. As it happens, an affirmative
answer can be obtained if it is specified that persons cannot supply

labor services (or that they are unproductive) when old. Then if each
person begins life without money, equation (35) will specialize to

(36)

uLct, l-n-c(O), ct+1,

t

t t+l ,m t+1

=u(c ,n ,c

).

And since Helpman and Sadka make no explicit assumptions regarding
derivatives with respect to m+i they do not violate any properties

implied by u and .

This may be an appropriate point at which to consider, as suggested

32

by Wallace (1980, p. 77), whether giving money a medium-of-exchange role

recuires abandonment of the idea that money is intrinsically useless.'
The answer to this question must depend, obviously, on precisely what is

meant by intrinsic uselessness. Presumably, it would require that money
not directly appear in any person's utility function. But what about
specifications like (33)-(35), which make money balances an argument of

indirect utility functions? It is my impression that most economists
would not consider such a specification as inconsistent with intrinsic
uselessness; even the store-of-value role can, after all, be utility—

enhancing. But if it were agreed that a proper definition makes intrinsic
uselessness inconsistent with a medium-of-exchange role for money, then
it has to be the former that is abandoned if one wishes to understand
the workings of a monetary economy.

It might also be said--perhaps unnecessarily-—that this paper's
disagreements with certain specific positions taken by Wallace should not
be

interrtd a a drtil of th frtifrftii
—--

monetary

roduot of-—hi
work with
--——

OG models. In addition to its analytical results, this work

has usefully emphasized the need

for

internal

consistency and reliance

upon policy-invariant relationships in macroeconomic modelling, as well as

the desirability of individual-utility-based policy analysis. Furthermore,
questions raised
bonds

by Wallace and his collaborators--e.g., why do government

not serve as a 'medium of exchange?--have

important

issues.

drawn attention to

33

VI. Other Monetary OG Models
Thus far, our discussion of monetary issues has concentrated on the

basic model of Section III. It has, consequently, neglected some more
elaborate OG setups that have been developed and utilized in a number of

notable papers. A brief discussion of a few of these richer monetary
models will accordingly be presented in this section.

One of the more striking results in the OG literature is provided
by Wallace's (1980, pp. 71-73) (1981) "Modigliani-Miller theorem for openmarket operations," which suggests that changes in the money stock brought
about by open-market operations will have rio effect on the price level.

Analytically, an open-market operation is defined in these papers as a
33!

government purchase

with money of some other asset, together with the

associated adjustments in (lump-sum) transfer payments that are needed
34/

to keep the path of government consumption unchanged.

For such an

exchange to be of interest, it is of course necessary that both money and

the second asset be valued in equilibrium. Of necessity, then, the model

must be richer than that of Section III. In fact, the main discussion
in Wallace's cited papers utilizes a model that is quite similar to that
of Section III but in which the outcome of storage activity is stochastic.

Specifically, for each unit of output stored in period

units are

available in period t+l, where t+1 is random and drawn from a stationary
distribution with mean greater than 1.0. Then with the aggregate money
stock held constant over time, risk-averse young agents will--for some 'y

distributions--wish to both hold money and store positive quantities of

output. The stochastic aspect of the model therefore makes it applicable

34

to issues that cannot be addressed with the basic version.

In this model the government can also store output, subject to the
same stochastic technology, which it obtains in exchange for money.

Let k and k denote the per-capita quantities stored by young persons
and by the government at the end of period t. The formal counterpart
of an open—market operation is then a comparison of alternative
stationary equilibria in which the government stores different amounts
of output, with the quantities related by the condition dM = P
Here dM and

refer to differences across equilibria, while P is the

price of output in the "initial" equilibrium.

The result that the same value of P is consistent with both equi-

libria may be explained as follows. Since interest earned on government storage is returned to the private sector via transfer payments
(positive or negative), the ultimate constraints on c and x are the

same whether the government chooses a large or small value for
vided that this value does not exceed the quantity that young agents
,,.

would choose in the absence of government storage.

I

Thus young agents'

choices for c and x will be the same for different settings of
requires that total storage k +

be invariant to k. But the young

agents' first-period budget constraint is y = c+m+k.

variant to

which

Thus with c in-

so must be m+k. Consequently, real balances m must be

directly related to

unit-for-unit across steady states: dm =

But this is consistent with the open-market purchase condition
dM = P

together with dP = 0.

So the same price level satisfies

equilibrium requirements in both steady states.

35

The foregoing argument can be modified to show that the price-level
invariance result will riot obtain if real money balances provide trans-

action services. For in that sort of an economy, young agents care about
the nagnitude of m, as well as c and x. So these agents will not be indifferent to changes in m brought about by changes in

aridwill

accordingly adjust their choices of c,x, and k. And that adjustment
process will prevent m from moving unit-for-unit with M and

changes

in P will be required. In particular, m will tend to move less than M:
an increase in N will induce art increase in P.

Reflection upon the relative usefulness of assets in Wallace's model
makes his price-level invariance result less surprising than it seems at

first glance. Thus, the result can be restated more generally as follows:
an open-market exchange of a productive asset for an unproductive asset
will leave the relevant real quantity of the former unchanged, with the

real quantity of the latter adjusting as required. When stated in this
manner, the result becomes consistent with the predictions of "Ricardian"
models in which open-market operations in government bonds induce price
36/
To
level changes proportional to changes in the nominal money stock.
see this note that in Ricardiart models money provides transaction services

and so is useful, while government bonds are--because agents take account

of associated future tax payments--of no consequence; useless. Thus the
Ricardian application is simple: the real quantity of the useful asset,
money, is unaffected by an open-market exchange for a useless asset.
Finally, note that our restatement of the result is also consistent with
the predictions of non-Ricardian models in which both money and bonds are

useful: the real quantities of both must then adjust in response to an

36
open-market exchange.

A different way of providing room for two assets has been suggested
by Bryant and Wallace (1980b) and utilized (with modifications) by Sargent
arid Wallace (1981). In the models of these papers, the second asset is
interest-bearing government or private debt, i.e., bonds that are issued

only in large denominations. Young agents who are potential lenders are
of two types: ones with relatively large endowments (termed "rich") and
ones

to

with small endowments ("poor"). Rich lenders are obviously motivated

hold bonds rather than money in order to obtain interest payments--there

is no other difference (except denomination of issue) in the two paper

assets. Poor lenders, however, can not hold bonds because each one's
endowment

by

is too small to permit the purchase of a single bond and it is

assumption illegal for individuals to share ownership of a bond. Thus

there may exist (possibly deterministic) equilibria in which both bonds and
money are valued.

Without going into the details of the models in question, one can, I
think, conclude from the foregoing description and the discussion of
Section IV that "money" in these models does not serve as a medium of exchange.

Each of the paper assets functions as does "money" in the basic OG model;
both are valued in equilibrium only because of the rather arbitrary assumptions

that keep poor lenders from holding bonds. This conclusion is supported,
moreover, by application of the criterion proposed in Section IV--aggregate
consumption/leisure possibilities are not enhanced by the existence of
valued money.

37

Next, let us consider an ambitious attempt by Peled (1982) to

generate, without resorting to a ?UP or cash-in-advance specification,
a more comprehensive role for money than exists in the basic OG structure.

In Peled's model, in which each young person has the same endowment of
a completely perishable consumption good and the same risk-averse utility
function, there are two spatially-separated islands to which are assigned

randomly-determined fractions of each new generation. In addition,
there is a second source of randomness: at the end of each period half
of the occupants of each island are selected at random and relocated
(with their money holdings) to the other island for the next period.

The agents thus selected will then spend their old age in a location
with conditions that, because of the random assignment of newly-born
persons, are different from those faced by their contemporaries who stay

on their island of birth. Since this selection process is random, there
is a certain type of risk that young agents on an island can (if they wish)

agree to share. They can do so by negotiating bilateral contracts
specifying money transfers that are contingent upon the second-period
population of the islands on which each party will spend his or her old
37/
age.

Consequently, Peled's model is one in which money serves to facilitate intragenerational communication, something that appears to be nonexistent in the basic OG model and its variants with random endowments

or storage processes. Under certain conditions the existence of money
therefore shifts outward the "utility possibility frontier;" if riskavoidance were a commodity it could be said that money makes feasible

38

aggregate consumption bundles not available in its absence.

Nevertheless,

it would appear that money still does not serve as a medium of exchange.

It is a transportable store of value which makes possible a type of
insurance contract, but there is no evidence that it serves to facilitate
39/

exchange of commodities.

Finally, let us consider Townsend's (1980) models in which money

serves to facilitate exchange among spatially-separated agents. In
particular, consider Townsend's version of the Cass-Yaari (1967) "circle"

model. This is not itself an overlapping-generations model, but is
related in the sense that it involves a highly-stylized setting in which
the role of money in facilitating certain desirable transactions is
40/
described with great explicitness.
In Townsend's version, the model

features a countable infinity of infinite-lived agents, indexed by the
41/
integers, and a countable infinity of different perishable commodities.

In each period household i, which is endowed with a positive quantity of
good i only, is physically able to make contact only with households i-l
and i.+1.

The tastes of household i are such that it obtains satisfaction

from consumption of goods i and i+l. Similarly, household i+l is endowed
only with good i+l and desires to consume goods. i+l and i+2, etc. Thus there

is no possibility of barter exchange, since there is no pair of agents

each of which has a commodity that the other values. In the absence of
money, each household simply consumes its own endowment. But if agents
hold positive quantities of fiat money--some physical entity that can be
stored and transferred costlessly--they can use these holdings to make

purchases of the second desired commodity. Townsend shows that a monetary
equilibrium exists in this setting and is Pareto superior to the nonmonetary,
autarkic equilibrium.

39

Providing a full discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of this
model as a vehicle for monetary analysis is beyond the scope of the present

paper. A few comments are nevertheless in order. First, as Sargent (1982)
has noted, Townsend's models are somewhat less tractable than OG models.

Second, the type of exchange facilitation provided by money in the CassYaari-To'wnsend model is more extreme than in the traditional literature,

where the absence of a medium of exchange makes trades more costly rather

than impossible. As a result, the criterion of my Section IV would suggest
that money does not serve as a medium of exchange in this model. But that
conclusion would not hold under a less extreme specification of transaction

costs. Indeed, it does not hold when the production technology described
by Cass and Yaari (1967, pp.364-365) is used instead of fixed endowments.
Third, the continued development of models emphasizing spatial separation
seems desirable.

40

VII. Conclusion
The arguments of the present paper can be briefly summarized as

follows. The overlapping-generations structure provides an attractive
framework for the analysis of macroeconomic issues involving the inter-

temporal allocation of resources. The attractiveness of the OG framework is a consequence of the essential generational feature that permits
an everlasting economy to be populated with agents who live for only a

limited number of periods. By assuming that agents are alike before birth,
one obtains a model in which it is possible to have a competitive equilibrium that is time-stationary although the economy is populated at each
point of time with agents that are unalike with respect to wealth and

incentives to save. The stationarity facilitates analysis, while the
point-in-time heterogeneity of agents increases the types of economic
activity that can be considered.
As a "model of money,'t the basic OG structure--which excludes cash-

in-advance or money-in-the-utility-function (MIUF) appendages--seems
inadequate and potentially misleading, the reason being that it neglects

the medium-of-exchange property of money. That this type of model does,
in fact, neglect the medium-of-exchange property is argued in the following

way: an economy that possesses a medium of exchange can attain aggregate

2i
consumption/leisure bundles that would be unattainable in its absence;
in the basic OG model the same bundles are attainable (with a given
capital stock) in equilibria in which "money" is valuable and valueless;

hence this money does not serve as a medium of exchange. That the models
may be misleading is demonstrated by examples in which three of their most
striking properties--tenuousness of monetary equilibria, optimality of

41

a constant money supply, and invariance of the price level to openmarket asset purchases--disappear in the presence of modifications
designed to reflect the medium-of-exchange property.

The paper also contends that, as the previous sentence implicitly
suggests, there is no particular reason why cash-in-advance, NIIJF, or

other appendages designed to reflect the medium-of-exchange property
should not be used in conjunction with the OG framework.

The useful-

ness of each potential appendage or elaboration is a distinct issue
that may involve difficult and important methodological considerations,

but in most cases these considerations have nothing to do with the
essential generational structure of OC models.

APPENDD(

In

the MIUF model of Section IV, conditions for Pareto optimality

of a stationary equilibrium can be obtainedby maximizing
is any positive constant arid (x1) is the

u(c,x,) + (x1), where
utility of the

k

c

initial old,

subject to the constraints y

-

0, x1

= 0,

+

(y-l)k

C -

43 /

are the
44
Lagrangiari multipliers, the optimality couditlDns include the following:

+

-

-

0, and

and

If

0.

/

=0

(A-i)

u1(c,x,) -

(A-2)

u2(c,x,) -

(A-3)

u3(c,x,) < 0,

(A-4)

e(x1)

(A-5)

X1(y-l) —

Now

k

0,

x

0

Xi

-

<

=

u3(c,x,)
0,

x1[9(x1) - x21

0,

k(X1(y—l) - X2]

0

0

=

0.

consider a monetary equilibrium in which storage is positive, i.e.,

a case with > 0 and k > 0. From (A-3) we see that a satiation level of
money balances must be held, i.e., that u3(c,x,) = 0. From (A-5) we
further see that X2 = 1(y-l), which with (A-i) and (A-2) implies
(A-6)
But

u1(c,x,) = u2(c,x,)

+

('y-l)u2(c,x,).

from equations (31g), (31a), and (31b)

agents'

(A-7)

in Section IV we see that

behavior implies
(l4) u1(c,x,) =

u2(c,x,)

+ u3(c,x,).

Thus with u3(c,x,) = 0 it is clear that (A-6) and (A-7) together require
=

l/(l),

result

which immediately reduces

mentioned

to -

= 5.

toward the end of Section IV.

This is the Friedman-type

REFERENCES

Barro,

R. J. (1974) Are Government Bonds Net Wealth? Journal of

Political Economy 82, 1095-1117.

___________

(1981) Macroeconomic Analysis, typescript.

Brock, W. A. (1974) Money and Growth: The Case of Long-Run Perfect
Foresight, International Economic Review 15, 750-777.

____________ (1975) A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Model, Journal
of Monetary Economics 1, 133-150.

Brunner, K., and Meltzer, A. H. (1971) The Uses of Money: Money in the
Theory of an Exchange Economy, American Economic Review 61, 784-805.

Bryant, J. (1980) Transaction Demand for Money and Moral Hazard, in
Models of Monetary Economies, J. H. Kareken and N. Wallace, eds.

Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
__________ (1981) Bank Collapse and Depression, Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 13, 454-464.

Bryant, J., and Wallace, N. (1979) The Inefficiency of Interest-Bearing

Natona1 Debt, Journal of Political Economy 87, 365-381.

__________ and

_________ (1980a) Open Market Operations in a Model of

Regulated Insured Intermediaries, Journal of Political Economy 88,
146-173.

__________ and

__________ (1980b) A suggestion for Further Simplifying

the Theory of Money, Staff Report No. 62, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis.

Calvo, G. (1978) On the Indeterminacy of Interest Rates and Wages with
Perfect Foresight, Journal of Economic Theory 19, 321-337.
Cass, D., and Shell, K. (1980) In Defense of a Basic Approach, in
Models of Monetary Economies.

Cass, D., and Yaari, N. (1966) A Re-Examination of the Pure Consumption
Loans Model, JournaL of PoLitical Economy 74, 353-367.

Clower, R. W. (1970) Introduction, in Monetary Theory, ed. by R. W. Clower.
Harrnondsworth: Penguin Books.
Diamond, P. (1965) National. Debt in a Neoclassical Growth

Model,

American Economic Review 55, 1126-1150.
DornbuSch, R., and Frenkel, J. A. (1973)

Inflation and Growth, Journal of

Nonej, Credit and Banking, 5, 141-156.
Drazen, A. (1978) Government Debt, Human Capital, and Beguests in a LifeCycle Model, Journal of Political Economy, 86, 505-516.

Duttort, D. S., and Gramm, W. P. (1973) Transactions Costs, the Wage Rate,

and the Demand for Money, American Economic Review 63, 652-665.
Fischer, S. (1974) Money and the Production Function, Economic Inquiry
12, 517-533.

Friedman, N. (1974) Cocnments, in Monetarism, J. L. Stein, ed. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.

___________ (1969) The Optimum Qua'tity of Money, in The Optimum Quantity
of Money and Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine.

Hahn, F. (1973) On the Foundations of Monetary Theory, in Essays in
Modern Economics,, N. Parkin and A. R. Nobay, eds. New York:

Harper and Row.

________ (1981) On Inflation, Technical Report No. 326, Institute for
Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University.
Helpman, E., and Sadka, E. (l979' Optimal Financing of the Government's

Budget: Taxes, Bonds, or Money? American Economic Review 69, 152-160.

Jensen, M. C., and Meckling, W. H.. (1979) Rights and Production Functions:

An Application to Labor-managed Firms and Codetermination, Journal of
Business, 52, 469-506.

Jevons, S. (1875) Money and the Mechanism of Exchange. London: King.
Kareken, J. H., and Wallace, N. (1980) Introduction, in Models of
Monetary Economies.

_______________ and ___________ (1981) On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium
Exchange Rates, Quarterly Journal of Economics 96, 207-222.
Lucas, R. E., Jr. (1972) Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,
Journal of Economic Theory 4, 103-124.

_________________ (1980a) Methods and Problems in Business Cycle Theory,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 12, 696-715.

__________________ (1980b) Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy, in
Models of Monetary Economies.

Martins, M.A.C. (1980) A Nominal Theory of the Nominal Rate of Interest
and the Price Level, Journal of Political Economy 88, 174-185.
McCallurn, B. T. (1981) On Non-Uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models:

An Attempt at Perspective, NBER Working Paper No. 684. Forthcoming
in Journal of Monetary Economics.

Neihans, J. (1978) The Theory of Money. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

Peled, D. (1981) Informational Diversity Over Time and the Optimality of
Monetary Equilibria, Carnegie-Mellon Working Paper 66-79-80.
Forthcoming in Journal of Economic Theory.

__________ (1982) Constrained Communication and the Welfare Enhancing
Role of Fiat Money, Carnegie-Mellon working paper.

Pigou, A. C. (1949) The Veil of Money. London: Macmillan and Co.

Samue].sort, P. A. (1958) An

Exact

Consumption-Loan Model of Interest

With or Without the Social Contrivance of Money, Journal of Political
Economy 66, 467-482.
Saving, T. R. (1971) Transactions Cost arid the Demand for Money, American

Economic Review 61, 407-420.

Sargent, T. J. (1976) A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United
States, Journal of Political Economy 84, 207-237.

______________ (1982) Consumption, Loans, and Currency: II, Working paper.

Sargent, T. J., and Wallace, N. (1975) "Rational" Expectations, the
Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,
Journal of Political Economy 83, 241-254.

______________ and __________ (1981) The Real Bills Doctrine vs.
The Quantity Theory: A Reconsideration, Staff Report 64, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Scheinkmart, J. A. (1980) Discussion, in Models of Monetary Economies.

Schumpeter, J. A. (1954) History of Economic Analysis. Ne York:
Oxford University Press.
Tobin, j.

(1980) Discussion, in Models of Monetary Economies.

Townsend, R. M. (1980) Models of Money with Spatially Separated Agents,
in Models of Monetary Economies.

Wallace, N. (1977) Why the Fed Should Consider Holding the Stock of
Constant, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review
1,

2-10.

__________ (1980) The Overlapping Generations Model of Fiat Money, in
Models of Monetary Economies.

___________ (1981) A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations,
American Economic Review 71, 267-274.

Walsh, C. E. (1982) The Demand for Money Under Uncertainty and the Role
of Monetary Policy, Working paper.

Weiss, L. (1980) The Effects of Money Supply on Economic Welfare in the
Steady State, Econoaietrica, 48, 565-576.

Wicksell, K. (1935) Lectures in Political Economy, Vol. II. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.

FOOTNOTES

1.

Note that this notational convention differs from that typically found
in the OG literature, where t indexes generations rather than time.

2. With homogeneous young agents the loan market will be inactive but,
as in Diamond (1965), we assume that

is taken parametrically never-

theless. In (5), and throughout the paper, inequality constraints are
written as equalities when they are certain to be binding in equilibrium.

3. Under the stated conditions, these will be necessary and sufficient
for optimality.

4. Here and in what follows, "per capita" refers to quantities per member
of the relevant generation, not per person alive.

5. Barro (1974) has shown the existence of an operative bequest motive will
under some conditions make an OG model analytically equivalent to one

with agents with infinite planning horizons. Drazen (1978) has described
one set of conditions under which this equivalence does not obtain.
In my opinion, there is ample reason to believe that the continued

development of both types of models--infinite-horizon and no-bequest

OG models--is appropriate. Barro's result is important but does not
warrant a dismissal of no-bequest OG models.

6. The reason for including this second example is to demonstrate that
multiple solutions may obtain in non-monetary OG models, thereby indicating that solution multiplicities are not necessarily related to
monetary issues of interest.

7. See, for example, Sargent and Wallace (1975, p.247).

8. See Calvo (1978, pp.322-324). These otherpaths are such that
as t—.°; they thus arise when Øt is large, making its
reciprocal less than 1.0.

9. When (16) is viewed as a difference equation,

appears to be

a state variable relevant to the determination of

or, equivalently,

as a state variable relevant to the determination of
viewpoint suggests a solution of the form

into (16) gives Q(q1)

=

Q(1)

That

and substitution

which "verifies" the guess.

10. That this strategy is feasible is demonstrated in McCallum (1981).
It will be desirable if,
are

as

in

the

present case, the issues at hand

not directly concerned with the possible existence of bubbles.

11. Wallace's argument is compatible with, but less complete than, the one
in McCallum (1981). In particular, Wallace does not
possibility
offer

in

consider the

of extraneous state variables other than time

any procedure

and does not

for selection of the appropriate solution in cases

which the solution to undetermined-coefficient identities is not

unique.

12.

There are, as in the Calvo model, other solution paths. We shall ignore
them, however, for the reasons given in Section II.

13. To be precise, the theory implies only that a monetary equilibrium will
exist--there is also an autarkic equilibrium in which i/pt = 0 for all t.

14. In the case in which ..

= u,

there is a continuum of equilibria in

which money is valued and goods are stored. Since

and ô are

parameters of independent processes, I will devote no attention to
this borderline case.

15. Here 10% is simply an order-of-magnitude figure reflecting a
depreciation rate of about 0.06 and an output growth rate--resultirig from population growth and technical progress--of about 0.04.
16.

The phrase is taken from Sargent (1976).

17.

Here period 1 is simply the point of reference for the optimality
calculation--a period within which a reallocation is contemplated.
If it is also the first period of the economy's existence, and

the latter begins without old persons, then < 0 is not optimal-as consideration of the next paragraph in the text will reveal.

l8 In the case in which population grows at the rate v,

the

per-

capita notation employed above becomes inadequate for repre-

senting the transfer-payment injections of money. The slope

of an individual's budget line remains -+i/' which now
equals -(l.+.)/(1+\'), while the feasible values satisfy

=

19.

y

-

To quote Wicksell (1935, p. 6), "The conception of money is
involved in its functions ...: as a measure of value, as a

store of value, and as a medium of exchange .. .
Schumpeter (1954, pp. 62-63) and Jevons (1875).

." Also

see

20.

"Of the three main functions, only the last is in a true sense

characteristic of money" (Wicksell, 1935, pp. 6-7). According
to Schumpeter (1954, pp. 62-63), a similar view was held by

Aristotle. Also see Clover (1970, p. 14).
21.

This seems to be the view of Hahn (1981) and Helpman and Sadka
(1979, p. 156).

22.

See, for example, Clover (1970, pp. 8-14), Neihans (1978, p. 1-3),
and Pigou (1949, pp. 25-26).

23.

Wallace's discussion on p. 52 is concerned with the relative
efficiency of fiat vs. commodity money, a concern that is

significant but entirely different. On p. 78, he denies or overlooks the presumption in his assertion that "not a single proposi-

tion in monetary theory makes use of" the distinction between the
medium-of-exchange and store-of-value roles of money.
24.

Whether there exists a reasonable justification for this procedure

is discussed below. Note that equations (31) also apply if the
real-balance term

25.

is defined as v1 +

rJ

mP/P1.
L I.. LIL

Scheinkman explicitly interprets his cash-in-advance model

as one in which money serves as a medium of exchange. To
represent that function of money is the usual reason for the
MIUF. assumption.
26.

The development in this paragraph reflects influences from
a number of sources. These include Brock (1974), Dorribusch and
Frenkel (1973), DuttQn and Gramm (1973), Fischer (1974), ard Saving

(170). There are doubtless other relevant references; I have
listed only those that have had an influence on my own views.

27.

Most writers would probably specify real balances at the

start of period t. Some formulations in the literature
imply, however, that it is the end-of-period balances that

matter (Brock, 1975). Some average over the period is another
possibility.
28.

One answer is that the cash-in-advance specification is a

special case, one with

m/c .
29.

= 0 for m/c < 1 and

=

for

1.

Implicit theorizing must be involved, for example, in Wallacets

(1980) storage technology--especially in the case 6 < 0. Note that
this argument is more general than that of Jensen and Meckling (1979),

which hinges on a distinction between firms and other agents.
30.

That does not imply that the principles are necessarily misguided,
but it does suggest that one proceed cautiously in embracing them.

31.

Use for some problems, it should be added. Obviously such models
are not going to explain which objects serve as the medium of exchange.

32.

33.

Another example is provided by Weiss (198O.
Purchase quantities may of course be positive or negative for
individual operations.

34

These transfer-payment adjustments are, I believe, implicit in

traditional analyses of open-market operations. Their explicit
recognition is not the reason for Wallace's result.
35•

Here and in what follows we drop the time subscripts since
steady-state equilibria are being discussed.

36. For an example and references, see Barro (1981), Chapter 6.
37. Old persons' money will be more valuable on islands in which there
is a high ratio of young to old persons.

38. Compare the argument of Section IV.
39. This view is supported by application of the criterion of Section IV,
conditional upon realizations of the random shocks. Details of the
timing or transactional assumptions of the model are also open to

objection. In particular, newly-born young agents arrive before the
selected old agents are relocated--otherwise, how could their
number be known?--but trades with them are not permitted.

40. Sargent (1982) states that Townsend's models and OG models "embody
the same sort of impediment to private borrowing and lending which

provided a role for currency." (Townsend's Section 3 describes a
generalized OG setup; that will not be discussed here.)

41. Townsend's device of arranging agents in an infinite sequence rather
than a closed finite "circle," seems to me unconstructive. The
object of this device is to provide an "endogenous" exclusion of

private loans. But this exclusion results because of an analytical
condition--an infinity of agents at each point of time--that must

be literally untrue. If it matters whether one takes the number of
agents to be infinite, as opposed to large and finite, then to do
so is inappropriate.

This "classical presumption" is taken to be axiomatic.
43. It would not affect the following argument if we used
42.

i(x1,1)

the

as

utility of the initial old.

44. To avoid clutter, the discussion proceeds under the condition x > 0.

