NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNIONIZATION AND FIRM PERFORMANCE: THE IMPACT
ON PROFITS, GROW'11H AND PRODUCTIVITY

Kim B. Clark

Working Paper No. 990

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
September 1982

This research has been supported by the Division of Research of the
Harvard Business School and the Labor Studies program of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The Strategic Planning
Institute provided access to the PIMS data and supported the statistical analysis through a computer grant. I am indebted to David
Eflwood, Therese Flaherty, Richard Freeman, David Garvin, Lawrence
Summers and participants in various NBER seminars for comments and
suggestions. Phil Jarimyszin and Lone Wilson provided excellent
research assistance. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Working Papers are a series of manuscripts in their draft form.
They are not intended for circulation or distribution except as
indicated by the author. For that reason Working Papers may not be
reproduced or distributed without the written consent of the
author.

NBER Working Paper 990
September 1982
Unionization and Firm Performance:
The Impact on Profits, Growth and Productivity
ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of unionization on profitability, growth and productivity using time series data on over 900
product line businesses in the North American manufacturing sector (pre-

dominantly U.S.). The first section of the paper develops a simple
theoretical framework for studying the effect of the union on firm

performance. A key result of this analysis is that information about
union wage and productivity effects is not sufficient to permit prediction of the sign (or magnitude) of consequent changes in the rate of
return on capital; one must know the parameters of production and demand.

Expanding the model to allow for the effects of market structure and
alternative bargaining regimes establishes the need to examine several
indicators of firm performance in assessing the impact of the union.
The empirical analysis reveals sizeable negative union effects on profitability, but growth, productivity and the capital-labor ratio appear to

be little affected by unionization in this data. The data are thus consistent with a model of union-firm interaction in which collective bargaining affects the distribution of profits, but leaves real magnitudes

unchanged. The evidence suggests, however, that unionization may have
longer term implications for efficiency since the impact on profitability
appears to fall most heavily on firms with relatively little market power.

Kim B. Clark

rgan

8

Business School
Boston, MZ 02163
Harvard

(617) 495—6303

The history of collective bargaining in the US has been marked
by dramatic episodes of confrontation which underscore the change union-

ization brings to the operation of an enterprise. Yet strikes and lockouts are only the most visible of pervasive differences in the employ-

ment relationship in organized establishments. It is well known that
a wide variety of changes in the employment contract and adjustments

in management procedure followed the wave of organizing begun in the 1930s)
In spite of the diffusion of many practices associated with collective
bargaining (seniority, grievance systems) recent research has revealed the
continuing existence of important differences between union and nonunion
establishments in policies governing compensation, exit and entry, dispute

resolution and internal promotion.2 As Freeman has argued, these differences reflect the complexity of the employment relation and the potential
for collective action to yield a different set of conditions in the pres-

ence of substantial information problems. Yet little is known about the
effect of these differences on the profitability of the firm.

The large body of evidence on the union wage effect, for example,

is not sufficient to establish a union effect on profits. Other changes in
the employment contract may lead to firm or worker adjustments which either

reinforce or offset the effect of increased wages on costs. The potential
negative effects of work rules and protection of malfeasance are well known,
but some recent evidence suggests that unionization may also lead to Improvements in operations through reductions in turnover, and changes in management

procedures.3 These considerations have motivated statistical comparisons of
union wage and productivity differentials. Freeman and Medoff have stated
the assumptions underlying this approach quite clearly:

-2Unionism may increase productivity in some settings
and decrease it in others. If the increase in productivity
is greater than the increase in average unit costs due to
the union wage effect, then the profit rate will increase;
if not, the rate of profit will fall.4

As I show below, this inference is only valid under quite restric-

tive assumptions. In general, it is not possible to infer changes in the
rate of return on capital from information on union wage and productivity

effects. The impact of the union on a firm's economic performance depends
on the wage setting process, the structure of markets, and the technology

of production. Although an analysis of wages and productivity provides
useful information about the operation of the firm under collective bargaining, an assessment of the impact of the union on profitability requires

a direct examination. Furthermore, evaluating the efficiency consequences
of unionization requires analysis of several measures of the firm's economic

performance. Unionization works through more than one mediating factor,
and the impact of the union on a given measure of firm performance depends
on the particular context in which bargaining and production take place.
Thus, focus on a single indicator can be misleading.

This paper uses microeconomic data on over 900 product line
businesses to gauge the impact of the union on economic performance. In
the first part of the paper, relatively simple models of the firm are used
to derive a number of hypotheses about the effect of unionization.

An

important aspect of the analysis is the role of market structure and the
institutional context of the wage setting process. A clear implication
of the theoretical analysis is the need to examine several indicators of
firm behavior in order to draw inferences about the operation and consequen-

ces of collective bargaining. Part II presents an empirical analysis of
Unionization and interfirm differences in the rate of return on capital,

-3sales growth, and productivity. Part III provides a brief summary and
suggestions for further work.

I. A Theoretical Framework
The starting point for the models developed in this section is
a single product monopolist with a constant elasticity demand curve and

a constant returns production process. Although pure monopolies are
rare, analysis of this case is useful because most of the firms to be
dealt with in the empirical work face a downward sloping demand curve

and enjoy some barriers to entry. Unionization enters the analysis in
two ways.

I first treat the collective bargaining process as a problem

of selecting a point on the firm's labor demand curve. In this context,
the firm is assumed to be free to choose the level of employment and to

adjust other decision variables in order to maximize profits. The second
treatment of unionization allows the two parties to arrive at a wage!

employment combination off the labor demand schedule. In this case, output and input decisions depend on the objectives of the parties and specification of the bargaining process.

The analysis yields results on several measures of firm behavior,
but focuses particularly on the rate of return on capital as the basic mea-

sure of profitability. While a given firm's objective is to maximize total
profits, some way must be found to scale total profits in order to provide
a basis for comparison with other (possibly different-sized) enterprises.
Because theory suggests that risk-adjusted returns should be equalized across
industries and firms, the rate of return on capital has been widely used in

empirical work. Other indicators of profitability, including various pricecost margins, have been suggested in the literature and will be examined
in turn.

-4The Monopoly Case

The firm in this model is a profit maximizing monopolist facing a

demand curve with constant elasticity. For simplicity, the technology is
specified to be CES with constant returns.5 The supply of factors is perfectly elastic. Initially, I assume that the only effect of unionization
is an increase in the wage. The firm takes the wage as given and chooses
a level of employment consistent with its labor demand schedule. For the
moment, let the union markup over the competitive wage be determined out-

side the model. The wage relationship can be written as:

w=w(l+mU)

(1)

where w is the competitive wage, m is the percentage markup and U is a
dummy variable which has the value 1 if the firm is unionized. The effect
of unionization on the firm can be developed from the solution of the firm's
maximization problem, given by:6

max t

f(K,L)

L -

r

K

(2)

K,L
The first order conditions can be used to derive expressions for the opti-

mal quantities of capital and labor. These, in turn, can be substituted
into the definition of total cost to yield a cost function. Under constant returns (and perfectly elastic factor supplies) this function has
the form:
C

A'g(w,r)Q

(3)

where g(w,r) is marginal cost, and A is an index of total factor productivity. The optimal level of output is determined by the equality of
marginal revenue and marginal cost. With a constant demand elasticity,
marginal revenue is simply (l-)Q so that at the optimum (ignoring the

-5constant A ):

=

[g(w,r)

-

—

]fl

(4)

'1

Since the elasticity of marginal cost with respect to changes in the wage is

simply a, labor's share, equation (4), implies that the elasticity of output
with respect to wage changes is -aq.

Using (4) and the definition of profits, total profit can be written
as:

=
1-1/ri

q-l

{g(w,r)]

(5)

Thus, the elasticity of total profits with respect to changes in the wage is:
=

a(l-q)

(6)

These results provide clear predictions of the effect of unioniza-

tion on output, the capital-labor ratio and total profits. Assuming m >

0,

unionization leads to a decline in output of aqm percent, a decline in total

profits of a(l-)m percent, and a percentage increase in the capital-labor
ratio of am, where a is the elasticity of substitution.

The effect on the rate of return on capital is less clear-cut. Clearly,
as long as q > 1, unionization will lower total profits in the absence of off-

setting productivity effects. If the stock of capital were unchanged, the
rate of return on capital would also decline. But the capital stock will not
remain constant. Whether it rises or falls depends on scale and substitution
effects. In the case of a CES production function, this elasticity is:

kw =

a(a-)

(7)

Note that the scale effect is just the effect on output (-aq) because of the
constant returns assumption.

-6The net effect of an increase in the wage on the return on capital
can be derived by comparing (6) with (7) so that:

-

=

= (l-o)

(8)

Thus, the rate of return on capital will fall with an increase in the wage if

the elasticity of substitution is greater than one.7 Otherwise, the return
will rise.

How will these results change in the presence of a union productiv-

ity effect? Following previous work, the productivity effect can be characterized by a simple change in A, the index of total factor productivity. Let
A be the index before unionization, and d the union effect on productivity.8
The index after unionization is then:

A=A (1 +

dU)

(9)

One way to illustrate the effects of unionization is to separate the effect

of the productivity index from the effects of factor prices. Changes in total
factor productivity have a direct effect on costs, while the wage effect

depends on labor's share. The optimal level of output with both wage and productivity effects is:

Q[A(l+dU} [g(w(l+mU),r)

]

(10)

In elasticity terms, the effect of unionization on output is then:

flqum_

(11)

Thus, if the productivity effect is positive, and equal to cm, there will be

no change in output under unionization. A negative productivity effect will
simply reinforce the wage effect.
Equation (10) supports a similar conclusion about total profits.

But the effect on the return on capital depends on relative changes in the

capital stock. Using the notation developed in (10), the effect of unionization on total profits can be written as:

—7—
=

(1-q)

(am-d).

(12)

With a CES, constant returns production function, the expression for the
effect on capital is:

ku =

d(q-l)

+ &m(a-q)

(13)

Inspection of (12) and (13) reveals that the productivity effect enters

symmetrically, and thus has no effect on the rate of profit. Changes in
the rate of profit depend on the elasticity of substitution:
rI(Tt/k)u_ (l-q) (cm-d)

-

[d(q-l)

+ clm(a-q)}

(14)

= cm{l-aJ
As before, the rate of profit will rise or fall depending on al. In this
context, it is not possible to infer changes in the rate of profits from infor-

mation on wage and productivity effects unless a is known. Wage and productivity comparisons do yield clear inferences about total profits, output and
the capital-labor ratio.

Alternative Bargaining Models

The above analysis assumes that the wage-employment bargain lies on

the firm's labor demand schedule. This assumption has significant analytical
power, since it allows one to treat the problem of unionization using the

theory of derived demand. However, two related aspects of the approach suggest
the need for further analysis. First, a variety of bargaining issues associated with work rules, the introduction of technology and compensation seem to
involve wage/employment combinations off the firm's labor demand schedule.9
Second, in a bargaining context, points on the labor demand schedule are un-

likely to be Pareto efficient. Unless the union has a fixed coefficient objective function, the contract curve will be off the demand curve. Since
either the firm or the union could be made better off without reducing the

-8welfare of the other party, it seems reasonable to expect that attempts would
be made to move toward a more efficient bargain.10
Any attempt to achieve a bargain off the demand curve greatly com-

plicates attempts to gauge the union's impact on firm performance. It is
necessary not only to specify the technology and demand parameters, but the
objective of the union and the specific bargaining process, including some

statement of relative power must also be brought into play. A definitive
treatment of those issues will not be attempted here. The more modest purpose of this section is to illustrate the implications of alternative bargaining setups using a relatively simple bargaining model.

For our purposes, the complexity of the union-management bargaining process can be simplified to the problem of choosing a point on a con-

tract curve defined by the objective functions of the two parties. The assumption that the agreement lies on the contract curve implies that bargaining extends beyond wage rates to include, perhaps implicitly, the level of employ-

ment, and other aspects of production.11 A variety of instruments are available that effectively constrain production adjustments by the firm without
involving an explicit agreement on the number of workers, or the total hours

of work. Work rules and provisions covering new technology, can be interpreted as measures to achieve a bargain off the demand curve. Moreover,
various compensations rules (royalty payments, profit sharing, equipment differentials) can have similar effects.12

Although in practice, the outcome of bargaining where such provisions
play a role will depend on the character and distribution of information, I
will abstract from such difficulties here.

I assume that sufficient informa-

tion is available to allow the firm and the union to reach the contract curve.

—9-

As in the previous section, the analysis concerns a single product monopoly

operating under conditions of constant returns. The objective of the firm
remains the maximization of profits. The union's objective is to maximize
the difference between the wage bill and the opportunity cost of employment in the firm. 13

This can be written as 11(w-w)L, where w is the wage

in the absence of unionization, w is the realized wage and L is labor input.

The maximization problem confronting the firm and the union can be treated

as a two-step process. In the first step, the joint interest or surplus of
the two parties is defined and maximized by adjusting those variable

which

do not vary along the contract curve. The division of the surplus is determined in the second step through some process which reconciles competing
claims.

Given the objectives specified above, the maximization problem can be
written as:

max S
K,L

PQ-wL-rK+(w-w)L,

(15)

or
max S = PQ-w L-rK
K,L

(16)

The addition of the two objectives results in a maximand which
is identical to the firm's objective in the nonunion setting. Under the

bargaining regime, the firm makes production decisions as though it faced

the nonunion wage. Thus, the stock of capital and the level of employment
(and thus output and price) are unchanged after unionization. Only the
wage varies along the contract curve. Given product demand and the opportunity cost of labor, the interests of the two parties are maximized at

the point of maximum monopoly profits. The division of the surplus depends

- 10

-

on the form of the objective functions, the distribution of power and the
particular decision rules which are assumed to apply. Although the total
surplus is unchanged after unionization, workers share in profits, and thus

reduce returns to the firm. With capital unchanged, the bargaining model
unambiguously predicts a decline in the rate of return on capital.
The presence of union productivity effects in the bargaining con-

text may lead to paradoxical results. A positive union effect, for example,
results in an increase in output and total profits (before divisions with

the union). Since the firm makes input and output decisions as though it
faced nonunion wage rates, the union productivity effect has the same impact

as would neutral technological change in the nonunion setting. The firm
behaves as though marginal costs had declined and increases output (and

lowers prices). Since the elasticity of demand exceeds one, the stock of
capital and labor input are increased in proportion.14 If the productivity effect is large enough, it may increase total profits sufficiently to

leave the firm's profits unchanged after division with the union. Even
in this case, however, the rate of return on capital will fall, since the
stock of capital will have increased.
The Implications of tiarket Structure

The analysis thus far has been limited to the monopoly case. Differences in product markets are likely to influence the impact of the union

in two ways. For any given wage or productivity effect, the response of the
firm to unionization may depend on the nature of competition it faces. Furthermore, the size of the wage and productivity effects themselves may depend

on the structure of markets. This is particularly evident in the bargaining
model, where relative power influences the division of total profits. The

— 11 -

introduction

of market structure considerations requires a richer theoretical

framework than the monopoly model provides. Note that the effect of the union
on profitability in that model does not depend on the elasticity of demand.

Thus, little can be learned about market structure and the impact of the union
on profits in the single firm framework where competition is defined

solely in terms of the shape of a constant elasticity demand curve. The development of a full-scale model of competition in oligopolies is beyond the

scope of this paper. It is possible, however, to suggest a number of important relationships between firm performance and unionization in different
market settings using a fairly simple theoretical framework.
In the model developed here, the firm undergoing unionization (firm

1) produces a differentiated product, and has several competitors. Demands
are assumed to be interdependent. In order to simplify the notation, it will
be useful to group the firm?s competitors into a composite, representative

firm, firm 2. Technology is assumed to be constant returns, and may differ
in the two firms. The reaction of firm 1 to unionization will depend on
the degree of product differentiation and the output and pricing rules which

govern competition. A convenient assumption is that the firms reach equilibrium by maximizing joint profits. This framework ignores interesting complications (e.g., unions and rivalrous behavior) but is sufficiently rich
to illustrate the basic issues.
Expressed in inverse form, firm l's demand curve is:

P1 =

f(q1, '2'

(17)

with the partial derivatives of (17) assumed to be negative. Firm l's
profits can be written as:

1q1[q1, q2) — a1]

(18)

- 12

-

where a1 is marginal cost, and q1, q2, are equilibrium values. With only
a wage effect, unionization raises a1 and the effect on 71 is given by:

[q1,
aa1

aa1

q2)-a1} + q1 [f1

aq1 +

2 a2 - 1]

15

(19)

aa1

The first term in (19) is the output effect, while the second term captures

changes in the price-cost margin. It is the latter which is of central importance in determining the effect of unionization on the return on capital

in different competitive situations. The effect of a wage increase on firm
l's capital stock will depend on the output effect and the elasticity of

substitution. Since output affects profits and capital symmetrically under
constant returns, output effects will cancel out. Changes in the return on
capital will depend only on changes in the price-cost margin and the

extent of substitution in production. However, variation in union impact with
variations in market structure will depend solely on changes in the pricecost margin, since there is no reason to expect a to vary with the structure
of the product market.

(1O'
Fh¼iILL5
,r.,. LII I...11L
Fk.
A) I..IS

Cl

is

the sum

of

,4 f4v.rn 1.,

two effects: a movement along its demand curve, and the reac-

tion of competitors which causes a shift in demand. Whether the price-cost
margin rises or falls in response to changes in costs is indeterminate. How-

ever, if the own elasticity of demand is roughly constant, then f1— 1,
1

and, movement along the firm's demand curve will leave the price-cost margin

unchanged. Since f2 < 0, and since competitors will react to a rise in a1
by increasing q2, firm l's price-cost margin will fall. The implication is
that an increase in costs in a competitive environment (i.e., high values of
a
put a squeeze on margins, more so than if the firm had substan-

will

1

tial market power.

- 13

-

A further example suggests the plausibility of this result.
Consider the case in which the newly unionized firm 1 is one of many small

firms in an industry with a dominant firm. Suppose further that the
small firms largely accept the dominant firm's price (products are only

moderately differentiated) which is set in the usual way on the basis of a

net demand function. A rise in a1 in this setting (with the costs of other
firms constant) is likely to lead to a declining price-cost margin for firm 1
since a relatively small firm will be unable to recoup cost increases by

raising prices. In contrast, if firm 1 were the dominant firm, the
price-cost margin would be likely to change very little.16 As long as
an identical union wage differential was imposed in the two settings,
and as long as cr was identical, the effect on the return on capital

would be more negative where firm 1 had less power.17 While intuitively
reasonable, the notion that unionization has a stronger impact on less
powerful firms is only one among several theoretically possible outcomes.18
Strong conclusions must await empirical evidence.

The effect of market structure on the union's impact is likely

to be unaffected by productivity effects. As long as the union effect on
productivity does not vary with market structure, and unless unionization
leaves costs unchanged, qualitative conclusions about the effect of
differences in competitive environments will be unchanged from the wage

only case. With unchanged costs, however, the profit effect depends
only on the elasticity of substitution and is thus independent of market
structure.

Conclusions about the effects of market structure are somewhat

stronger if a bargaining model of wage determination is introduced. The
analysis is simplified because a negotiated wage change in the

- 14

bargaining

-

model leads to no changes in output or prices in the unionized

firm. While the profits of firm 1 are reduced, competitors are unaffected.
From the competitors' standpoint, unionization of firm 1 only affects

how the total profits of firm 1 (which are unchanged) are allocated. In
this context the effect of different competitive environments is straight-

forward. Since unionization does not affect real variables, the issue is
how post-union returns to the firm compare to the pre-union level of

profitability. As long as the wage differential is the same in different
competitive environments, the union effect on profits will depend on how
pre-union profits per unit of labor vary with the competitive environment.

Under the usual assumptions about firm behavior, this ratio will

be higher and, consequently, the firm's share of total profits will be

higher, the greater the market power of the firm. In effect, the more
competitive firms must give up a larger fraction of lower total profits
if the condition of constant wage differential is to be satisfied.19
A union productivity effect does not change the conclusion.
If unionization affects productivity, the level and price of firm l's

output will change, and adjustments will be made among competitors in

order to maximize joint profits. Consider the case of a positive union
effect, accompanied by a wage increase, both of which are independent

of market structure. Consistent with the two-stage bargaining procedure
developed above, the firm is assumed to incorporate the productivity
effect into its calculation of total profits, before the surplus is

divided. Thus, the productivity change affects the calculus of joint
profit maximization in a manner exactly analogous to equation (19).

As before, assessment of the difference in union impact in different

- 15

competitive

—

settings depends on changes in the price-cost margin. Let

the relationship between total profits before and after the productivity
effect be given by it1

= (1

+

61)n,

where 61 captures the cross-price

effects of competitors (the own price effect is assumed to just offset

the cost change) which will be positive. The firmts share of total
=

post-union profits is

given by n/n = 01(1 + 61).

01, and the union effect on profits is
(Similar expressions can be written

for the firm in the less competitive setting -

firm

2.)

As in

the wage effect only case, the constant wage differential implies

that ((l-01)n)/L1 =
that 7t1/L1 <

02(1

+

62).

environment.

n2/L2,

((l-02)7t)/L2.

Substituting for

and recalling

the equality of wages implies that Oi(1 +

61)

<

Thus, the union has a smaller impact in the less competitive
20

Market Structure and Wage/Productivity Effects
The simple model of oligopoly developed above suggests that
competition increases the response of firm performance to unionization.

This result rests heavily on the assumption that wage and productivity

effects are independent of market structure. Yet it has long been
argued that wage determination is affected by structural conditions in

the product market.21 Moreover, the nature of competition is likely to
affect both the opportunity and the incentive for the firm to improve

productivity after unionization. In both cases, however, the direction
of the effect is ambiguous. Although definitive predictions cannot be
derived, theoretical considerations together with existing empirical
evidence can be used to provide insight into likely directions of influence.

- 16

In

-

the case of compensation two conflicting effects govern the

relationship between market structure and the union wage effect. Firms

with substantial market power tend to earn above-average returns, which be-

come the target of union negotiations. From the union's perspective high
profits increase the firm's ability to pay and constitute a legitimate

ground for high wage demands. Furthermore, if returns substantially
exceed the opportunity cost of capital, a high wage level need have little

effect on the firm's long-term survival. In contrast, unionization of a
firm operating in a highly price-competitive market may lead to very

low long-term wage gains. Either the union will recognize the need to
moderate demands, or the firm will not survive. Thus the only competitive
firms observed are those with wages close to nonunion levels.
The foregoing argument ignores the role of relative power in

wage determination. While it is true that in the extreme case of perfect
competition the scope for wage gains is constrained, within the set of
firms exercising some market power, the union wage differential may be

affected by the relative power of the employer. Because of its ability
to weather a strike, a firm with few competitors and substantial financial
resources may be less willing to make concessions than a firm with less

market power. Thus, unionization of a firm with high market share may
not lead to a larger differential over nonunion wages. This is particularly true if the high market share firm has already foregone some profits

by paying relatively high wages. The desire to increase an applicant
queue, to avoid community censure or unionization have been suggested
in the literature as explanations of a positive correlation between market

share or concentration and the level of wages. In such a setting, the
added impact of unionization may be small.22

— 17 —

Existing

empirical evidence on the relationship between market

structure and the union wage differential in U.S. manufacturing suggests

that the constraint of competition and the power of the firm tend to be

offsetting. Work by Weiss, and Freeman and Medoff suggests no statistically
significant relationship between concentration and the union wage effect.23
While the direction of the effect is generally negative (i.e., the differential is smaller in concentrated industries) large standard errors pre-

clude strong inferences. The implication is that the wage effect is
unlikely to offset, and may reinforce the tendency for the union impact
on profits to be more negative as the number of competitors increases
and as market share declines.

Whether this result continues to hold in the face of productivity

effects, however, is unclear. If positive union productivity effects are
larger and/or more likely in more competitive settings, the union impact

on profitability (and output) could be attenuated. The threat of economic
demise may be more apparent the more competitive the market, and thus
could provide compelling pressure for the firm to improve operations.
In the case of perfect competition, for example, any union wage effect

would appear to require some offsetting productivity gain to ensure

survival. Yet pressure to improve operations is usually presumed to
be present in highly competitive markets without unionization, leaving
no possibility of further improvements after the union is introduced.
If as before attention is confined to the set of firms exercising some
market power, then the potential for improvement would seem to be greater
in less competitive markets since organizational slack, or x-inefficiency

is likely to increase with market share.24 Whether potential gains are

- 18

realized,

-

however, depends on the presence of pressure from sources besides

other competitors. Even though market-based pressure may be less, for
example, the internal pressure imposed by the union could motivate a
search for new methods and procedures which improve operating performance
and offset, perhaps partially, any union wage gains and inefficient work

rules. Furthermore, a vigorous organizational response to unionization
could be observed in high market share firms if satisficing behavior is
important in less competitive markets, and if the union threatens to
reduce firm performance below satisfactory levels.25

In light of the empirical evidence on the union wage effect and
market structure, the preceding argument suggests that the union impact
on profitability may well be greater in firms with less market power,
even if all firms experience some positive union productivity effects.
If the more powerful firms are better able to recoup wage increases

by altering internal organization the tendency for competition to sharpen
the impact of the union will be reinforced.
The theoretical analysis in this section suggests that the
impact of the union on various indicators of firm performance depends
on technology, the wage setting process and market structure.

The

basic qualitative results are summarized in Table 1. It is clear that
inferences about the net efficiency consequences of the union based on
a single indicator like productivity or profitability may be misleading.

Evidence about productivity is incomplete without information on wage
differentials and even then, any resultant changes in the rate of return
on capital may convey information about the extent of substitution

possibilities, but little else. Similar conclusions apply to other

— 19 —

Table

1

Unionization and Firm Performance: Theoretical Predictions

Bargaining Regime

Indicators of
Firm Performance

On the Demand Curve
Wage and OffWage
Effect
setting Productivity Effect
Only

On the Contract Curve
Wage and Of fWage
Effect
setting Productivity Effect
Only

Q/L

0

+

0

+

Q

-

0

0

+

n/K

?*

?***

-

—

*Except where noted, the entries refer to the single firm model. In
general it is the magnitude and not the signs which depend on market
structure. Note also that the signs on Q/L assume that the capitallabor ratio is held constant.
**In the monopoly model, the sign depends on ci; with competition, the
sign is more likely to be negative.
***The sign depends on a.

- 20

indicators

-

taken in isolation. A finding, for example, that unionization

has no effect on growth could result from a bargaining model of wage
determination, and need not imply the existence of a productivity dividend.

Adding information on productivity (and other indicators) is thus essen-

tial. Only evidence on the pattern of effects over a number of indicators
yields insight into the consequences of unionization.

II. Empirical Analysis
The analysis of Part I focused on three indicators of firm per-

formance, each of which may be affected by unionization. The approach
in the theoretical analysis has been to treat the two effects of unionization - wages and productivity -

in

the context of a reduced form

equation for firm performance. In the case of profits, for example,
the effect of the union is gauged through the following expression:
it

B[AeX(l

+

dU)]

[g(w(l +

mU),r)]'

(20)

Clearly, profits and other measures of performance depend on technology,
exogenous factor prices, the structure of markets and the nature of demand.

Unionization is assumed to affect performance through changes in wages

and through its effect on productivity. While the various dimensions of
performance are clearly related to one another, the intent is not to
estimate a structural model of performance but to identify the impact of

unionization in otherwise comparable enterprises. The general approach,
therefore, is to estimate a set of reduced form equations which relate
indicators of performance to a similar set of control variables
(including unionization) which are treated as exogenous or predetermined.

— 21 -

The analysis makes use of micro data on individual "business
units" -

generally

divisions of a given corporation - which are referred

to as the "firm" The indicators of firm performance are defined as
follows:

rate of return on capital (ROl):

net income (pretax) divided by total capital invested
in the business
output growth (GS):
rate of growth of deflated sales (price deflator
is firm's estimate of an index of the price of
output)
labor productivity (QL):

sales (or value added) divided by total employment

These indicators reflect in part the theoretical analysis of

Section I, In part the availability of data. Profitability is measured
as the return on total capital invested, a measure long used in economic
•

•

analysis and in business as a measure of performance.

26,, Total

capital

invested" has been used, since there is no meaningful distinction between

equity and debt capital in the data (a line of business). Although
primary emphasis is placed on the ROl measure, the impact of unionization
on the return on sales (ROS - a price-cost margin) will also be examined.

A second measure of profitability may be useful in interpreting the source
of union/nonunion differences in the return on capital (e.g., lower gross
margin versus higher capital intensity).

The effects of unionization on output and growth are captured
using the rate of growth of sales deflated by an index of product prices.
Although the theoretical analysis dealt with the effect of unionization
on the level of output, the empirical work focuses on the question of
whether unionization affects the extent to which a firm expands or

- 22

contracts

-

relative to its market. The only variable close to the theore-

tical output measure is the firm's market share. While results with market
share will be discussed, this variable may be less a measure of performance
(at least current performance), and more a measure of structural conditions
in the market.

The productivity analysis uses two measures, sales per employee
and value added per employee.

While it would be desirable to have

better measures of labor input (hours worked, more detailed categories

of employment) they are not available. In addition, the only price
information available is the firm's estimate of its own selling price

expressed as an index, with 1973 =

1.00.

Without cross-firm variation

in the level of prices, only sector-specific price deflation (e.g.,

2-digit SIC) will be possible. As discussed below, an attempt will be
made to control for variation in the ratio of materials to labor and the
capital-labor ratio, and thus to estimate the effect of unionization
on total factor productivity.

The equations to be estimated can be expressed in general terms
as follows:

R0I.t = ROT (UN. ,Mt,NIjt,t,Ti)

(21)

GS. =

GS

(22)

QL.t =

QL

(23)

where for the

firm at time t,

is a measure of unionization,

is a vector of variables measuring the nature of the competitive
environment in the firm's narrowly defined market, 11it captures the

market structure of the firm's larger industry, H. is a vector of workforce characteristics, T., is a technology vector, KL.t is the firm's

- 23

capital-labor

-

ratio, and ML. is the materials-labor ratio. (Note that the

value-added version of (23) omits the materials-labor ratio.) The specification assumes that the price of capital is constant across firms; the

inclusion of work-force characteristics is intended to control for variation

in competitive wages, and in labor quality. A full listing of the variables
included in the analysis is presented in Table 2.
For the most part, the models spelled out in equations (2l)-(23)

are straightforward. Performance depends on structural conditions, both
outside the firm in its labor and product markets, as well as inside, in

its technology. In practice, there is little information about technology
and differences across firms in this dimension are captured by 2-digit

SIC industry dummies and time trends. The data provide a richer set of
control variables for market structure. Indeed, equations (21)-(23)
depart from typical industry-level analysis in their specification of
the firm's market structure, in the richness of the control variables,

and in the dependence of productivity on market structure. In addition,
the reduced form character of the analysis results in the presence of
work-force characteristics (albeit industry-level characteristics, tenure,

years of education, demographics) in equations explaining profitability
and growth.

The principal concern of the analysis is estimation of the overall
impact of unionization, and its impact in different competitive situations.
Industry-level measures of market structure include barriers to entry,

industry growth, concentration and the share of imports. The analysis
assumes, however, that conditions in the firm's own narrowly defined
market are the primary structural determinants of competition; this is
the focus of the analysis of unionization and market structure.

— 24

Table
Control Variables —

Variable

—

2

Definitions

and Sources*

Definition

Source

Firm Control
Variables (KL, ML, NP)

LKL

Log of total Investment per employee;
total investment includes net plant
and equipment and working capital

PINS

LML

Log of purchased materials per

PINS

employee
MS

Share of served market (in percent)

BIG3

Market share of three largest competi— PINS

PINS

tors (in percent)

COMP

Number of competitors

PINS

CPUR

Percentage of immediate customers

PINS

that account for 50% of business'

total sales
EXPER

Approximate age of business (years
since first commercial sale)

PINS

RMG

Rate of growth of real market sales;
(total market sales deflated by
estimated market prices)

PINS

INDG

Average

rate of growth of sales in
business' 4—digit SIC industry over
10—year period preceding business'
entry into sample

PINS/Census and Annual
Survey of Manufactures

INDC4

Four firm concentration ratio in
business' 4—digit SIC industry

PINS/Census and Annual
Survey of Manufactures

INDIMP

Share of imports in sales in busi—
ness' 4—digit SIC industry

PINS/Census and Annual
Survey of Manufactures

COST

Cost disadvantage ratio of 3—digit
SIC industry

Annual Survey
Manufacturers

RGN (1,2,3)

Fraction of shipments in Northeast,
South and West for the firm's 3
digit (SIC) industry

Census of Manufactures

TEN

Average years of tenure in the firm's
3—digit (SIC) industry — 1973

Q.irrent Population Survey
January 1973

GRD

Mean grade attended by employees

1970 Census

Industry Market

Structure (MI)

of

Industry Labor

Market

(H)

of

Population

in the firm's 3—digit (SIC)
industry — 1970

AGE

Mean age of employees in the fIrm's
3—digit (SIC) industry — 1970

1970 Census of Population

BLK

Percent of nonwhite employees in
the firm's 3—digit (SIC) industry

1970 Census of Population

FEM

Percent

1970 Census of Population

of female nployees in
the firm's 3—digit (SIC) industry

- 25

-

Three variables are used to characterize the competitive environment the firm faces: the market share of the three largest competitors,
the number of competitors and the firm's own market share. These variables are intended to capture the size distribution of competitors, the

difficulty of anticipating competitor reaction, and the firm's relative

position. A variety of alternative measures of market structure using
combinations and permutations of these variables -

e.g.,

marginal con-

centration ratios, the Herfindahi index - were examined in the course of

the empirical work but were found to provide no additional insight or

explanatory power. It should be emphasized that the definition of the
market and what constitutes a competitor are defined by the reporting

business. Thus, the variables should be interpreted as measures of
market structure as perceived by the firm.

The market structure variables enter the equations for profitability and productivity, but the firm's market share has been excluded

from the growth equation to avoid redundancy. In the productivity
equation, market structure is included to capture any x-efficiency
effects or effects which may flow from relative size.

The unionization variable is based on the firm's response to

the question: "Of all the employees in this business, what percentage

are unionized?" The questionnaire makes no attempt to define what
"unionized" means. Moreover, given the breadth of the work force involved
("all employees") there is likely to be a good bit of error in the

estimates. Fine distinctions between firms are not likely to be meaningful. It is much more realistic to assume that the respondents will
accurately identify whether a business is completely nonunion, or whether

- 26

-

the fraction unionized falls in a broad range (e.g., 30%-60%). Most of
the analysis, therefore, will use dummy variables to capture the union!

nonunion distinction, rather than relying solely on variation in the
percentage unionized.

Before examining the source of the data in more detail, a brief
word about the exogenous variables in equations (2l)-(23) may be useful.

As noted at the beginning of this section, I treat unionization, market
structure and other control variables on the right-hand side of (2l)-(23)

either as exogenous or predetermined. A few of the variables are affected
by the firm's decisions and their use raises the issue of simultaneity

bias in the coefficients. Two variables deserve particular mention:
the firm's market share, and unionization.27

The market share of the firm provides information about the
elasticity of demand and the firm's position relative to its competitors,

characteristics of the market which are likely to have a major impact

on profitability and which may affect productivity. I assume that these
are structural features of the competitive environment, and are not
affected by current profitability or productivity (the two equations

where market share enters). It is clear that performance will affect
structure over time, but existing evidence suggests that the lags are

likely to be quite lengthy.28 Of course, this assumption may be more
tenuous for rapidly growing markets, particularly where products and

firms are not well established. In order to test the sensitivity of
the conclusions about union impact to the inclusion of market share,
equations where market share is excluded will be estimated.

- 27

-

A further critical assumption in model specification is the
exogeneity of unionization. At issue is whether estimated coefficients on the
union variables capture the impact of unionization, or whether they also
reflect the process through which establishments are organized (e.g.

unions organize the least (or most) profitable firms). The view that
unionization is exogenous finds some justification on empirical grounds.

For the great majority of unionized firms in this sample, union status

was achieved prior to the time period covered by this data. Direct simultaneity is thus unlikely. It is of course possible that unionization
could be correlated with an unobserved "firm effect" which persists
through time, thus creating a correlation between union status and the

error terms in equations (21)-(23). But the unobservable character of
the effect, and the difficulty of predicting profitability (or other

performance measures) far into the future based on observables, makes
this possibility unlikely.
The Data Set

The data used in the empirical work provide fairly detailed
information on performance, technology, market characteristics and union

status. Data are available on over 900 product-line businesses which
participate in the PINS project directed by the Strategic Planning

Institute.29 The Institute is composed of over 250 member companies
which participate in the project by supplying annual data on individual

businesses within the company. Data are currently available from 1970-80.
Not all businesses provide data for each year so that the design of

the data base is unbalanced. In addition to income statements and
balance sheets, the data set includes variables measuring the structure

- 28

—

of the market in which the firm participates, and the competitive strategy
of the business.

The data have a number of features which may affect interpreta-

tion of the results. The companies in the project tend to be large, diversified corporations; many are found in the Fortune 500, and almost all of

them are found in the Fortune 1000. The analysis thus deals with the
effects of unionization among a set of firms which are not representative
of all firms in a given sector, but which account for a significant

fraction of the assets and people employed. Because the unit of observation is a line of business, a given company may report on several busi-

nesses. The businesses tend to be synonymous with operating divisions
of the company (e.g., the washer and dryer division of the Diversified
Appliance Corporation), but may include product lines within the division (e.g., commercial washers and dryers) if the appropriate data are

available, and if the finer breakdown is useful to the company. The
definition of each business is thus left for the companies to decide,

although guidelines for the selection are provided by SPI.3° The lack
of a uniform definition of the unit of observation should be kept in
mind when interpreting the results.

The data provided by the respondent companies are a mixture of
information available through accounting systems, and the respondent's

perceptions or assessments of particular variables. Thus, the rate of
growth of sales, or the gross book value of plant and equipment are

provided by the accounting system. Data on the number of competitors,
or the firm's share of the served market reflect the perceptions of
the respondent; the data sre not computed from information provided by
outside sources or other participating businesses in the same industry.

- 29

-

The self-reported character of the data raises a question about
its integrity. Two considerations suggest the data are of relatively high
quality. First, the information requested is information of great value
to the firm (e.g., its market share) and it seems reasonable to suppose
that the firm is both in a position to know, and has expended effort to

acquire accurate data. Second, a firm's participation in the project is
motivated by a desire to use its data in the models developed by SPI.
Considerable effort is made to preserve confidentiality and ensure

quality: participating firms only have access to their own data;
sensitive data (profits) are reported in disguised or ratio form (e.g.,

return on sales); researchers at SPI run the data through an elaborate
procedure to check for consistency and follow-up gross errors with the
company.

The Evidence
Table 3 presents means and standard deviations for selected

variables. The calculations are broken down by union and nonunion status,
and are based on data for North American (predominantly U.S.) manufacturing

businesses over the period 1970-80. Each firm-year is treated as a separate
observation, though some firms are not represented in each year. There are
902 firms in the sample, and thus an average of about five observations per
firm (there are 4,681 observations in total).

31

It is evident from the calculations that the unionized firms

are substantially older, and participate in markets that are growing some

what less rapidly than their nonunion counterparts. They tend to confront about the same number of competitors, and to compete in markets
where the largest firms have a slightly larger share of the market.

As far as performance is concerned, the raw means suggest that
nonunion firms are more profitable, and that their sales are growing more

- 30

-

Table

3

Means and Standard Deviations
Total, Union and Nonunion Samples, 1970-1980

Total

Union

(N=468l)
Std. Dev.

(N=3246)
Std. Dev.

Nonunion
(N=l435)
Mean
Std. Dev.

Variable

Mean

ROl

21.5

25.6

20.6

24.4

23.5

28.1

ROS

9.0

11.5

8.7

10.6

9.5

13.4

GS

9.2

28.8

8.1

28.0

11.6

30.3

LVL

3.28

0.57

3.28

0.54

3.27

0.65

LSL

3.89

0.61

3.90

0.58

3.85

0.66

LKL

7.78

0.71

7.80

0.68

7.75

0.79

LML

7.57

0.85

7.61

0.82

7.48

0.90

Mean

%UN

41.6

32.8

60.0

21.2

MS

22.6

18.8

22.6

18.2

22.6

20.0

BIG3

46.9

18.5

47.1

18.2

46.5

19.2

COMP

13.9

13.2

13.9

12.9

14.0

14.0

CPUR

13.5

11.2

13.3

10.9

13.9

11.7

EXPER

25.8

15.4

28.6

15.0

19.6

14.6

RNG

4.9

21.8

4.3

21.4

6.5

22.5

INDG

8.2

4.9

7.9

4.5

8.9

5.6

47.5

24.2

48.1

23.5

46.2

25.6

INIDIMP

4.7

6.1

4.9

6.4

4.2

5.3

COST

0.12

0.20

0.12

0.21

0.10

0.18

INDC4

- 31

rapidly

-

—

even more than could be accounted for by faster market growth.

In terms of market share, however, there is no difference in the average

levels. On the productivity side, union firms have a slight edge (1 percent)
in value added per employee and a somewhat larger advantage in sales per

employee; although firm conclusions await statistical analysis, it appears
that the productivity differences may reflect differences in capital and
materials per employee.

Estimates of various specifications of equations (21)—(23) are

presented in Table 4. Results with three sets of control variables are
examined. The first (control 1) uses a set of 2-digit (SIC) dummies,
a time trend and a set of time-industry interaction terms.32 The interaction setup allows each industry to have its own time trend, and is

equivalent to using industry-level deflators. The second set (control 2)
of controls adds all the variables on market structure and labor markets

from Table 2, except the firm's own market share. The final set (control 3)
adds market share and market share squared, and two variables which
measure the fraction of sales or purchases made to or from components
within the parent corporation (these variables control for differences in
transfer prices).

In general, the evidence points to a sizeable negative effect of

unionization on profits, and small or insignificant effects on other

measures of performance. Consider first the union impact on ROl in
line 1. The negative coefficient on the union dummy in line la suggests

a decline of ROI of about 12 percent. Once additional controls for
market structure and industry labor markets are added, however, the
estimated effect increases to -4.1 percentage points, or a decline of

about 19 percent relative to the sample mean. While the market share

ROl

b)

d)

R**

c) R0I**

ROl

a)

Profitability

ISL

LSL**

d) LVL**

c)

b) ISL

a)

Productivity

0.03

(0.01)

—0.03

—0.02
(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.02)

—0.181/ —0.121/
(0.04)
(0.05)

—0.041/

—0.061/

(0.03)

—0.17# —0.261/

(0.01)

—

(0.05)

0.051/

(0.03)

0.010

(0.03)

0.011/

—

(0.03)

(0.03)

—

—0.03

—0.l0

(0.02)

—

(0.01)

—0.02

(0.03)

—0.02

(0.03)

—0.03

—

CPUR

—0.02

—

(0.02)

0.01

(0.04)

—0.02

—0.02
(0.01)

—0.67
(0.83)

(0.98)

—

(0.01)

—3.23

—0.05

(0.38)

(0.03)

—1.60

—0.12

(0.84)

(0.03)

—4.38

—0.30

—

CG4P

—0.32

—

BIG3

(0.87) (0.02)

—4.05

(0.86)

—2.50

UNI4

4

0.130
(0.04)

0.050
(0.02)

0.08#
(0.02)

—

(0.02)

—0.12

—

(0.01)

0.07

(0.03)

0.13

(0.02)

0.111/

(0.01)

0.061/

(0.01)

0.051/

—

(0.02)

0.78

—

(0.01)

—.02

(0.02)

0.06

(0.12)

—0.061/

—0.121/
(0.07)

—0.191/
(0.07)

—

(0.08)

—0.04

—

(0.03)

0.07

(0.08)

0.11

0.01
(0.08)

—

INDG

0.05

—

RMG

(0.03) (0.02)

0.15

—

EXPER

—

(0.03)

—0.11

(0.06)

—0.20

(0.06)

—0.10

—

INDIMP

(0.03)

—0.111/

(0.01)

—0.061/

(0.01)

0.021/

—

(0.09)

—0.351/

(0.05)

—0.081/

(0.05)

0.031/

—

—0.001/1/ 0.10
(0.02)
(0.06)

—

(0.01)

0.01

(0.02)

—0.03

0.03
(0.02)

—

INDC4

(0.09)

1.211/

(0.05)

0.741/

—

—

—

—

(0.03)

0.41

(0.06)

0.84

—

—

MS

(0.001)

—0.011/

(0.001)

—0.011/

—

—

—

—

(0.03)

—0.291/

(0.08)

—0.571/

—

—

2

MS

(0.01)

0.47

(0.01)

0.23

(0.01)

0.23

—

(0.01)

0.49

(0.01)

0.49

0.48
(0.01)

0.23

—

—

—

—

—

—

INL

(0.01)

—

—

—

—

—

—

tEl

2

25.07

SEE

10.39

0.605

0.896

0.889

0.882

0.369

0.362

0.197

0.203

0.210

22.99

0.01928.60

0.198

0.188 23.23

0.121 24.15

0.050

R

4622

4621

4625

4642

4622

4644

4623

4623

4627

4644

d. f.

1/Indicates coefficient has been multiplied by 102.
#1/Indicates less than 0.005.

*In addition to the variables listed, each equation includes a set of
2—digit SIC dummies, a time trend, and a set of time/industry dummy interactions; rows b) and C) also include the 3—digit SIC variables: fraction of sales in Northeast, South, West; average tenure;
mean grade attended;
percent female; percent black, mean age.
**This equation includes variables measuring the fraction of sales to conponents and
purchases frcin ccisponents inside the firm's parent corporation.

3.

b) GS**

a)GS

2. Growth

1.

Variable

Dependent

Specification/

Table

Unionization and Firm Performance — Basic Results*

- 33

variables

-

in line ic are highly significant, they have little effect on

the union coefficient.

A negative union effect is also evident when profitability, is

measured by the return on sales. Only the results with the full model
are presented (line id) but the results with other specifications are

similar. The size of the coefficient implies about an 18 percent lower
return on sales in union firms. The size and significance of the ROS
effect suggests that the decline in ROl arises primarily from a decline

in total profits, rather than an increase in capital intensity. Indeed
the similarity in the percentage changes in ROl and ROS implies that
unionization has only a small effect on the ratio of sales to total
capital.

33
The large negative union effects in the profit equations are

not repeated in the growth or productivity equations.

Although signi-

ficantly negative in line 2a, the union effect on the rate of growth
relative to the market is small and statistically insignificant, once

the characteristics of the market are introduced. The specification
reported in line 2b allows the market growth rate (RNG) to enter

unconstrained. Estimates were also obtained with the RMG coefficient
set equal to 1. The results were literally unchanged -

the union

coefficient was -0.67 with a standard error of 0.83.
The evidence in line 2 implies that there is little difference

in the way union and nonunion firms participate in the growth of the

markets in which they operate. While this finding sheds some light
on the effect of unionization, it does not rule out the possibility
that unionization causes a one-shot decline in output relative to

- 34

the

-

market. In order to examine this possibility, real growth was

replaced with the firm's market share as the dependent variable. The
union coefficient in the specifications corresponding to 2a and 2b, were
(with standard errors in parentheses): -0.016 (0.62), and 0.65 (0.52).
When other measures of the firm's market structure were omitted, the

union effect was -0.20 (0.64). There is thus no evidence of a union
effect on the firm's share of its served market. Since market share
reflects structural conditions in the market, the absence of a union

effect may only suggest that union and nonunion firms operate in

similar competitive environments. However, it would seem likely that
a sizeable negative union effect on the firm's output would register
in these data.

The analysis in line 3 of Table 4 turns to the question of the

union productivity effect. Here, labor productivity is measured by
sales and value added per employee. Inclusion of LKL and LML in the
equation means that the union coefficient measures differences in total

factor productivity. As the results indicate, the choice of dependent
variable has little effect on the union coefficient, although the

sales specification in which materials and capital are included on the

right-hand side is statistically superior. Unlike the results for
profits and output growth, the union effect on productivity is unaffected

by the inclusion of the control variables. Even though many of the
structural variables are themselves significant, the union effect is

estimated at -0.02 (0.01) with or without them. When value added is

used, the union effect rises to -0.03 (0.0l).

35 -

While the union coefficient in the sales specification is twice
the size of its standard error, it is substantively small; moreover, with

over 4,600 observations, the power of the evidence that the effect is differ-

ent from zero is not overwhelming. Yet these results stand in contrast to
the results of Brown and Medoff, who found a positive union productivity
35

effect using data on 2-digit SIC industries by state.

Moreover, the

results are contrary to some findings based on specific industries.36

Reconciliation of these disparate findings is beyond the scope of the current

paper, but it is possible to put the results here in some perspective. It
must be remembered that the PINS sample is not a random sample of firms in

the manufacturing sector. Furthermore, the unit of observation here is not
the establishment. The productivity measure refers to total employees of a
business unit, and thus includes a variety of occupational categories (e.g.,
sales, managers, engineers, accountants) not included or not included with

the same weight in the establishment-based Census of Manufactures. It
should be noted, however, that when productivity equations were estimated
controlling for the occupational mix in the firm's 3=digit SIC industry rio

change in the results was obtained. It might be argued that failure to
control for the blue collar/white collar mix would bias the union coefficient
downwards since unionized establishments are likely to be more blue collar
intensive, and would therefore be somewhat less productive than white collar
intensive establishments (assuming white collar workers are more productive).

That argument, however, makes little sense within a 3-digit industry where
the technology of production would seem to leave little scope for large
differences in occupational mix.

- 36

-

Beyond the issue of comparability, it is important to note that
the question of the union effect is ultimately an empirical question.

There is no reason to suppose that the union effect has the same sign

or magnitude in every industry. In fact, the average effect estimated
in line 3 masks some differences across industries. Using the simple specification in line 3a, estimates of the union effect were obtained for

each 2-digit industry. While the majority of the industry effects (and
the bulk of the sample) were quite close to the average of -0.02, positive
union coefficients (6-17 percent) were found in textiles, furniture, and
petroleum, and negative effects (4-18 percent) were found in lumber, stone,
clay and glass, transportation equipment, and instrument manufacture.

These estimates may reflect differences in the union/nonunion mix of
component 3-digit industries, but they do suggest some diversity of

effects. Evidence from previous industry case studies suggests that
the nature of the union's impact on productivity depends on a complex
interaction between management adjustment and union policy and action,
t,h-

r'h

tion

mu

1 1. ffr i—-rr 1 ng1iifr-t

37

flri

tht , ntvr—

in the firms in this sample leads to little change in productivity,

but the results suggest the need for further analysis of industry effects.

Alternative Measures of Unionization
Thus far, the analysis has been based on a relative simple speci-

fication of unionization. The results in Table 4 are in effect compariSons of conditional means for union and nonunion firms. It is possible
to construct additional measures of unionization which may enrich under-

standing of its impact. Three possibilities are pursued in Table 5. The
first is simply to enter the percentage of employees unionized in place

of the union dummy. The second breaks up the percent unionized variable

— 37 -

into

the three categories: less than 30 percent, between 30 and 60 per-

cent, and over 60 percent. These two measures are combined in the third
approach through the use of a linear spline function. For the problem
at hand, the spline variables are written as:

U

Z30

30

Z60 =
=
=

0
U-30
30

Z60-i-= 0
= U-60

0<U<30

U>30

0<U<30

30<U<60
U>60

0<U<60
U>60

where U is the percentage unionized.

The variables are constructed to

eliminate discontinujtjes at the breakpoint, and to allow the union
effect to vary with the percent organized, with different slopes in the

different ranges. The coefficients on these variables measure the slope
of the function over the specified range.
The alternative measures of unionization are examined in Table 5,
using the full set of control variables (control 3) as defined in Table 4.
It is evident that the basic results on profitability, growth, and productivity are little affected by the new forms of the union variable,

although some interesting patterns emerge in the comparisons between

measures. A large negative effect on profitability is found under all
specifications, but the monotonicity of the effect implied by the use

of percent organized is dubious. The spline function shows a strong
negative effect from 0 to 30 percent, and then no significant slope

thereafter; the slope over the final range is actually positive. Use
of three dummy variables suggests some differences depending on percent
organized, but statistically, the differences are not particularly signi-

ficant. A comparison of the standard errors of estimate for these equations

'.

—

GS

—

ISL
—

—

0.01
(0.01)

(0.01)

—

—0.02

—

—

(1.04)

—

—0.62

(1.52)

—

—2.95

—

—

(0.01)

—0.04

—

—

(0.92)

—0.26

—

—

(0.04)

—

(0.05)

0.01**

—

—

(0.06)

(0.05)

—

0.10

—

—0.08

—

—

(0.06)

(0.05)

—

—0.04

—0.14

—

(0.04)

—

—

—0.05
(0.05)

—

—

(0.05)

0.04

—

(0.001)

0.01

(0.0005)

0.01

(0.0005)

0.01

—

—

—

(0.06)

0.83

(0.06)

0.23
(0.01)

—0.01
(0.001)

(0.01)

0.23

(0.01)

0.23

—

—

—

—

—

(0.001)

0.01

(0.001)

—

—

—

(0.001)

—0.006

(0.001)

—0.006

—

IKL

equation includes the full set of control variables listed in Table 2, as well as those listed in notes
coefficient hasbeen multiplied by io2.

—

ISL

LSL

(0.01)

—

*Each

*

0.002

(0.012)

CS

CS

Growth

—

—

—

(0.93)

(1.06)

—

—5.28

—2.91

ROl

ROl

3. Productivity

2.

2

MS

0.84

MS

—4.23
(1.54)

—

Z60+

—

—

Z60

ROl

—

Z30

(0.001)

—

UN6O+

—0.005

—

UN6O

0.83

—

UN3O

(0.06)

—0.06

ZUN

(0.01)

1. Profitability

Variable

Dependent

Specification!

Alternative Measures of Unionization*

Table 5

* and

(0.01)

0.49

(0.01)

0.49

(0.01)

0.49

INL

0.197

0.196

0.192

22.98

22.98

22.98

23.23

23.22

23.24

SEE

** of Table 4.

0.896

0.897

0.896

0.370

0.369

0.369

0.188

0.189

0.187

2

R

4619

4622

4621

4623

4623

4625

4621

4621

4623

d.f.

- 39

-

and the comparable equation (ic) in Table 4 shows that the alternative
measures of unionization provide little explanatory power beyond the
union dummy.

Similar statements apply to the growth and productivity equations.

Although some differences in the various coefficients appear, the data
appear to have little or very weak information about any differential effect

of changes in percent organized. As noted earlier, this is likely to be
a reflection of measurement error in the basic unionization variable.
In light of the evidence, the remainder of the paper focuses on results
with a simple dummy variable to capture the effects of unionization.
Implications of the Basic Results
Seen in terms of the models developed in Section I, the results

in Tables 4 and 5 appear to be inconsistent with the simple monopoly model

with the firm on its demand curve. If the union wage effect in these data
were in the proverbial 10-15 percent range, the profit results could imply

an elasticity of substitution on the order of 2. Yet, with a union wage
effect, growth and market share in the simple model should have declined

substantially; instead, the evidence suggests little change. Since productivity also changes very little, there appears to be some support for
the simple bargaining model in which only a wage effect is present.

Additional evidence on the bargaining interpretation of these

results is provided by examination of the capital-labor ratio. Neither
capital nor labor should deviate from nonunion values in the face of
unionization if wages are bargained through a process of joint profit

maximization as described in Section I. Thus, if the bargaining model
is correct, the union coefficient in an equation explaining the capitallabor ratio should be zero.

- 40

Within

-

the framework sketched out in Section I, the capital-labor

ratio is determined by technology and relative prices, but is unaffected

by market structure. In practice, it is important to control for differences in the market and industry, since the choice of technology is likely
to be closely related to the types of products the firm manufactures.

Evidence on the capital-labor ratio, therefore, is examined in the context of a model which includes controls for industry structure, technology, and labor market characteristics, but which excludes the firm's
market share and the characteristics of its competitors.38
Table 6 presents estimates of the union effect on capital per

employee under three specifications. The first includes only 2-digit
industry dummies and industry-time interactions. The second adds controls
for the labor market and the product at the 3- and 4-digit level. The
third specification adds a set of controls for the extent of vertical integration (ratio of purchases to sales and share of internal components in
those purchases), in order to control for differences in technology in the

chain of supply. Results were obtained with arithmetic and logarithmic
versions of the dependent variable, and in both cases the union effect is
not significantly different from zero, once the control variables are

added. In line lc, for example, the union dummy has a coefficient of
-129.6 and a standard error of 89.1. The effect is also substantively
small: compared to the sample mean of 3174, the union coefficient constitutes a decline of about 4 percent.

The difference in sign between the arithmetic and logarithmic

versions suggested the possibility of outliers in the data. Examination
of the residuals in equation lb revealed a small number (a little over
1 percent of the sample) of observations with residuals far from the

- 41

Table

-

6

The Effect of Unionization on the Capital-Labor Ratio

Dependent
Variable

Controls*

Vertical
Integration
Controls**

R

tlarket

Union

2

SEE

d.f.

1. K/L
(arithmetic)
a)

-515.1
(89.2)

-

-

0.252

2607

4644

b)

—168.1

X

-

0.311

2505

4630

X

X

0.338

2456

4627

-

-

0.267

0.614

4644

X

-

0.315

0.595

4630

X

X

0.352

0.579

4627

(90.5)
c)

—129.6
(89.1)

2. LKL
(logarithmic)
a)

-0.048
(0.021)

b)

0.030

(0o21)
c)

0.036
(0.021)

*Jncludes all the variables in Control 2 (see Table 3), except
BIG3, COMP and CPUR.
same variables as in a), and ratio of purchases to sales,
and fraction of purchases from components of the parent corporation.

Includes

- 42

median.

-

These were primarily chemical processing firms, a sector in

which extremely large values of capital per employee would be expected.

Estimation without the outliers had no material effect on the magnitude

of the coefficients. The conclusion that the union effect is not significantly different from zero is unaffected by discordant observations.

Evidence on the capital-labor ratio thus provides further support for
the bargaining interpretation of the union's impact on firm performance.
Union Effects and Flarket Structure

It is obvious from the evidence developed in Tables 4-6 that

unionized firms earn substantially lower returns than their nonunion

counterparts. As far as other measures of performance are concerned, however, unionization appears to have only a minor impact. While the evidence is thus not inconsistent with a bargaining model of unionization
and firm performance, broader inferences about the union's impact on the

allocation of resources must be viewed with some caution. It might be
inferred, for example, that unions affect the division of total excess
return between workers and the firm, but have little impact on the use

of real resources. Yet even if that characterization were to apply to
the sample average, there may well be some diversity in the pattern
of effects across competitive situations which could have real effects

over the longer run. It matters whether the average effect reflects
a situation in which the union extracts substantial gains from firms
with monopoly power, leaving the competitive sector little changed, or
whether the bulk of the union impact falls on firms with little market
power.

The analysis in Section I suggested a number of reasons why
the union's impact might be different in different contexts, and in fact,

- 43

-

why the union may have a relatively larger impact on the smaller firms.
Some insight into the effects of unionization in different environments
is provided in Table 7.

Estimates of the basic model are presented for subsets of the

overall sample defined on the basis of market share. High market share
firms are defined as those with more than 35 percent of the served market;

the cutoff point for low-market share firms is 10 percent. This approach
is relatively crude, since other aspects of the market may be important
in determining the nature of competition and the firm's market power. A
10 percent share has a different meaning in a world where the principal

competitors have 3 or 4 percent. While acknowledging the approximate
nature of the approach, the use of market share should capture the
basic tendencies in the data.

Estimates of the union effect on performance are presented in
line 1 of Table 7; Table 8 provides mean values of the performance

measures. The results are revealing. Unionization has an extraordinary
effect on the return on capital in low-market share firms. Taken at
face value, the estimated coefficient (-4.7) implies something close to

a 40 percent decline in profitability due to unionization. A similar
decline emerges in estimates using the return on sales. This large
decline in profits among low-market share firms stands in contrast to

the results for firms with substantial market power. The estimated
effect In column 4 is statistically and substantively insignificant.

Whereas unionized firms with less than 10 percent share earn much
lower rates of return, profits among the "rich and powerful" appear
to be little affected by unionization.

- 44
Table

-

7

Union Impact in Different Competitive Environments*

1

Low-Market Share
2
3

High-Market Share
4

Independent
Variables

(ROl)

(GS)

(LSL)

CR01)

5
(GS)

(LSL)

UNION

-4.69

0.96

-0.03

-0.34

-1.51

-0.03

(0.01)

(2.10)

(1.90)

(0.02)

_0.0l**

-0.45

-0.03

_0.12**

(0.03)

(0.07)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(1.39)

BIG3

COMP

CPUIR

-0.09

RMG

INDG

IN]DC4

INDINP

0.06

(0.04)

(0.05)

0.01

0.06

(0.05)

(0.06)

(0.04)

-0.07
(0.07)

-0.12**
(0.05)

0.l5**

0.24

(0.04)

-0.18
(0.05)

0.04

0.63

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.02)

(0.04)

-0.20
(0.05)

EXPER

(1.66)

0.18

0.17

d.f.

0.05**

0.06

(0.15)

(0.13)

0.24

0.06

(0.08)

(0.08)

(0.06)

0.11

0.82
(0.03)

_0.32**

-0.24

(0.15)

(0.11)

(0.21)

0.06

0.04

-0.08**

-0.08

(0.03)

(0.04)

(0.03)

(0.04)

-0.30**

-0.42

(0.12)

(0.15)

-0.33

0.41

(0.13)

(0.16)

0.120

0.263

21.39

25.43

1385

1385

-0.10

(0.07)

-0.14

LML

SEE

(0.04)

0.06

(0.13)

LKL

R2

0.01**

6

-0.12**
(0.12)

0.18**
(0.07)

0.19**
(0.05)

0.1O**
(0.03)

-0.06
(0.19)

-0.14**

-0.05
(0.03)

-0.13**

-0.10
(0.14)

_0.20**

(0.17)

(0.03)

(0.12)

0.20

0.31

(0.01)

(0.01)

0.54

0.46

(0.01)

(0.01)

0.913
0.191
1383

0.220

0.455

24.74

22.32

894

894

0.895

0.198
892

*In addition to those listed, each equation includes a set of 2-digit SIC
dummies; a time trend, a set of time 2-digit SIC interactions; and
several 3-digit SIC variables: fraction of sales in Northeast, South,
West; mean tenure; percent female; percent Black; mean grade attended;
mean age.
2
**The coefficient has been multiplied by 10

- 45

-

Table 8
Means and Standard Deviations for High- and Low-Market Share Firms

High-Market
Share
__________________

Low-Market Share

(N=940)

Performance
Measure
Mean
___________________________
ROl

LSL

(N=1439)
Std. Dev.

Std. Dev.

Mean

34.7

27.3

11.1

22.4

11.8

29.5

6.8

29.1

3.93

0.60

3.80

0.63

- 46 -

The contrast is not nearly as sharp for the other performance
measures. There appears to be some difference in the growth equation,
with lower share firms having a positive union effect. But the
coefficients are not significantly different. The estimated productivity effects are identical, although the coefficient for the high

share firms has a larger standard error. For the low-market share firms,
the pattern of effects across performance measures is much like the overall

results in Table 4. Unionization is associated with a large impact on
profits and small or negligible effects on productivity and growth. Among
high share firms, however, unionization has no statistically significant
impact on firm performance.

Estimates were also obtained for the balance of the sample. The
results revealed a lower union impact on productivity as market share

increased, but the decline does not appear to be smooth. Among firms with
market shares of 10-20 percent, the data suggest a union effect of -2.4

(1.7), or about 12 percent of the mean. The estimates for firms with
20-25

percent

of the market was -5.8 (1.8), or 22 percent, quite close

to the sample average. In view of the fact that the effect vanishes
among firms with over 35 percent market share, it seems clear that the
high-market share firms in Table 7 form a distinctive group.
The theoretical analysis in section I provided several reasons

why the impact of the union on profitability might be larger among firm's

with less market power. Without information on relative wages (which is
not available) it is not possible to draw firm conclusions, but the evidence appears to be consistent with studies which found little relation-

ship between market structure and the union wage effect. In the context

- 47

of

-

the bargaining model, a constant union wage effect across market struc-

ture implies that unionization will fall more heavily on the less powerful
firms.

While this line of thinking seems appropriate for most of the
firms in this sample, a different explanation is likely to apply to those

firms with substantial market power. The absence of a profit effect
among high share firms could imply no union wage effect, but that is

contrary to most of the evidence on the subject developed to date. A more
appealing alternative relies on the possibility of limit pricing behavior.

It does not seem far fetched to suggest that the firms in the high share
group enjoy some barriers to entry (average market share

50 percent)

and may be limit pricing. If so, no profit effect would be observed
even if unions raise wages, as long as the union effect was reflected

in the limit price. If the limit price were below the monopoly price,
and if the union imposes a cost which would be borne by new entrants, the
limit pricing firm will adjust the limit price to cover the added costs,
1
.
39
Leaving tue price cost margin uncnangea.
The evidence on market structure and union effects provides

some perspective on the overall results, and suggests a number of inter-

esting hypotheses about the union impact. The evidence on profitability
is consistent with the models of competitive interaction developed in

Section I. Unionization appears to bear most heavily on those firms
whose profitability is already at a relatively low level. A disproportionate effect on less powerful firms raises the possibility that unionization influences processes of entry and exit and thus the structure of

the market. This notion is not unreasonable. Williamson has argued
precisely this point in the coal industry, and the effect of the UAW

- 48

-

on the smaller automobile companies in the l950s provides a further
historical example.4° This obviously depends on the extent of organization in the industry and the ability of new or smaller firms to avoid
unionization.

It is difficult to pursue these hypotheses in the PINS data,
since the observations pertain to a single firm, while the hypothesis

involves the extent of unionization in an industry. Because the data
set is not necessarily composed of observations on direct competitors,
and because little information about competitors is available (e.g.,

the extent to which they are unionized), it is not possible to examine

what are essentially industry dynamics. In this case one is left with
suggestive results about the incidence of the union impact on profits and
a number of working hypotheses about longer-term effects on competition;
the need for further research is clear.

III. Conclusions
This paper has developed a framework for analyzing the effect of
unionization on firm performance, and has provided empirical evidence on
several indicators, including rates of return on total capital and sales,
output growth, market share, productivity and the capital-labor ratio.

The analysis provides clear evidence that, on average, unionized firms
earn substantially lower returns than nonunion firms operating in com-

parable technological and competitive environments. It is also evident
that other dimensions of performance, particularly, growth and capitallabor substitution, are little affected by unionization in this data.

The evidence is thus consistent with a bargaining model of union-firm
interaction, in which the union affects the distribution of profits, but
has little effect on output, or factors of production.

- 49

This

-

characterization of the union's effect has some interesting

implications. It explains why unionized firms may survive over long periods
of time, and why the owners of capital would be strongly opposed to unioniza-

tion. The evidence suggests further that the issue of the impact of the
union on resource allocation is really a question about the long run. In
this data, at least, efficiency effects would seem to derive from differences
between firms with and without market power, and from differences between

industries. Interpreted literally, the results point to factors which
influence the maintenance of union organization, and exit and entry behavior

as the key determinants of the union's impact on efficiency. One implication
is that research on these problems could benefit from analysis of unionization in specific firms and industries with emphasis on the historical

perspective. Such longitudinal analysis, if carried out over a period of
time long enough to allow for entry and exit, would be a valuable addition
to the literature.

These comments are not meant to imply that the questions about the
union's impact on the firm which motivated this study have been answered.

The analysis is suggestive of a possible interpretation, but it is well to
remember that the evidence in favor of the bargaining model is largely

negative: the data fails to reject the notion that unionization has no
effect on output or factor use. Furthermore, the special nature of the
PINS data suggests caution in embracing the bargaining model as generally

applicable. Even within the data set there is some indication that the
impact of the union may differ in different competitive settings. Further
analysis of the impact of the union on the firm, of possible differences
in productivity effects by industry and of the role of the union in
competitive dynamics within an industry seems warranted.

- 50

-

Footnotes
1. The basic reference is Slichter, Healy and Livernash.
2. A review of these findings is contained in Freeman and Medoff (1980).
3. The papers by Freeman (1980), Brown and Medoff and Clark are
representative.
4. Freeman and Fledoff (1980), p. 81.

5. The model developed in this section is a special case, but it illustrates the point that the impact of a union induced wage increase on
the rate of return on capital depends on the parameters of production
and demand. Only in the case where the price of output is fixed does
the union wage increase have an unambiguously negative effect on the
rate of return on capital. This can be seen by expressing the rate of
return on capital, as:
n/K =

[-

and (with the price fixed) calculating the logarithmic differential.
This yields:

dln() =

1[dln(Q/L)

-

(l-ci)dln(K/L)]

-

j&dlnW,

where a is labor's share.

Assuming that the changes in these variables were caused by unionization, the term in brackets is the union productivity effect, while
the change in the wage is the union wage effect. With no productivity
effect, and assuming that unionization raises the wage, the rate of
return on capital will fall. If the price is allowed to vary (i.e.,
if the firm is assumed to have a downward sloping demand curve) one
obtains the same result as given in the text. In general, the direction of the effect also depends on the elasticity of demand and returns
to scale.

6. Note that I have defined profits net of a required return to capital.
Doing the analysis in terms of gross returns would change the magnitude
of the calculated elasticities but would have no effect on the signs;
since the required rate of return is assumed to be fixed, the sign of
changes in the gross rate of return (required plus excess) arising
from a wage increase depends on the sign of changes in the excess
rate of return.
7.

If returns to scale are not constant, then the sign of (n'k)w will
depend on the elasticity of demand, and the degree of
returns to scale, as well as the elasticity of substitution.

- 51
Footnotes

-

(continued)

8. It is important to note that the effect of the union is assumed to
apply to the production process as a whole, rather than to a particular factor of production. The assumption of a "neutral" productivity
effect is roughly consistent with existing evidence that unionization affects all aspects of the enterprise. (See Clark and
Slichter et al.) The notion that it affects them all equally,
however, is only an assumption.
9. Warren-Boulton describes several such measures in his work on
vertical control by unions.
10. The likely inefficiency of points on the demand curve is a central
feature of the work of Hall and Lilien; for a recent treatment of
the bargaining problem, see HcDonald and Solow.
11. If the wage alone were subject to agreement, with the firm free to
adjust output, prices and other factors, the firm would choose a
point on its demand curve. Note that the bargaining model
implicitly assumes that the relationship between the union
and the firm persists indefinitely. A richer analysis would
deal with the question of maintenance of organization.
12. See Warren-Boulton, pp. 119-156 for an intensive analysis.
13. This assumption has been used by de Ilenil and Rosen. The implication is that the union seeks to maximize the rents associated with
bargaining collectively.
14. A neutral change in technology (to which a union productivity effect
is equivalent) has two effects on factors of production. The first
is a direct reduction in input requirements equal (in percentage
terms) to the productivity effect. The second is an increase in
requirements through lower prices and increased output; the second
effect depends on the elasticity of demand. If d is the productivity effect, the impact on K and L, for example, is d(q-l).

15. The assumption of differentiated products is crucial here. Without
it, joint profit maximization would imply that q1 would go to zero,
with some kind of ex-post redistribution of profits. The analysis
without differentiated products is equivalent to the problem of
the multiplant monopolist.
16. This assumes that interdependence effects are minimal.
17. It should be noted that the mental experiment here is to compare an
otherwise identical firm in two different market settings. The
issue is not the profitability of the unionized firm relative to its
competitors, but rather the differences in profitability within the
same firm in the two different environments.

- 52
Footnotes

-

(continued)

18. This conclusion can also be illustrated in a model where a large
firm is limit pricing behind barriers to entry. If unionization
leads to an increase in average costs and an increase in the limit
price, there will be no observed effect on profits, as long as the
new limit price is less than the profit maximizing price. All
of these examples are merely illustrative. Other models suggest
different conclusions. For example, a Cournot model of duopoly
implies that unionization of the smaller firm actually reduces
margins by less than unionization of the larger firm. But this
model abstracts from cross-price effects and assumes a common
output price. I am indebted to Therese Flaherty for these
examples.
19. Note that the firm is assumed to face the same pre-union wage no
matter what the product market environment. With the same union
differential it must be the case that post-union wages are identical.
In a bargaining model, the post-union wage can be expressed as
w = ((1_O)n*)/L, where it* is total or pre-union profits, L is
labor input, and 0 is the firm's share of total profits. Note
that 0 also measures the extent of decline in the firm's profitability. Consider a firm in two environments, one a competitive
situation (firm 1), the other a situation where the firm has much
more market power (firm 2). Since post-union wages are equal,
((1-01)it)/L1 =

<

((1-02)rt2)/L2.

It is reasonable to expect

and L1 > L2. Thus, wages can only be equalized if l < 02

which implies that profits must fall more in the competitive situation.

20. The discussion here abstracts from any rivalrous behavior. It
is assumed that competitors accept reformulation of prices and
outputs caused by the union. But it may be that competitors
come out worse off, since some of the union's gains may come out
of their profits. Whether the consensus holds up or breaks down
may depend on the relative power of the unionized firm. Thus,
even in the case of rivairous behavior, it is likely that unionization will have less impact on the more powerftl firm.
21. See the papers by Weiss and Segal for a discussion of the theoretical
and empirical issues.
22. This argument is made by Weiss, who also finds some support for the
queue explanation. Similar conclusions apply to the work of Ashenfelter and Johnson.
23. See Weiss, and Freeman and Medoff (1981); additional evidence can be
found in the paper by Pugel.

- 53

-

Footnotes (continued)
24. It is evident that such considerations apply only to firms enjoying
some barriers to entry. The tendency for inefficiency to increase
with market share has been inferred from the quadratic nature of
the relationships between rates of return and market share. See
especially the work by Shepherd.
25. The analysis has not treated the potential impact of unionization on
market structure. While principal concern is with the effect of the
union on the firm, it is clear that the extent of unionization within
an industry could affect the nature of competition, both by affecting entry conditions, and communication about costs. Furthermore,
if the union pursues a common wage policy, marginal competitors could
be eliminated. The net result of these considerations is likely
to be a larger impact of the union on less powerful firms.
26. The net income measure is based on conventional accounting practices
which treat R&D, advertising and other marketing costs as expenses.
Neither income nor cajital have been corrected for inflation in the
results reported below. Capital is valued at historical costs and
net income is taken as reported. However, a relatively crude attempt
was made to restate capital in current prices, and to correct for
profits on inventories.
(The PINS data provide an estimate of
the replacement value of plant and equipment.) Since this correction was a very rough cut, and since it had no effect on the
estimated impact of the union, results with the conventional
profitability data are presented below.
27. The capital-labor ratio is also endogenous, but it is used to control
for the effect of the union on productivity which works through wages.
The union coefficient is thus to be interpreted as an estimate of
d, the union effect on total factor productivity.
28. See the paper by Martin for estimates of the lagged relationship
between performance and structure.
29. The PINS data have been used in several analyses of strategy and
performance. See in particular papers by Gale, Buzzell and
Ravenscraft and Scherer.
30. The governing principles are that the business serve a well-defined
set of customers, and face specific competitors.
31. The panel structure of the data does not permit estimation of a model
with a fixed firm effect, since union status does not change within
the sample period. It is possible that the efficiency of the regression could be improved by allowing for a more complicated covariance
structure (e.g., across firms and overtime). However, the unbalanced
nature of the design makes this approach computationally burdensome
and it has not been pursued.

- 54
Footnotes

-

(continued)

32. Results with time dummies are very similar. Clearly, the crosssection variation in the data dominates variation over time.
33. This is in fact confirmed in the data. A regression with (S/K) as
the dependent variable using the full model has a union coefficient
of 0.09 (0.04). The mean of S/K is 2.29, which suggests a difference
in S/K of about 4 percent.
34. Some estimates were obtained with a union-time interaction term,
but the overall results were little changed; the interaction term
was not statistically or substantively significant.

35. See Brown and Medoff.
36. Clark and Frantz found positive union effects in the cement and
furniture industries.
37. The most explicit treatment of this issue is found in Clark.
38. In effect, the industry variables play the role of 3- and 4-digit
SIC industry dummies.
39. See the paper by Duchatelet and Flaherty for a theoretical analysis
of limit pricing which suggests that it may be a more pervasive
phenomenon than previously believed.
40. Macdonald documents the effect on the so-called "Independents" of
UAW wage policy. In this case, some of the smaller firms (i.e.,
Studebaker) actually paid wages above those at the larger firms.
This "pattern-plus" approach to bargaining between the UAW and
the smaller companies may have affected the "Independents" ability
to compete and may have contributed to their eventual demise.
See Macdonald, pp. 258-306.

- 55
References

Ashenfelter, Orley and George Johnson. "Unionism, Relative Wages and Labor
Quality in U.S. Manufacturing." International Economic Review. 13,
October 1972.
Brown, Charles and James L. Medoff. "Trade Unions in the Production Process."
Journal of Political Economy. 86. June 1978.
Buzzell, Robert D, Bradley Gale, and Ralph G.M. Sultan. "Market Share--A
Key to Profitability." Harvard Business Review. January-February 1975.

Clark, Kim B. "The Impact of Unionization on Productivity: A Case Study."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 33, July 1980.
Duchatelet, Martine and M. Therese Flaherty, "Strategic Response to Entry
Over the Product Life Cycle." Processed 1981.

Frantz, John. "The Impact of Trade Unions on Productivity in the Wood
Household Furniture Industry." Honors Thesis, Harvard University, 1976.

Freeman, Richard B. "The Exit-Voice Trade Off in the Labor Market: Unionism,
Job Tenure, Quits and Separations." Quarterly Journal of Economics.
94, December 1980.
Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff. "The Percent Organized Wage
Relationship for Union and Non-Union Workers." Review of Economics
and Statistics. 63, November 1981.
Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff. "The Two Faces of Unionism."
The Public Interest. 57, Fall 1979.
Gale, Bradley T. "Selected Findings from the PINS Project:
Market
Strategy Impact on Profitability." American Marketing Association
Combined Proceeding. (1974).
Hall, Robert E. and David N. Lilien. "Efficient Wage Bargains Under
Uncertain Supply and Demand." American Economic Review. 69,
December 1979.
Macdonald, Robert M. Collective Bargaining in the Automobile Industry
(New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1963).
McDonald, Ian M. and Robert M. Solow. "Wage Bargaining and Employment."
American Economic Review. 71, December 1981.

Martin, Stephen. "Advertising, Concentration and Profitability: The
Simultaneity Problem." The Bell Journal of Economics. 10, Autumn 1979.

- 56

-

References (continued)

Pugel, Thomas A. "Profitability, Concentration and the Interindustry
Variation in Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics. LXII,
I'lay 1980.

Ravenscraft, David and F.M. Scherer. "The Lag Structure of Returns to
R&D." Processed 1981.
Rosen, Sherwin. "Trade Union Power, Threat Effects and the Extent of
Organization." Review of Economic Studies. Vol. 36 (April 1969).
Segal, Martin. "The Relation Between Union Wage Impact and Market
Structure." Quarterly Journal of Economics. 78, Feburary 1964.

Shephard, William G. "The Elements of Market Structure." Review of
Economics and Statistics.
Slichter, Sumner, James Healy and Robert Livernash. The Impact of
Collective Bargaining on Management. (Washington, D.C.: Brookings,
1960).

Warren-Boulton, Frederick R. Vertical Control of Markets: Business and
Labor Practices. (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1978).
Weiss, Leonard. "Concentration and Labor Earnings." American Economic
Review. March 1966.

