                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                OIL PRICES, WELFARE AND TEE TRADE
               BALANCE: AN INTERTEMPORAL APPROACH



                        Lars   E.O. Svensson




                      Working Paper No. 991




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                         September 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #991
                                                       September 1982



                    Oil Prices, Welfare and the Trade Balance:
                            Art Intertenporal Approach


                                   ABSTRACT



     The paper examines welfare effects and the
                                                 trade balance response
 to changes in the world oil prices and interest
                                                  rates for a small
oil—importing economy. The trade balance is mainly
                                                    seen as the
difference between
                   Saving and investment, and these are derived
from intertemporal optimization
                                  It is shown that the welfare effects
consist of static terms of
                             trade effects, intertenporal terms of
trade effects, and employment effects. The trade
                                                     balance deteriorates
for temporary oil
                    price increases, whereas its response is ambiguous
for permanent oil
                  price increases. For a fall in the world interest
rate, the trade balance
                        deteriorates, if the economy is a net borrower.




                                   Lars E.O. Svensson
                                   National Bureau of Economic Research
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                   (617) 868—3900

                                          and

                                  Institute for International
                                      Economic Studies
                                  University of Stockholm
                                  5—106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
                                                                         Revised Septenter 1982

                          OIL PRICES, WELFARE AND THE TRADE BALANCE:

                                    AN INTERT4pO? APPROACH*


                                        tars E.O. Svensson


                            I.   Introduction and summary   of results
            This   paper examines the trade—balance response to changes in world oil pri-
ces and interest rates for a small        oil—importing open econow. The theoretical
interest    in this problem is, of course, derived from the oil price increases in 1973_14

and 1919—80 and the resulting huge surpluses in OPEC current accounts and
                                                                          trade
balances,    and corresponding overall deficits vis——vis OPEC in the rest of the world.
World markets have since then been flooded by OPEC'5
                                                     supply of credit, and there is

evidence that world real interest rates fell during the 19705.1

            By now,   starting with   the works by,   among others, Schmid 11976],   Findlay and
Rodrigues    [1977J, Buiter 11918], and Bruno and Sachs 11979], there exists a lare

literature on many thretica1 macroeconomic aspects of      these events. 'lb the extent
that    this literature has dealt with determinants of the current account, it has,
however,  mostly used a rather static approach and even overlooked obvious and impor-
tant intertemporal aspects. Whether the current account balance is described in
terms    of export   minus import or equivalently as income minus absorption, it has
rarely been seen as the outcome of intertemporal decisions on saving and invest-
ment. As argued by Saclis [1981, p.212] : "A one—period theory of the current account
that describes a static balance of imports and exports makes as much sense as a one—
period   theory of savings or investment. Because current account imbalances reflect

             choices, expectations of future events can be a decisive factor in
iritertemporal

determining the size of deficits and surpluses  u2
                                                —2—



             Svensson and Razjn 119821 have
                                               developed a two—period maw—goods model of          a
 small open econow, for the purpose of examining the classic Harberger—Lau5_
 )Ietzler terms of trade effect on aggregate spending and
                                                          saving. They can resolve
 previous controversies on the determinants of the effect,
                                                            precisely because they
 develop a model where expenditure and saving are the outcome of intertemporal
                                                                               optimi-
 zation.   Their model also gives rise to a theory of the current
                                                                  account that expli-
 citly takes the intertemporal aspects into account, and they derive
                                                                     the effects on
 on the current account of
                           temporary, per1nent, and expected future changes in world
 prices, assuming perfect international capital
                                                       mobility and a given world rate of
 interest. The discussion
                               is, however, limited to the case with fixed (full employ-
 ment) output vectors and no investment, except for a brief
                                                            discussion of conse-
 quences of static and intertemporal
                                     substitution in production.
            In   this paper, the anaJ.ysis of Svensson   and Razin 11982]   is   specialized to
 deal   with two traded goods, name3,y a dorstical3,y Sroduced final
                                                                     good and an imported
raw material, called oil, which is used as an input in production.
                                                                   The ana].ysis is
furthermore extended to include investment, rigid wages, and changes in
                                                                        employment.
The effects on welfare and
                           on the trade balance3 in terms of final goods of exogenous
increases in oil prices (relative
                                  to final goods) and a decrease in the world (real
final—goods)     interest rate are examined,4 taking     into account endogencis changes in
saving,  investment and employment. As in Svensson and Razin [1982), the model uses
an explicit),7 microeconomic framework, and abstracts complete),y from
                                                                                 monetary
aspects. There is no government and the effects of different licies
                                                                    are not con-
sidered. Throughout the analysis it is assumed that capital and
                                                                        labor, capital and
oil, and oil and labor, are all 'cooperative' (in the sense that        the   corresponding
cross partiajs of the production function are         all sitive) , that    oil is used only   as
                                               —3—




an intermediate input and not consumed directly, that oil cannot be stored, and that
there 18 no home production of oil. Then the following results are derived:
         With flexible wages and full employment, the effect on welfare of chan5es in
oil prices and the interest rate is independent of the possibilities to substitute
oil for capital or labor in production. The welfare effects can be simply expressed
as a sum of static oil terms of trade effects and an intertemporaj. interest rate
terms of trade effect. With rigid wages and less than full employment, welfare is in
addition affected by enrplment changes, which do depend on the degree of substituta-
bility of oil in production.
           With flexible wages and full emplwment we can show that:
           (i)   A (present) ttporary oil price increase (at a constant rate of

interest) unambiguously deteriorates6 the (present) trade balance through a decrease

in saving, whereas investment is unaffected.

           (2) An (expected) future oil price increase unambiguously improves the

(present) trade balance through an incrase in saving and a decrease in investment.

           (3)   A permanent oil price increase has, in general, an ambiguous effect
                                                                                     on
the   trade balance. To     get more specific results we need further restrictions, for

instance   that oil imports and oil price increases are the saziie in both periods, and
that the marginal propensity to consume is the same in the present and in the future
(alternatively, that the rate of ti preference is independent of the welfare
level).    Then the (present) trade balance unambiguously   improves, because saving is
unaffected   but investment decreases.1

           (4)   It the                             in the trade balance, a decrease
                          country has a (present) deficit

in the world rate of interest unambiguously deteriorates the (present) trade balance
by a decrease in saving and an increase in investment. Otherwise, the effect on the
trade   balance is ambiguous.
                                           —'4—




         With   rigid wages both in the present and the future, oil price increases

 decrease employment, which increases the magnitude of the effects on the trade

balance under (1) and (3) above. If there are rigid wages only in the present but

flexible wages and full employment in the future, there is an increased
                                                                        tendency
towards deterioration of the (present) trade balance
                                                          for present oil price increases.
         These results show the differences in    the   response of saving, investment and
thetrade balance to temporary and pernanent oil price increase. The results also
show that for a perranent oil price increase, the trade balance may — somewhat
                                                                                   para—
doxicalJ,y — actuallyimprove, unless the rate of interest falls. It follows that in
order to create a deficit in the trade balance vis—a—yis OPEC for the non—OPEC world,
it may be necessary for the world rate of interest to fall.8 Thus we get a possible
theoretical explanation of the alleged fall in world rates of interest during the
1910s after the 1973-i4 oil price rise.
         We also show that there is a corçlete analor between the effects on welfare
and the trade balance of (i) exogenous oil price increases at full employ-ment, (ii)
exogenous decreases in employment at constant oil prices, and (iii) exogenous
decreases in productivity at constant oil prices and full employment.9
         The paper is organized as follows: Section II specifies the equilibrium of
the small country and defines the trade balance. In Section III the effects on
welfare and the trade balance of changes in oil prices and the interest rate are
derived under the assumption that there is full employment. A graphical illustration
of these effects is provided in Section IV. Rigid wages and changes in employment
are discussed in Section V. Section VI mentions some extensions, draws some general
conclusions, discusses some li.tations of the analysis, and suggests some areas for
future research.
                                                  —5—



                              II.   Equilibrium under full employment
              We consider a snnll country in an interteiora1 framework. There are two
periods,      indexed t = 1   and 2, and called the 'present' and the 'future',          respec—
tively. In      each period there are two goods, namely          a   final good and oil. They are
bothtraded on the world market at given relative spot prices at each date. The
country has access to a world credit market with a given final—goods real rate of
interest. We let q1 and q2 denote the relative spot prices of oil in periods 1 and
2 in terms of final goods. The (final—goods) discount factor (equal to one over one
plus   the real rate of interest) is denoted by 6.

           The country produces final goods, using oil as an imported intermediate

input together with domestic capital and          labor.      There is no domestic production of

oil, and oil cannot be stored. Production possibilities are given by well—behaved

concave production functions x =          ft(kt    A,   zt)     relating output       of final goods

to capital stock k1, labor input £ and oil input z, all in period t. The present

capital stock, kt, is predeteitned, whereas the future capital stock, k2, can be

augnted by investment of final goods in the present period. There is no investment
in the future.

           With regard to welfare and demand, we assume that the country can be ade-

quately represented by a well—behaved utility function U(c1, c2), where c1 and

c2   denote   present and future    consumption   of final goods.       Oil   is not consumed.

           Consider   now a couetitive equilibrium for the country, where the present
capital stock, k-, and the present and future labor supply, £ and z?, are given exo—
genousiy. The country faces given spot prices at each date and a given discount
factor.1° Wages adjust so as to assure full employment of labor. (In Section V we
shall deal with rigid wages and variable emplcjment.) Sich an equilibrium can be
represented by the equation
                                                                                   —9—


  (t)             'T)a    '9 (n        +   )      ' 'ab         (9        =


                                       'T)tx          '1b             +       'I)gX9   'b    '9)tI        'gb    (9 (9
 atfl. tBaocwa.i.jal.uT ;aWpn                    ;utiJguoo                    ag   uoflirtba        saifls ;qq.           azfl.   3uasa4d anya&         jo
 a.zn2tpuaxa uo               Uofldtflnguoo pUB            uansaAux syenba                      aqq.     .uasa.rd anTiA Jo             pa.DTnwnz,3i
 aflsawop        3npod          .Zao       at      0A    'spopad
                 'aa a.xn.tpuadxa uc uotqthunsuoo T ua
 aJT4TpUadxa TIuoT3t1nJ

 q.as

 'taAai
        rnba o (ATun
            fl
                                  '
                      °T'°Q ionpoJd
                                           aq
                                                 't)a       'ç '(Ti       Jo

                                                   txasa.zd anysA Jo aJnqxt;
                                                               U      potaacl
                                                                                at ao2cI
                                                                                       T uat tq
                                                                                                 jo
                                                                                                    Lq      p.zspus uasaad)
                                                                                                         uaga.zd

                                                                                                             'spoo
                                                                                                                   TBUTJ

                                                                                                                            'ç pwe
                                                                                                                 pflpUfls dcl
                                                                                                                                  Spoo qonpt
                                                                                                                                       aq
                                                                                                                                            (an-çBA

                                                                                                                                                      9T




                         '(
                                                       (dcl)                                                 8
                                                                                                                                       'UOtDUttJ
 't)x 'b '5T                      jo       aq    aot.xd        Jo TiU!J 'SpOO               aIfl.     TT 'att.vl       Ui         flncjut   Jo TflTCFVO
 pui




                         '
        '2oqi Iii         UT    P0TJ                      aqj TAaT Jo uaur4SaAut 5T paurniaap Lq aT                                           Uotq.tpuoo
         awl.    wasaad 9flriA Jo                at      a.m.n; TUTJBm ;onpoid jo TnTcIvo    rnba                           s               o 'ATUn
 at     aOT.Zd    JO 2Ua5a2d TBUTJ 9pOO                                            T
                                                                     'Gouajj           5T U3ATS          Lq Ui W9W1.SaAuT 'UOflOUnJ
 '9)TI    'ab                    jo 1.UaSBJd TBi.TTBO '3OOq                            Stfl VlTtODStp 'JOOBJ atfl 31T4n3                       TTO
'a3t.xct pui      at a.zn;nj uawtow fTAat                                                 a.mqn; TnT&8o               3pos        ST   qI   nins   jo
91fl    waw2saAut         pui aq. p9Utm.zaapaad ;uasa.zcl                              TnT° oo;s                   atzj    Jaflwr siq uaaq
passa.zjdng       si     Ui   tjaflitI2.zg       aq 1.uawsanjt UOflOunJ ptm Gtfl dcr SUOT;3unJ UT (T)
                                                 Jo
                                            aq; apnq qfltVJguoo U83 aq U9q3t.IA si .tiasaad aTrBA o
GJnwcpuadxa uo UOT4mngTjo3 TBnLa                               oq.   'qfliaA 'jç         a.zaqA       tflflaA    ST   pautjap          SB


(?)                                        .Xp



'a•     aqq.    uase.v!       9A jo              aq.    inns    jo    q.uasa.zd        otqMauop        's'.onpo.zd     .au jo          'q.uawsaAu
prie alnq.nj      3T2°p
                 uj    q.apnq 2ute.zqsuoo uio aq                          poos.xapun        si    utsgajdxa           at      an;Taa IGAGI n se
Ui vc3T13t            UOflOUflJ    JO aqq. UQAT2 PtXOA SaO1Id                            tIfl   ').UflOOBtp      'IOt38J UB qi
                                                             —7—



 employment  levels. By standard properties of the expenditure function, the
 equilibrju consumption levels are given by the corresponding price derivatives,
 C1   = E1(i,          u) and c2 = E6(l, 6, u))6 Also,
                  6,
                                                                   by   standard properties of the OP
 function,       equilibria output of final goods and oil inort are given by
      =   yt(1    qt kt, £t) and               =   ...yt(1   qt kt, £t). Thus, the equilibrium of the
 small open econor is fully specified.
          Let us also define the (present) trade balance (surplus) measured in final
 goods, t1. It equals the present current account surplus since there is no initial
 foreign debt. It is defined as

 ()         tl=yl..E1_I1
which in equilibrju sinnltaneously equals (i) the
                                                  value of the present net export,
i.e. (x1 —        c1   —   i1   —   q1z1),
                                   excess of present domestic product over
                                             (ii) the

spending on consumption and investment at date 1, i.e. the excess of domestic product
over absorption, (iii) the difference between present saving (Y' —
                                                                    E1) and invest-
ment, and (iv) the net increase in foreign asset holdings, i.e. the capital account
deficit.
            Having defined an equilibrium and the trade balance, we shall go on to
discuss changes in the trade balance. In interpreting the various effects on the
trade balance, we will find it helpful to look at it mainly as the difference between
saving and investment.


                       III.         Increases in oil prices and the discount factor
            In the introduction, we mentioned that there is enirical evidence of a fa.l
in world rates of interest during the 1970s after the oil price increase in 1973—1.
We shall now examine the effect on the trade balance of our small econontr of a
                                                —8—



    combination of oil price increases and a decrease in
                                                         the rate of interest. As a first
 step we derive the effects of these changes
                                                   on national welfare, assuming constant
 (full eloyment) labor input. Differentiating the budget constraint Cl),
                                                                         using
 standard properties of the expenditure and ID? functions, as well as the
                                                                          equilibrium
 condition for investment, we get

            EudU
                    = —z   11
                           dq — 22
                                 dq t2+    do


 where Eu denotes 3E/3u, the inverse of the rgina1 utility of wealth, which
                                                                            is posi-
 tive, and where t2 denotes the (current value) future trade balance,


 ()
            t2=12_Eo=x2_c2_q2z2
            Hence   the change in welfare is proportional to the sum of the oil—inort
weighted    oil price changes and the trade balance weigited discount rate change. The

effect on welfare is as if prices and the discount
                                                         factor has been held constant but
wealth had been decreased by the right—hand side of (4). We call —
                                                                   z1dq1         and
—
    Z2dq2 the present and future static (wealth equivalent) terms of trade effects

(on welfare), and t2dó the intertemporal terms of trade effect)-T

           In   particular, we see from (4)   that, somewhat paradoxicalay, the effect on
welfare is independent of the degree of
                                              substitution between oil, capital and labor
in production. 18

           Next,    to find the effect on the trade balance,
                                                               we differentiate (3), using
(4), to get, after some anipulations,


           dt1 a — z1dq1 —
                             C'w(... 1dq1 — &z2dq2 + t2dó) —
(6)
                                                                     — Ilqdq2 — 116 dó

where Ck, is the marginal, propensity to consume in period 1 (out of wealth),
                                                                              i.e. the
partial   derivative with respect to wealth of the t4arshallian uncompensated demnd
                                                   —9—

  functionfor final goods in period 1,19 and where E1 =
                                                                 is the intertejzoral
  pure substitution effect on present Consumption of a change in
                                                                 the discount factor.
          We can then identify and interpret the detenninants of
                                                                  the change of the
  trade balance. The first term on the right—hand side
                                                        of (6) we can call a direct
  static terms of trade effect, due to a revaluation of oil
                                                            iIort or, alternatively
  to the change in domestic
                                    product, in the present. The
                                                                    second term is a wealth
          on resent cons        tion 20
                                          consjstj of the sum of     the static and intertem-.
 poral terms of trade effects nfltiplied by the marginal
                                                         propensity to consume in
 period 1. The third term is an
                                         intertenporal constjmptio substitution effect. The
 last two terms we may       call   investment substitution effects.    We also note that the
 first three terms
                         give the change in saving, and the last two the change in investhent.
            In   order   to understand the separate effects
                                                            of changes in oil prices and the
 discount   factor, we consider the following
                                                   four pure cases:
            (i) By a temporary oil
                                price increase, we mean a situation where only the
present oil price increases, i.e.  dq1 > 0,         dq =
                                                  0 and dd = 0.  Then we can write

 (7)        dt = (a — °1w)(— z1dq1)       < 0
                    (+)      (_)

where the sis of the
                     separate tenus are also shown. The              term (1 —
                                                                                 c'w) can be
interpreted      as the marginal propensity to save out of present domestic
                                                                                  product. it
is positive if final goods are nornal at both dates, which
                                                                     we assume. Since invest-
ment is unaffected, the trade balance response depen
                                                     only on the change in saving.
Since present domestic product falls
                                            by the static terms of trade effect, saving
falls.    The trade balance clearly deteriorates.

            (2) By   a future oil price incerase, we nan     a situation where only     the
future   oil price increases, i.e. dq2 > 0 and dq' = do =
                                                               0.     We then have
                                                       —10—


                 dt   l_     1
                            Cw(_
                                    22
                                   ózdq)—I1
                                            dq2        >0.
                                   (—)


                 Here, both saving and investment changes.           Since welfare and wealth falls,
 consumption falls. Since present domestic
                                                          product is unchanged, saving increases.
 Equivalently, the wealth effect on the trade balance is pDsitive. What about

 investment? If we assume that oil and
                                                      capital are cooperative inputs in the sense of

 having positive cross partials in the production function, investment falls when oil

prices increase. This can be understood the
                                                              following way: An oil price increase

always decreases oil input (the own substitution effect is always negative). If

capital and oil are cooperative, this decreases the narginal product of capital,
which causes a decrease in investment.21 Hence, since savings increases and invest-
ment falls, the trade balance clearly improves.
                (3) From  the above follows that a permanent oil price increase, when both
present        and future oil prices increase, (i.e. dq1, dq2 > 0 and do =           in a), leads
general to an ambiguous change in the trade balance. Investment falls unambiguously,
but the net effect on savings is ambiguous. Itwever, if                    the   change in savings is
small, the trade balance will be dominated by the investment effect, and the trade
balance will improve. This somewhat paradoxical result has been emphasized by Sachs
[1981]. Precise conditions under which this occurs can be derived as follows:
                Assume that the oil price increase is the same in both periods
(dq1      =
              dq2 = dq)    and that oil import initially is       equal   in the two periods
(z1   =         = z). Then (6)     can be written


(9)             dt1
                       (c2   — C1&(_      &zdq) —
                                         (—)
                                                    I dq2 (>    0, if       '




where
                 is the marginal propensity to consume in period 2 (out of wealth).22
                                                       —11—


 Hence,if the marginal propensities to consume are the same at both dates, savings
 remains unaffected and the investment effect determines the trade balance change. It
 follows that the trade balance unambiguousi.y improves if the period 2 marginal
                                                                                                pro-
pensity to consume does not exceed that of period 1. In Svensson and Bazin [1982] it
 is    shown that this condition for the marginal propensities to consume is associated

with a rate of time         preference      that is a non—decreasing function of the welfare
level. 23

               (4)    Finally,    we consider   an   isolated increase in the discount factor
(do >    0,   dq1 = dq2 =    o),      i.e. a fall in the rate of interest. We get


(10)          dt1 = — C'wt2dO —                 0.
                                110 dO C
                            (+)          (+)
Let    us henceforth assume that the country has a deficit in the present trade balance

and hence a corresponding surplus in the future (since t1 +                   = o).24    Then
welfare    and   wealth increases with the increase in the discount factor.             Put dif-
ferently, the         country gains from the fall in interest, since it is a borrower.
Consequently,         present consumption increases, and since present domestic product is

constant, saving falls. Investment increases with the increase in the discount fac-
tor.     (The present value of the marginal product of capital increases, which

increases investment.)25 It follows that the trade balance unambiguously

deteriorates.

              The results under (3) and (4) above to some extent support Sachs 119811

argument that, for permanent oil price increases, it is really the investment

response that determines the changes in the current account. And                since   investment,
if   anything,       is likely   to           rather than a deterioration is likely
                                      fall, an improvement

to occw. To create the deterioration in the current account vis-a—vis OPEC that is
necessary for a world equilibrium, world rates of interest may have to fall. These
                                             —12—



 and similar     world equilibrium issues are further explored by Marion and Svensson

 11981].

                                IV.   A graphical illustration
           Theequilibrium of the country can be ilkstrated in a familiar Fisher
 diagram as in Figure 1.26 The intertemporal transformation curve ST shows the
 feasible combinations of present domestic product, net of investment, (y1 —
                                                                             Ii), and
 future domestic product, Y2, when the investment level I varies. It is concave
towards the origin, since future domestic product is a concave function of the

investment level. The interteqoral budget line has a slope equal to the inverse of

the discount factor. One indifference curve of the utility function is shown. The

present value maximizing combination of net present domestic product and future
domestic   product is given by point A, the net domestic product point, which hence
determines  the equilibrium level of investment, the horizontal distance between A and
T. The utility maximizing combination of consiumption c1 and c2 in the two periods is
given by A', the consumption point. Saving in period 1 l         —   c1, is given by the
horizontal   distance between T and A'. The present trade balance t1 =          — c1 —
is   given by the horizontal distance between A and A'. The diagram is drawn such that
the   country has negative saving and a trade balance deficit in period 1.
           First,   consider the effects of a temporary oil price increase, i.e.

dq1 > 0.    We have Cf1 = — z1dq1 C 0, i.e. present domestic product decreases with the

static   present terms of trade effect. This corresponds to a parallel shift of the
intertenoral transfornation curve ST to the left to S'T' as in Figure II. The net
domestic product point shifts horizontally to F, with unchanged investment level.
The spending point shifts southwest to F', along the wealth expansion curve through
A'. If the marginal propensity to consume is positive at both dates (consumption is
normal at both dates), this curve has a positive slope. Saving shifts from the
                                              —13—


  horizontaldistance between A' and T to that between F' and T'. Since T has
                                                                              moved to
 the left but A' to southwest, it is clear that saving falls.
                                                               The present trade
 balance shifts from the horizontal
                                    distance between A' and A to that between F' and
 F.  Clearly, the trade balance deteriorates, in accorda.nce with our
                                                                      previous results
 in Section III.
            Second,   consider the additional effects of a future oil price increase, i.e.
 dq2 > 0.      We have d12 =
                               12q(1, q2 11)dq2 = —z2(l,   q2, 11)dq2 C 0   ,   for   each
 level of investhent, where 12(1, q2, Ii) denotes future oil inort, which is
                                                                             an
 increasing function of investhent, since
                                              oil and investment are assumed to be
 cooperative. That is, the  transfortjon curve shifts vertically down with the sta-
 tic future terms of trade effect, the shift being larger with
                                                               increasing investment,
 from S'T' to SPtTT?.At a constant level of investment, the net domestic product point
 shifts from F to G. However, the oil price increase has decreased the (marginal)
Profitability    of investment. This appears in the diagram as the transforwation
                                                                                  curve
being less steep at G than at F.
                                       Hence, the equilibrj level of investment
decreases, and the net domestic product point shifts to H. The consumption
                                                                           point
shifts to H'. Saving shifts from (the negative of) the horizontal distance between
T' and F' to that between T" and H', and thus increases. The
                                                             present trade balance
is now given by the horizontal distance between H' and H. Clearly,
                                                                   the additional
effect of a future oil price increase has unambiguously improved the trade
                                                                           balance,
from the horizontal distance between F' and F to that between H' and H.
                                                                        However,
the 2ermanent oil price increase, has shifted the
                                                      trade balance from the horizontal
distance between A' and A to that between H' and H. The net change in the
                                                                          trade
balance depends on the relative
                               slopes of the straight lines througii HA and H'A',
respectively and is in general ambiguous.
             The special   case of   a permanent oil price increase discussed above, when the

 static terms of trade effects on the trade balance cancel and only
                                                                           the   investment
 effect matters, is when the two straight lines GA and WA' both have a
                                                                       slope equal to
 unity. Clearly, the same result occurs whenever the two lines have the
                                                                                     same slope. We
 also see that then the investment
                                         substitution effect from G to H unabiguousj.y im
 proves the present trade balance.

            Finally, consider the additional effect of an increase in the discount

 factor, i.e. do > 0.       This decreases the slope of the intertporal budget line. The

 level of investment increases, the net
                                              domestic product point shifts from H to J, and
the consumption point shifts to J', the shift consistthg of the wealth effect from H'

to J" (resulting from an intertemporal term of trade improvement) and the substitu-
tion effect from J" to J'. Saving falls and the trade balance unambiguously
deteriorates.
            Since welfare increases monotonically along the income expansion curve
through H' and A', it is clear that the diagram also illustrates the welfare effects
of   the changes in oil prices and the discount factor.


                            V. g4d wages and variable employment
            In   this paper, we have so far assumed full employment of labor. Let us now

introduce   rigid wages and variable employment.27 Let      us   first simply assume that
there is a given final goods wage, v, in each period. We shall
                                                                        later   deal with the
reasonable case when there is rigid wages and variable employment only          at   the first
datebut flexible wages and full employment at the second date. Then the profit
maximizing employment level is given by the condition that the demand price for
labor, the partial    is equal to the given wage. For each date we consequently
get the employment functions Lt(qt, kt, wt) defined         qt kt, Lt(qt, kt, wt))
= wt .   The     change in present employment from an oil price increase will then be
                                                         —15—


 given by


 (11)       d11 =   L1    dq1 < 0


which is negative if oil and labor are cooperative in the sense of having a positive

cross partial of the production function. That is, present enloyment decreases with
an increase in the present oil price.
            The effect on future employment is more conçaicated, since the employment
level and the investment level are sinzltaneously determined. First, we realize that
if there is constant returns to scale, in the sense that future domestic product is
linearly hongenous in (k2, £2), an arbitrarily given real future wage is in
equilibri incompatible with the given discount factor. The latter implies a given
future rate of return to capital which with constant returns to scale fixes the
future wage rate (for a given future oil price). Let us avoid this problem by
assuming that the future domestic product function is strictly concave in (k2, ),
which excludes the constant returns to scale case.

         Next, the changes in present and future employntnt from an oil price
increase will be given by

            d11 =   I    dq2 +   I   .td2 < 0
                                 (+) (_)
                                                   and
(12)
            dZ L2 dq2 +          L2kd11    <   0



Under the assumption that capital and labor, capital and oil, and labor and oil, are
all cooperative, it can be shown that both investment and future employment decreases.
The direct negative effect on investment Idq2 'C                0   is reinforced by an indirect
effect I1Ld&2 C 0        via the fall in investment. Similarly, the direct effect on
eloyment L2qdq2 C         0   is reinforced by the fall in investment, L2kdI3 < 0.28
                                                        —16—



                Similarly, for an increase in the discount fact, it can be shown that both
 future employment and investment increases, the investment increase being bigger than
 with full employment.29
                The endogenous changes in employment levels that
                                                                 we have now derived               .'ill
 have separate effects on the trade balance that simply adds
                                                             to the effects we have
 previously       derived for     the full employment case. To isolate these separate effects,
 let    us make a digression where we regard the employment changes as exogenous. We
hence differentiate (i) and (3) for given changes in the employment levels but with
constant        oil prices and discount factors.             Differentiating (1) gives

 (13)           Edu = Y1d&' +                  = w'dL   +


Hence, the effect on welfare of changes in the level of
                                                        employment is simply propor-
tional to the changes in the present value of domestic product, the change in

wealth.30 We call the two terms on the right—hand side the present and future

(wealth equivalent) employment effects (on welfare), respectively.
                                                                                     Differentiating
(3)     gives

(14)          dt1 =   Ci   —
                               C1w)w1dL1
                                           —
                                                            — I1zdL2

It    follows directly that a temporary decrease in employment, i.e. d& < 0                  and
dL2 =    0,   has a negative consumption wealth effect on the trade balance, which

deteriorates. A future decrease in employment has a positive consumption wealth

effect on the trade balance.               It has an additional positive effect on the trade

balance through a decrease in investment, if investment and labor are
                                                                                         complements.
It   follows that a pxanent decrease in employment has an ambiguous effect on the

trade balance.
                                                  —17—



            At this stage we realize that the effects on welfare and the trade balance
 of exogenous decreases in employment are completely analogous to the effects of oil
 price increases. It follows that the effects of exogenous decreases in employment
 can be graphically illustrated in Figure II, in exactly the same way as we demon-
 strated the effects of oil price increases.
            We also realize that as loris as we regard the employment levels             and
 £2
    as exogenous, we may as well interprete them as parameters representing produc-
tivity levels, say. Hence, we have implicitly derived the effects on welfare and the
trade balance of exogenous changes in productivity, and indeed shown the analor bet-
ween oil price increases and productivity decreases. This analor has recently been
emphasized in Bruno     11981]. Fornally, the analor between oil price increases,
employment decreases, and decreases in productivity, arises simply because they all
appear as parameter changes affecting the domestic product functions in the same way
and    hence cause similar negative supply shocks.

           After   this digression, we return to regarding the employment changes as
endogenous, given by (11) and (12)         because   of rigid wages. Since an oil price
increase leads to a decrease in employment at the same date, and we have seen that
the effect of a decrease in employment is the sane as the effect of an oil price
increase, we can directly conclude that the existence of rigid wages and the
resulting changes in employment will simply reinforce all the sepirate effects of oil
price increases that we derived in Section III. Thus, combining (6) and 14), for
instance the effect of a     temporary   oil price       increase on the trade balance will    be

(15)       dt1 = (1 —
                      C'w)   (   z1dq1 +
                                 (—)
                                           ?dti)
                                            (—)
                                                     c   0,


with   d&1 < 0 given by (ii). The trade balance will
                                                               deteriorate   more than it does in

the full employment case, since present domestic product falls more because the
                                                   —18—



 eiloyment effect adds to the static tens of trade effect.
            Similarly, the effect of an increase in the discount factor will be

 (i6)       dt1 =   — Clw(t2do + ôw2d&2)
                                     (+)
                                             —
                                                  I16
                                                   (+)
                                                       —   I  dZ C
                                                           (÷h+)
                                                                     0


 where d&2 > 0     r   the   previs argument. The trade balance deteriorates nrre than in
 the full employment case, due to the jsitive employment effect ów2d&2
                                                                          on welfare
  (which decreases savings) and the additional increase in investxuents I1dL2 >
                                                                                         0
           Let   us finally r_ark on the reasonable case when there is real wage
                                                                                         rigi-
 dity in the present (the short run) but flexible wages and full
                                                                          enloyment   in the
 future (the long run). This case is also consistent with constant returns to scale
 in capital and labor in the future, for which case future real wages will be deter-
mine by future oil prices and the discount factor. We realize that the
                                                                       asymmetry
caused by a decrease in eloyment only in the present will tend to deteriorate the
                                                                                                 trade
balance. In particular, the previous result in the full eiloyment case, that a per-
manent oil price increase y under some circumstances inçrove the trade balance, is
then further qualified.
          In the full employment case, we also noted that welfare effects are indepen—
dent of the d%ree of substitution in production between oil, capital, and labor. We
realize that with rigid wa€es this is no longer so, since the maitude of the
enloyment   effects depends on the degree of substitutability between oil and
                                                                                       capital
and labor. Hence, with rigid        wages   and   variable employment, the degree of substi—
tuion in production does indeed directly influence welfare.


               VI. Extensions, conclusions, and limitations of the analysis

          Let us    first mention some extensions of the above analysis. So far, we have

assumed that   oil is   used exclusively as an intermediate input in production. If
                                                —19—


 some oil is also consumed directly by consumer,3' the static teruis of trade
                                                                              effects
 on welfare are larger in magnitude, since oil import is larger. This
                                                                                itself
 should reinforce the effects on the trade balance derived in the
                                                                  case when oil is not
 consumed, in the same way     as
                            do changes in employment when there are ri6id wages, as
 we noted in section V. However, it can be shown32 that additional
                                                                   substitution
 effects on consumption enter, making      overall effects on the trade balance ainbi—
                                          the

 guous, except for a pure increase in the discount factor. The ambiguity arises
 because oil price increases induce substitution in consumption of final goods for
 oil, when oil and final goods are substitutes. This substitution effect is opposite
 to the   consumption wealth effect.

             is natural to nasure the trade balance in tern of final goods, when oil
            It

 is used as an input in production only. However, when both oil and final
                                                                                goods are
consumed, it is less obvious in what units the trade balance shall be measured. One
solution is to deflate the trade balance by an exact consumer price index, hence

constnict a 'real' trade balance. This
                                             can be done by asstzaing that preferences are

weakly homothetically separable over time, as in Svensson and Eazin 119821. Then it
can    be shown33   that the real trade balance is affected by what can be called real

ternE of trade effects and changes in the
                                                real discount factor, the latter being the
present value of the future consumer price index
                                                       deflated by the present consumer
price index. In particular, a temporary oil price increase then also changes the
real discount factor tbrcigh changes in the present consumer price index, which can
be   shown to give rise to ambiguity in the trade balance response.
         The analysis can be extended to an arbitrary number of goods along the lines
of   Svensson and Razin   [1982J. The generalized ternE of trade- effects are then
exactly analogous     to those in the present analysis. Felative
                                                                   price changes intro-
duce   consumption and investaent substitution effects that may give rise to an

ambiguous   trade balance response.
                                             —20—


            Let us also make some general comments
                                                       on the above analysis. It involves,
 as do several other recent works, a microeconomic
                                                         approach, in the sense of using
 behavioural functions explicitly derived
                                              from optimizing behavicxir, to   proble that
 havemst2y been attacked with the usual macroeconomic tools. The present analysis
 hopes to help to demonstrate the fruitfulness and power of such an approach. The
 method of using 'dual' functions, expenditure
                                               and domestic product functions,

 although formally equivalent to using 'primal'
                                                      utility and production functions,
 makes, at least for the present problem, for
                                                    easily derived explicit welfare effects,
 and greatly facilitates
                             identification, interpretation, and signing of the various
wealth and    substitution effects.   As shown in Svensson 119811, it also
                                                                               siuiplifies

generali05 to many goods and factors, and allows for convenient but              rioorous
 'real'   analysis in terms of various price indices.

           l'bre
             fundamentally, the above analysis attexts to contributed to
demonstrate, also with several other recent works, the fruitfulness and, may be, even
the necessity, to look at the determinants of the trade balance and the current
account in an explicitly intertemporal setting.
           Although many of our results may not be new, our method of deriving them has
made it          to express them in rather general, yet easily interpreted, forms.
          possible

Our results on the welfare effects on oil price and interest rate changes have high-
lighted the   irrelevance for the (first order) welfare effects of the degree of

substitutability in production and consumption when there are flexible wages and

full   employment, and   the crucialness of such substitution to the (first oFder)
welfare   effects when there are rigid wages and varying employment. Our rather        rich
results   on the effects on the trade balance have made clear how incomplete and
possibly misleading a static view of the trade balance is. The results emphasize the
different and even opposite impacts of temporary, future, and permanent oil price
                                               —21—



 changes.        The analysis of interest rate changes has clarified the role of the inter—

 temporal terms of trade effect on
                                        wealth, welfare, and saving in addition to the
 intertemporal substitution effects on saving and investuent.

            There are numerous and obvious
                                              limitations of the analysis, some of which
 call for additional research. ly the most simple small open
                                                                econorn4' case has been
 analyzed, the case when the country faces given prices on oil and final goods and
                                                                                          a
 given world rate of interest. The case with a two country world,
                                                                  consisting of a
 final—goods producing Industria and an oil—producing OPEC, where the world rate of
 interest is endogenous, is stucied in ?&rion and Svensson      [19811. The case with a
three    country world consisting of a home country, a foreign country, and OPEC, in
which both the rate of interest and the relative price between home and foreign
                                                                                pro-
duced final goods are endogenous, is taken up in Marion and Svensson [1982aj. That
case makes possible a discussion of how structural difference between industrial
countries explain differences in their responses to oil
                                                             price increases.
           the present paper, there is no government and no policy, there is perfect
            In


international mobility of capital, and monetary factors are coxletely abstracted
from.    One of ny policies that is of obvious relevance is the restriction of inter-
national capital movements.
           The present analysis abstracts from the allocation between
                                                                      traded and non—
tradedgoods. The determinants of the current account when there are non—traded
goods are treated in an intertemporal setting by Razin [l980J, and, when there is
import of oil, by Marion [l9ol] and Bruno 11982].
         The response to oil price increase depends crucially on whether there is
home production of oil or not. A net exporter of oil will benefit from positive sta-
tic term of trade effects. The investment response to a future oil price increase
could very well be overall positive, since the profitability of investment in the oil
                                              —22—



production     industry will increase. The present analysis uses the simplifying, but

not unrealistic, assumptions that capital, labor and oil are all cooperative.

Implications of other assumptions can easily be examined.

           The effects on emplwment of oil price changes have been examined in a very

rudimentary way, and there is obvious scope for analysis of various wage indexation

schemes and other labor market specifications. Neither have direct welfare effects

of emplrment changes been dealt with.

           The   restriction to only two   periods nay appear severe, but has nevertheless

made possible rather rich results. It is   clear that as lon6 as the only interten-
poral distinctions we need are binary, for instance between the 'present' and the
'future', or the 'short run' and the 'long run', two periods are indeed all that is
required and with suitable interpretations we can get an almost surprisin5 richness
of results. For other problems, finer intertemporal distinctions nay be needed, for
instance between the 'past'    , 'present',   and 'future' when we want to distinguish bet-
ween present     expected and present unexpected price changes. Or suppose we want to

examine the consequences of the possibility that the observed fall in the world rate

of   interest during the 1970s is not permanent but temporary. Then we     need to

distinguish     between the 'present' , the 'near future', and the 'distant future'. In
such   cases   we simply need three or more periods.35



National Bureau  of Economic Research,
           Cambridge, MA, and

Institute for International Economic Studies,
           University of Stockholm
                                                —23—



                                            Footnotes

 *
      This   paper is a revised and shortened version of Svensson [19811.       I have bene—
fitted from detailed comments by Nancy P. Marion, Dartmouth College, an anonymous

referee, and the editors of this Journal. A first draft of Svensson (19811

was presented to the Workshop on Open Economy
                                                       Macroeconomics, held Au4,'ust 24—25,
1981 at the Institute for International Economic Studies. I am grateful to the

participants for many helpful suggests. I especially want to thank Michael Bruno,

Lars Calmfors, Henrik Horn, Harry       Flaw,   John 1-lelliwell, Hans Lind, Torsten Persson,
and Assaf Razin for specific comments.          Remaining errors are my own resonsibility.

Financial support from the Research Foundations of Svenska Handelsbanken and the

¶Lbrsten and Ragnar    S6derbergs   Foundations is gratefully

acknowledged.

1. Sachs L19811 provides an excellent discussion of these events, both theoretical

and   empirical, together with data on many countries' current accounts and on world
interest rates.
2. An intel-temporal view of foreign trade and different stages in the balance of pay-
ments was very fashionable in the Trade and Development literature of the 1960s, as
for instance in Bardhan [1966] and Bruno 119611, see also Bazdarich L19181.            An

excellent early reference, which contains a synthesis between static international
trade theory and Fisherian capital theory, is Miller [1968]. More recently, Razin
119801, first version distributed 1918, discusses the current account in a rigorous
intertnpora1 model with non—traded goods and investment. Sachs l1982a] and Lipton
and Sacha 11980] offer a theoretical framework for discussing the current account in
a two—country growth model, with perfect international capital mobility and far-
sighted optitzlng agents. The models are too complicated to solve ana1ylitca11y
 though, and must be studied    by sixailation techniques. Obstfeld 11980, 1982]
 discusses   the current account in an Uzawa [19681—type continuous tint model with
 intertnpora1 optimization behavior. This Ijzawa—type analysis involves several, for
 the results crucial, simplifying assumptions, as shown by Svensson and Razin [1982].
            Recently, McKinnon [1978, 1981] and Sachs 119811 have argued the fruit-
 fulness of looking at the current account as the difference between saving and
 investment, rather than as a time—independent difference between exports and
 imports. Sachs 11981] also develops a two—period model of the current account and
provides an excellent discussion of its response to tanporary and permanent oil price
increases with results similar to those of Svensson and Bazin [1981] and the present
paper. See also Bruno 11982] and Sachs 11982b1
            Dixit [1981] presents a very neat intertemporal general equilibrium model of
trade in goods, capital, and oil. He does not consider trade balance issues but con-
centrates    on problems of income distribution and strategic behaviour between

countries    with different endowments.
          Taking monetary factors into accowit as in Helpman [1981], Persson 11981]
uses an explicitly intertesçoral framework in discussing the balance or payments in
different currency areas and exchange rate regimes. See also Eelpman and Razin
[1982].
3.  Since there is no initial foreign debt and no interest payments on foreign assets
in the first period, the current account and the trade balance in the first period
are identical. Henceforth, we shall only refer to the trade balance.
4. let us note that in our analysis an 1oil price increase' ntans 'a (rgina1)
increase in the present oil price' relative to what the present oil price otherwise
would have been, or 'a (marginal) increase in the future oil price' relative to what
                                                               —25—



the future oil price increase would otherwise have been. It should not be inter-
preted to mean an increase over tiz in the sense that future oil prices are
(rginala,y) above present oil prices. That latter interpretation is however
included as a special case, if the before-change situation is one with present and
future oil prices being equal, and the change is an increase in the future oil price
with the present oil price held constant.
                     More precisely, for exogenously given oil pirces q1 and q2 in the two
periods, we get an equilibrium of endogennas variables (welfare, trade balance, out-
put, etc.) in the two periods. We let the vectors                              and      denote these endoencus
variables. The exogenous oil price increases dq1 >                         0   and dq2 > 0 result in new exo-
genous oil prices q1 +                    dj1 and q2 + dq2
                                       , and in a new equilibrium
    + d1      + dC2 . These oil price increases (dq , dq2 ) and equilibrium changes
                     ,              )



(d, d) are increases and changes relative to the before—change oil prices
(q1 ,       q
             2
                 )   and      equilibrium (c1 ,     . 2).
                     A completely different meaning of an oil price increase would be that it

refers to a situation where q2 > q1, that is, the future oil price is hisher than the

present one.                   It is certainly of interest to examine what the equilibrium              (t', )
looks       like in that case.                  Strictly, it requires global rather than our local

differential—calculus analysis. however, for the local case, this meaning of an oil

price increase is indeed a special case of our                        analysis.      This can be seen in the

following way: Let                      the   initial oil prices be such that q3- = q2 =       ,   resulting   in an

equilibrium (V.                   j2)         (it does in general of course not follow that         =          Then

consider an increase dq2 > 0 in the future oil price, resulting in a new equilibrium

        +   d,           t2   + d2).      here the change (d, d2) in the equilibrium reveals how an

equilibrium with the future oil price (nar4naliy) above the present oil price dif-

fers        from an equilibrita where oil prices are the sase at the                    two periods.
                                                  —26—


  5. Any established termino1oy for this kind of complementarity (technical
 compleznentarity7) is unknown to me. The term 'cooperative' has been suggested by
 Elhanan Helpman, according to whom it is used in Hebrew
                                                         technolor. Note that the
 usual definition of
                     comPlementarity/substitutability is in terms of the cross par—
 tials of the conditional (i.e.
                                constant output) input demand function. A thorough
 discussion and empirical evidence
                                   on such (Hicksian) complementarity and substituta-
 bility between captial, labor,
                                         enerr and materials inputs is in Berndt and Wood
 119791. They discuss separable production functions of the fonu, for
                                                                      instance,
 x =    f(g(k,   z), &)   where f( )   and g( ) are
                                                    constant returns to scale, all of which
 hence fulfill our assumption of
                                          cooperation between factors: ftk&,
                                                                               k k > 0.
 (Partials will be denoted
                                 by subindices throughout the paper.)
6.      'Deteriorates'    here zans relative to what the (present) trade balance would

have been if there had been no oil price increases. Cf. note 4.

7.     The results (i) to (3) are derived in Svensson
                                                      and Razin 119821 for the case with
many traded goods, but with fixed output
                                                  vectors and no investment. Except for the
detailed conditions mentioned under (3), they are also derived by Sachs 11981J.

8. This point is made by Sachs 11981].

9.     The analor between productivity decreases and raw material price increases
                                                                                  is
emphasized in Bruno [1981).

10. As is well—known, we can either
                                             interprete this equilibrium as a Hicksian
perfect foresight 'full equilibrium over time', or a Hicksian 'temporary equilibrium

in   period 1',   where period 2 variables represent
                                                          commonly held subjectively certain
point    expectations.
11. The expendit'e function is defined as E(l, 6, u) = main              +
                                                                       u(c1, c2)
) u).           and Norman 119601 , or Varian 119781, for properties and
          See Dixit
                                                                         uses of the
expendit.e function.
12. Throughout the paper we shall use final goods as numeraires.
                                            —27—


 13.    The OP function is defined as yt(1 qt kt, £t) = max      {xt   —
                                                                           qtzt: x = ft(kt   &t,
 zt)}. It is also called the
                                 value—added, the restricted profit, the variable profit,
   GNP, or the revenue function. A comprehensive reference is Bruno [19781 or
 the

Diewert 11974]. See Varian 11978] for a micro—textbook using this and similar dual
 functions,   and Bruno [1973], Chipnan [1972], Dixjt and Norman [1980], Ithang 11971],
and    Woodland 119811, for their use in international trade theory.

            Note that Domestic Product equals National Product   in    period 1, since there
is    no initial debt. In period 2, National Product equals       +    rt1, the sum of
Domestic Product and net interest income frow abroad rt1, where r = (i/o) — 1 is
the rate of interest and t1, the period 1 trade
                                                balance, is net lending in period 1
to the rest of the world.
14. The equilibrium investment level is the solution to the problem
max {612(j. q2, K1 +   ii,   £2) — i11 , where   i' is investment. Hence the investment
function fulfills the first order condition 6K = 1. We assume an interior solution.
15. This concept of wealth includes also the present value of future labor earnings
(human wealth).
16.  E1 is the partial with respect to the first argument, the price of final goods,
and E6 is the partial with respect to the second argument, the present value of
future final goods, etc.
17. The importance of the jnterteroral terms of trade effect is emphasized by Eazin
11980] and Persson 11981].

           The expression Edu In (4) is in general the 'change in real income' often
used in international trade theory.
18. Itre precisei,y, the substitution effects are irrelevant to the first—order
effects on welfare. Mfferentiatj (i) to the second order reveals that substi-
tution enter as second—order effects. Hence, the substitution effects are dominated
by the tern of trade effects for smll changes in oil prices and the discount factor.
                                                 —28—



 19.    We have used that C equals
                                          Eiu/E•
20.A more precise terminolor would be a 'welfare' effect on consumption.
21. - differentiating the narginal condition    = 1 we get      =                       —


But    2kq =   kz'zz    C   0   since f2 C   0   and we assume 2kz > 0, (that oil and capital
are    cooperative). l'ürthermore, 2kk C 0       by concavity of the production function.
Hence,   I c     0.
22. We use that         +         = 1, by the intertporal budget constraint.
23. A homothetic utility function has a constant rate of time preference.

24. This is consistent with the realistic world equilibrium where OPEC has                    little
consumption    in the first period in comparison to its oil income.
25.    We have 116 =   — k'kk > 0,         since kk C 0.
26. Similar Fisher diagraiz, although without the interteioral transformation
curve, are used in Svensson and Razin 119821 arid Sachs [1981].
27.       variable enloyment we mean that employment is endogenously determined and
may be less than full, hence giving rise to unemployment. We do not refer to a
situation with variable utility maximizing labor supply.
28. We have d11/dq2 =
                            (i'   +
                                       IL2q)/(1_I12k)          C
                                                                   11q   <   0, since the term liLk
can be shown to be positive and less than one (see Svensson 11981, n.29.

29. We have d11/dS =
                         1151(1    —   I Ok >           > 0.
30. We note that the simplicity of (13) is because we assume that welfare depends on

consumption    only, and not directly on ençloyment levels. Without the assumption, the
employment effects on welfare would depend on the differences between wage rates and
effects enter as second_order effects. Hence, the substitution effects are dominated
by the tern of trade effects for small changes in oil prices and the discount factor
the supply prices of labor, and eloyment substitution effects on consumption would
                                         —29—



enter in (i1).    Persson 119821,in discussing welfare effects of stabilization poli-
cies in different exchange rate regimes, includes such employment effects on welfare.
31. For instance, if oil input for heating of private homes or gasoline for private
transpon is regarded as direct consumption rather than as production of housing   and
transport   services.

32.   See Svensson [1981, Sect. 7J.
33.   See Svensson 11981, Sect. 8J.

34. See Svensson [1981, Sect. 91.

35.   See, for instance, Marion and Svensson Il9d2bl.
                                             —30—



                                          References

Bardhan, P. , "Optinal foreign borrowing," Essays the in theory of optimal economic
         owth, K. Shell, ed., (Cambridge, MA; M.I.T. Press, 1966).
Bazdarich, M.J., "Optimal growth and stages in the balance of payments," Journal of
         Internationai Economics,     VIII (1976), 425—443.

Berndt, E.R. and D.0. Wood, "Engineering and econometric interpretation of        enerr_
         capital compleinentarity," American Economic Review, LXIX (1979), 3423514.
Bruno, P4., "Optimal patterns of trade and development," Review of Economics and
         Statistics, XLIX (1967), 545—5514,
__________ "Protection   and tariff change under general equilibrium," Journal of
         International Economics, III (1973), 205—225.
_________ "Duality, intermediate imports and value added," Production economics; a
         dual   approach to theory and    applications, II, l. Fuss and   D. McFadden, eds.

         (Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1918).

_________   "Raw materials, profits, nd the productivity slowdown," NBER Working

         Paper   No. 66o, April   1981.

_________   "Adjustment and structural change under raw naterial price shocks,"
         Scandinavian Journal of Economics, LXXXIV      (1982),   forthcoming.

Bruno, H. and J.D. Sachs, "Macroeconomic adjustment with import price shocks: real

         and   monetary aspects," lIES Seminar Paper No. 118, February 1979.
Buiter, W., "Short—mn and long—run effects of external disturbances under a floating
         exchange rate," Economica, XLV (1978), 251—272.
Chian, J.S., "The theory of exploitative trade and investment policies: A refor-
        mulation and synthesis," International Economics and Development; Essays in
         Honor of Raul Prebisch, L.E. Di Marco, ed., (New York: Academic Press, 1972).
                                              —31—



 Diewert, W.E., "Applications of duality theory," Frontiers of quantitative economics,
         II, M.D. Intriligator and D.A. Kendrick, eds. , (Amsterdam; North—Holland,
            197J4).

Dixit, A., "A model of trade in oil and capital," Princeton University, August 1981,
           mime o.

Dixit, A. and V. Norman, Theory of international trade, (London: Nisbet and Cambridge
         University Press, 1980).
Findlay, R. and C.A. Rodriguez, "Intermediate imports       and   macroeconomic policy under
           flexible     exchange rates," Canadian Journal of Economics, X    (1977), 208—217.
Helpman,   E., "An exploration in the theory of exchange rate regimes", Journal of
           Political Econonv, LXXXIX (1981), 865—590.
Helpman, E. and A. Bazin, "Dynamics of a floating exchange rate regime," Journal of
       Political Economy, XC (1982), y28—7.
Khang, C., "An isovalue locus involving intermediate goods and its applications to
           the pure theory of international trade," Journal of International Economics,
           I (1971), 315—325.
Lipton, D. and J.D. Sachs, "Accumulation and growth in a two—country model," NBER
           Working Paper No. 572, October 1950.

McKinnon, R.I. ,      "Exchange—rate instability, trade imbalances, and monetary policies

           in Japan and the United States," Issues in international economics,

           P. Oppenheimer, ed., (Stocksfield: Oriel Press, 1978).

_________ "The exchange rate and macroeconanic policy: Changing postwar

           perceptions," Journal of Economic Literature, XIX      (1961),   531—557.

Marion,   N.?.,   "Nontrwjed goods, oil price increases and the current account," NBEi1

           Working Paper No.    759, September 1981.
                                                  —32—



Marion, N.?. and L.E.O. Svensson, "World equilibrium with oil price increases," lIES
           Seminar     Paper No. 191, December 1981.

__________ and   __________,    "Oil   price increases and ',croeconomic adjustment    in a
           three—country model," NEER Working Paper No. 839, January l982a.
__________     and __________, "Adjustment      to expected and unexpected oil price
           increases ,"     mimeo,   September 1982b.
Miller, Nornan C., "A general eui1ibr±um theory of international capital flows,"
           Economic Journal, LXXVIII (1968), 312—320.
Obstfeld, M., "Intermediate inaports, the terms of trade, and the dynamics of the
           exchange      rate and the current account," Journal of International Economics,

           x   (1980),   461—48o.

               "Aggregate   spending and the term of trade: Is there a Laursen—Metzler

           effect?", Quarterly       Journal   of Economics, XCVI (1982), 251—270.

Persson, T., "The neutrality of money and the analysis of alternative exchange rate

           regimes", lIES Seminar Paper No. 166,         January 1961.
__________ "Global       effects of national stabilization policies under fixed and
           floating exchange rates," Scandanavian Journal of Economics, LXXXIV (1982),
           forthcoming.
Bazin,   A., "Capital movements, intersectoral resource shifts, and the trade

           balance," lIES Seminar Paper No. 159, October 1980. Revised version of

           Foerder Institute Working Paper 29—78, Tel—Aviv University, 1978.

Sacha,   J.D. , "The   current account and macroeconomic adjustment in the 1970s,"

           Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1981, 201—268.
                                              —33—



Sachs,   J.D., "Energy and growth under flexible exchange rates: A sinnlation study,"
            The international transmission of economic disturbances under flexible
            exchange rates, J. Ehandari and B. Putnam, eds., (Cambridge, MA: M.I.T.
            Press, 1982a).
_________     "Some    interteiçoral aspects of countercyclical fiscal policy,"
            Scandanavian Journal of Economics, LXXXIV (1982b), forthcoming.
Schmid, H., "A       model of trade in money, goods and factors," Journal of International
            Economics, VI (1976), 347—361.
Svensson,    Lars E.O., "Oil prices and a small oil—importing econour's welfare and
            trade balance: an intertemporal analysis," lIES Seminar per No. 1814,
            October 1981.
Svensson, L.E.O. and A. Razin, "The terms of trade and the current account:
            The Harberger_Laursen..Metzjer effect," Journal of Political Econonw, XC
            (1982), forthcoming.
Varian, H.R., Microeconomjc analysis (New York: Norton, 1982).
Woodland,   A.D. ,   "Internationsi. trade and resource allocation," University of British
            Columbia, unpublished mnuscript, 1981.
                            FIGURE 1


        C
            22
            .1




y2(jqZyl)


                        A
12(14211)
                    I




                                           u'uU(c
                                                    12
                                                     ,c )
12(1q2,o)
       C
           2       -I

                    I

                                       I
                                       I
                    I
                                       I

                 .11—Il            ,Yl               C
                                                         1
                                                             C
                                                                 11
            FIGURE II
    2
C




    S

SI




SI'



        H




                  -I
                            I
                        C       ,Y
