NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONEY SURPRISES AND SHORT-TERM INTEREST
RATES: RECONCILING CONTRADICTORY FINDINGS

John

H. Makin

Working Paper No. 993

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

September 1982

The research reported here is part of the NBERts research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #993
September 1982

Money Surprises and Short—Term Interest Rates:
Reconciling Contradictory Findings

ABSTRACT

This note attempts to reconcile contradictory findings regarding

the impact of money surprises on short term interest rates. Expectations
effects regarding anticipated monetary policy and anticipated inflation

suggest a positive relationship. Liquidity and output effects of
monetary surprises suggest a negative relationship. It is shown that
intra—day data and end—of—period data will capture expectations effects
while period average data will capture liquidity/output effects.

Seemingly contradictory results are reconciled by differences in dependent variables employed by various authors.

John H. Makin
Fiscal Affairs Department
Room 6—101
International Monetary Fund

Washington, D.C. 20431
(202) 477—6102

introduction

i.

The

impact upon short—term nominal interest rates of "surprise"

or unanticipated

movements in the money supply has been the focus of

a ntimber of empirical investigations conducted since adoption in

October, 1979 by the Federal Reserve of new operating procedures.

There are, however, seemingly contradictory findings among the re—

suits of these investigations. The aim of this paper is to suggest

means

of reconciling these contradictory findings. The effort seems

justified in light of

the sharply elevated means and

variances

of money

surprises since October of 1979 reported by Roley (1982) and Makiu
(l982.a).

Those who see a positive relationship between money surprises
and interest rates emphasize two types of expectations effects.

Grossman (1981) and Roley (1982) see positive money surprises result-

ing in

higher

nominal rates due to anticipated future tightening

moves by the monetary authority coitted to money growth targets.
Roley (1982) finds this effect far more pronounced after October,

1979. Mishkin (1982), on the other hand, links positive money surprises with anticipated inflation, thereby explaining their positive
association with short term rates.

A negative relationship between money surprises and short run

interest rates is explained by liquidity or output effects. Liquidity
effects arise from an excess money supply condition associated with
a money surprise when prices are "sticky" as suggested in Khan

(1980) and Makin (1982.a). Assuming that real income does not rise

2

sufficiently to absorb excess money supply as a result of a positive

money "surprise," the expected real interest rate must fall to equate

money supply and demand.1 Alxetnattvely.,

Makin (1982.b)

argues from

a structural model that a positive money surprise elevates real
output, income and thereby saving so that a new equilibrium with
higher real investment (equal to higher real saving) requires a
lower expected, after—tax real rate.2 This in turn will see a lower

at

nominal interest rate at a given level of expected inflation and
given levels of any other variables which may affect the expected
after—tax real rate.

Reconciliation of these findings will be seen likely to depend
upon differences in sampling intervals, different methods of measuring
unobservable money surprises and careful consideration of possible

two—way

causality

between money surprises and

interest rates.

The

intention here is not to "settle" differences in perspective regarding
the relationship between money surprises and interest rates and no
claim is made that all questions raised are satisfactorily resolved.

Rather, the questions explored will hopefully alert investigators
to the particular significance of some seemingly innocuous assumptions

and

measurement techniques.

[I.

Surprises

and Expected

polic7

There is no conflict between the findings of Makin

1982.b)

and those of Grossman (1981) and

a rise in nominal

interest

(1982.a,

Roley (1982) which rationalize

rates during the one and

one—half hours

3

following a positive money surprise as a response to expected tighten-

ing by the Fed. In Makin (1982.b) the question investigated is
whether, during the quarter in which money is above its anticipated

path, there Is downward pressure on interest rates. Failure to reject
the hypothesis that this is true is not inconsistent with discovery

of a pure expectations effect whereby an announced weekly money supply
number above the consensus forecast results in higher rates over the
period from 3:30 p.m. before the announcement to 5:00 p.m. which in
turn reflects anticipated tightening by the Fed.

Roley and Grossman are sampling rates over only a one and one
half hour interval precisely in order to capture a pure expectations
effect by reducing to a minimum the possibility that other shocks will

impinge upon the market and occlude its appearance. Alternatively,
Makin's finding with quarterly data is simply that over a quarter
when an effort is made to control for behavior of other variables
operating on the interest rate, it is not possible to reject the hypo-

thesis embedded in his model that money surprises depress the nominal
rate.

in

The precise form of the quarterly data employed becomes relevant

discussing differences between results of Mishkin (1982) and Makin

(1982.a, 1982.b), to which we now turn.

III.

Inflationary Expectations and the Impact of
Money Surprises

The results of Mishkin (.1982) and Makin (l982.b) are not as

easily reconciled although a number of avenues can readily be explored

4

as there exist significant differences in both their theoretical frameworks and in the data employed to test hypotheses.

Mishkin appears to derive his estimated equation from "the

liquidity preference approach to the demand for money." It is convenient to write a money demand equation in log form from which to derive Nishkin's estimating equation.

—

P=

(1)

(lut

where

m = log

(B,y

— Yit + Ct

>

0)

of money supply

Pt =

log

of the price level

=

log

of real output

=

nominal Interest rate.

Inverting equation (1) and solving for an expression for the nominal
interest rate and for the expected nominal Interest rate as of time
"t—l"

conditional on information at time "t—l" gives:

(2)
EquatIon

—

e

—1

=

(2) is essentially Mishkin'S

e

e

e

—l

equation (8).

Writing a forward

rate as t—l't plus a risk premium and substituting into (2) gives
the final equation estimated by Mishkin:3

'(3

i_t_iFt

=

—

e

—l

_a0_a1a + y
1me)
—
t

t

+ c ]

where a0+aiCY measures the risk premium.

e

5

Equation (3) implies positive coefficients on output and price

surprises and a negative coefficient on the money surprise. Mishkin
finds the former two positive coefficients but finds a positive coef-

ficient on the money surprise. This he attributes, it appears, to
a rise in inflationary expectations associated with a positive money
surprise.

Mishkin's result whereby a positive money surprise will elevate

nominal

interest

is not consistent with liquidity preference theory

unless a positive money surprise is taken as a measure of the level

of expected inflation. Alternatively the result may be a statistical
artifact, explainable in terms of failure to take account of relationships among his "independent" explanatory variables, or in terms of
failure to consider a possible response of money surprises to shocks
to money demand (a possibility which Mishkin admits) or in terms of
simple mismeasuremexit of surprises.

Consider first the relationship between money surprises and price

and

output

surprises, if they are positively correlated as would be

suggested by a number of theories including typical "rational" supply
equations, when the money surprise appears alone on the right—hand
side of equation (3) (as in 1.1 and 1.5 of Mishkin's Table 1) it proxies
for price and output surprises which are positively associated with

unanticipated changes in the interest rate. Indeed when the equation
is re—estimated with price and output surprises present along with

moneysurprises the coefficient on the money surprise term falls by
20 to 30 percent but remains significantly positive, Still, the

6

estimated coefficient on the price surprise term is not significantly

different from zero and the large estimated standard error may be due

to multicollinearity. The best way to answer these questions would
be to look directly at the correlation matrix for the "independent"
variables examined by Mishkin (1982).

Aiother reason for a positive estimated coefficient on the
money surprise term,

mentioned

briefly by Mishkin, relates to the

possibility that money surprises are positively related to the error

term in the money demand equation. If, during Mishkin's 1959—76 sample
period, positive shocks to money demand caused the Fed to react with
an increase in the money supply in order partially to smooth interest

rates, then the money surprise term proxies for, c, the error term
in the money demand equation which in turn ought to be positively
associated with surprise increases in the interest rate under liquidity
preference theory.

It is important also to remember that Mishkin (1982) properly
employs end of period interest rates in an effort to capture the hypothesized Impact of a money surprise upon inflationary expectations.
In contrast, to test for liquidity and output effects 1akin (1982.a,
1982.b) employs period average interest rates so that

interest

rates

during, say, the fourth quarter are related to a money surprise which

will not be known until the end of the quarter. This procedure, which
amounts to relating interest rates at time "t—l" to a money surprise
discovered at time "t"

allows

a liquidity or output effect (induced

by money being above or below its expected path over the quarter)

7

to operate before the expectations effect (linked to the appearance
of a money ttsurpriset at quarterts end) appears.

A final poasible reason for an erroneous inference that money
surprises cause a surprise increase in interest rates stems from a
difficulty inherent in all investigations of the impact of unantici-

pated changes in money or other variables. Does the Investigator's
surprise really measure the actual surprise which confronted economic

agents during the sample period under investigation? A great many
questions arise here which I have discussed at some length elsewhere

in Makin (1982.a, 1982.b). The basic problem in the context of Mishkia's
paper can be stated simply. If his surprise is mismeasured so that it
is partly anticipated then the coefficient on the mismeasured surprise
will be positively biased insofar as anticipated money growth measures
anticipated inflation which is In turn positively correlated with
interest rates. ?,fishkin's univariate model of expected money growth

is an arbitrary AR—4 process. If the residuals from that representation or from his forecasting equation used in Panel B of Table 1 are
not white noise his money surprise is partly anticipated and the
estimated coefficient on the money surprise will be positively biased.

In fact, this result is likely since Mishkin filters his seasonally
unadjusted data with an AR—4 model which very likely leaves seasonality

in his measure of money surprises. This inference is supported by
Mishkin's reference to unpublished results employing seasonally ad—
justed data for which "standard errors are somewhat larger'1 (p. 70) .4

8

iv.

Concluding

Remarks

There is strong evidence that weekly money surprises result by
way of an expected policy response by the Fed, in an immediate (within

1.5 hours) rise in short term interest rates. Such a short interval
of time is required to capture the pure policy expectations effect
advanced by Grossman (1981) and Roley (1982) to explain this result.
These arguments are particularly compelling with regard to the period

since October, 1979 during which the Fed appears to have assigned
more weight to money supply targets than to interest rate targets.

Most theories suggest that in the absence of a policy expectations effect a money surprise ought to depress nominal interest rates
either directly (based on liquidity preference theory) or by way of

negative pressure on the expected after—tax real rate required to satisfy

a simple general equilibrium model. Mishkin (1982) argues that his
finding that a positive money surprise causes an unanticipated increase

in short term interest rate is due to the new information that the
positive money surprise conveys about anticipated inflation.

Mishkin's result is possible reconciliable with Makin's due
to his use of end of period data on interest rates which ought to
capture expectations effects in contrast with Makin's use of period
average data on interest rates which ought to capture liquidity and

output effects. Still, it is important to remember that there exist
four potential sources of positive bias (described in Section Iii)

in the estimated relationship between money surprises and interest

rates reported by Mishkin (1982), Added to this Is the fact that

9

better proxies than money surprises exist to measure anticipated

inflation. Makin (1982.a, l982.b) employs survey data, which is only
weakly correlated with money surprises, as a direct measure of anti-

cipated inflation. in the presence of such a direct measure of anticipated inflation, it is not possible toreject the hypothesis that
a surprise increase in money depresses the expected after—tax real
rate and thereby, the nominal interest rate on 3 month Treasury bills.

10

FOOTNOTES

1.

The nominal interest rate must

fall

due to a drop in the ex-

pected real rate since anticipated inflation will not be negatively related to a positive money surprise.
2.

The positive income effect also elevates real money demand
thereby putting positive pressure on the real rate, but the
impact of the saving effect is likely to dominate for typical
values of the interest elasticity of money demand as shown in
Makin (l982.b).

3.

Mishkin's equation actually has surprise growth rates of the
right—hand side variables in equation (3) but this is identical

to log—level surprises since (m_m,.i) —

(tnt

4.

t—l" — mi)

=

—

Using seasonally unadjusted data, all eight oe Mishkin's reported
money surprise terms are significant at the 5 percent level
or better (with 6 of 8 significant at the 1 percent level).
Using seasonally adjusted data, Mishkin (1981) reports only 1

of 8 money surprise terms

significant

at the 1 percent level,

2 of 8 significant at the 5 percent level and 5 of 8 not
significant at the 5 percent level.

11

REFERENCES

Grossman, Jacob (1981). "The Rationality of Money Supply Expectations
and the Short—Run Response of Interest Rates to Monetary
Surprises," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (November):
409—24.
Khan, Mohsin 5. (1980). "Monetary Shocks and the Dynamics of Inflation,"
IMF Staff Papers (June): 250—84.
Makin, John H. (l982.a). "Effects of Inflation Control Programs on
Expected Real Interest Rates," IMF Staff Papers (September),
forthcoming.

____

(1982.b). "Real Interest Money Surprises, Anticipated Inflation
and Fiscal Deficits," university of Washington (June),
unpublished.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1981). "Monetary Policy and Short—Term Interest
Rates: An Efficient Markets—Rational Expectations Approach,"
NBER Working Paper No. 693 (June).

____

(1982).

"Monetary policy and Short—Term Interest Rates: An
Efficient Markets—Rational Expectations Approach," Journal of
Finance (March): 63—72.

Roley, V. Vance (1982). "The Response of Short-Term
to

Interest Rates

Weekly Money Announcements," Working Paper, Federal Reserve

Bank of Kansas City (April).

