                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DO WE REALLY KNOW THAT
                FIPLNCIAL MARKETS ARE EFFICiFNT?




                      Lawrence H. Summers




                     Working Paper No. 99)4




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                         September 1982




I am grateful to Fischer Black, Zvi Griliches, Jim Pesando and Jim
Poterba for clarifying discussions, but remain responsible for any
errors. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
programs in Economic Fluctuations and in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #994
                                                   September 1982




                 Do We Really Know That Financial Markets
                             Are Efficient?

                                kb s tract




    This paper examines the power of statistical tests commonly used

to examine the efficiency of speculative markets. It shows that for

markets with "long horizons" such as the stock markets, or the market

for long term bonds, these tests have very low power. Market valuations

can differ substantially and persistently from the rational expectation

of the present value of cash flows without leaving statistically discernible

traces in the pattern of ex—post returns. This observation also suggests

that speculation is unlikely to insure rational valuations, since

similar problems of identification plague both financial economists and

would—be speculators.




                                               Lawrence H. Summers
                                               National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Ave.
                                               Cambridge, NA 02138
                                               (617) 868—3909
                                   —1--




       The proposition that securities markets are efficient forms the

basis for most research in financial economics. A voluminous literature

has   developed supporting this hypothesis. Jensen (1978) calls it the
best established empirical fact in economics.1 Indeed, apparent

anomalies such as the discounts on closed end mutual funds and the

success of trading rules based on earnings announcements are treated as

indications of the failures of models specifying equilibrium returns,

rather than as evidence against the hypothesis of market efficiency.2

Recently the Efficient Markets Hypothesis and the notions connected with

it, have provided the basis for a great deal of research in macro-

economics. This research has typically assumed that asset prices are in

some sense rationally related to economic realities.

      Despite the widespread allegiance to the notion of market

efficiency a number of authors have suggested that certain asset prices

are not rationally related to economic realities. Modigliani and Cohn

(1979) suggest that the stock market is very substantially undervalued

because of inflation illusion. A similar claim regarding bond prices is

put forward in Summers (1982). Brainard, Shoven and Weiss (1980) find

that the currently low level of the stock market cannot be rationally

related to economic realities. Shiller (1979, 8la) concludes that both

bond and stock prices are far more volatile than can be justified on the


     1Similar assertions are very common in the finance literature.
While doubts along the lines of the discussion here, appear to be part of
an oral tradition, the only reference I could find is Shiller (198lb).
     2For examples, see the recent Issue of the Journal of Financial
Economics devoted to anomalies in the Efficient Market Hypothesis.
                                    —2—
basis of real economic events. Arrow (1982) has suggested that psychological models
                                                        by Tversky and Kahneman (1981) can
of "irrational decision making" of the type suggested
                                          markets. These types of claims are frequently
help to explain behavior in speculative

dismissed because they are premised on inefficiencies and hence imply the

presence of exploitable excess profit opportunities.

     This paper argues that the strength of existing evidence confirming

the hypothesis of mar}et efficiency has been vastly exaggerated. It

demonstrates that the types of statistical tests which have been used to

date have essentially no power against at least one interesting alternative

hypothesis to market efficiency. Thus the inability of these tests to

reject the hypothesis of market efficiency does not mean that they

provide evidence in favor of its acceptance. In particular, the data in
conjunction with current methods provide no evidence against the view

that financial market prices deviate widely and frequently from rational

valuations. The same considerations which make deviations from

efficiency difficult to isolate statistically, make it unlikely that they

will be arbitraged away, or eliminated by speculative trading. Thus the

results here call into question the theoretical as well as empirical

underpinnings of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis. While none of the

analysis in this note demonstrates that securities

markets are inefficient, it does imply that belief in the Efficient

Markets Hypothesis is a shared act of faith, with little in the way of

theoretical or empirical support.

     The first section distinguishes alternative concepts of market

efficiency and lays out the formulation used here. Tests of market

efficiency in its weak and strong forms are considered in the second

section. The implications of the results for our understanding of

speculative markets are discussed in the third and final section.
                                           —3—


I. Defining Market Efficiency

        The notion of market efficiency has been defined in many ways.

Fania (1976) presents a thorough discussion of both theoretical issues and

empirical tests of this proposition. In the development below, I shall

consider the evolution of the price of a single security. It can easily

be taken to represent an entire portfolio. It is assumed that the

 required expected rate of return on the security is equal to a constant r,

which is known with certainty. As has frequently been observed, standard tests of

market efficiency, are really joint tests of efficiency and a model

specifying expected returns. The assumption made here that the ex—ante

return is known and constant makes it possible to focus only on the test

of market efficiency.3

        Assume that the security in question yields a sequence of cash

flows, D. These may be thought of as dividends if the security is a

stock, or coupons if the security is a bond. If the security has a

finite maturity T, then DT may be taken to represent its liquidation

value, and all subsequent values of D may be taken to equal zero. One

statement of the hypothesis of market efficiency holds that:
                                      D
                     =   E[(           S)1]
                               s=t (l+r)
                                                                         (1)


where      represents the set of information available to market

participants at time t. This is not the form in which the hypothesis is


   3Since the discussion here assumes that the model generating
expected returns is known with certainty, it will overestimate the
power of available statistical tests. Recent theoretical work such
as that of Lucas (1978) suggests that the particular model of
ex-ante returns considered here cannot be derived rigorously. This
is immaterial for the points at issue here. What is crucial is that
the discussion is carried on assuming full knowledge of the model
characterizing ex—ante returns.
                                        —4—


usually tested. Equation (1) is mathematically equivalent to the

statement that, for all t:

                         +                                           (2)
              —
                  E(—)       E(Dt)

or the equivalent statement that
                     p               (l+r)
                                                                     (3)
            E(R)=E(7'_l+
                   t                    t    t)



where the information set in equations (2) and (3) is taken to be

Note that once a transversality condition is imposd on the difference

equation (3), it implies equation (l).

     Equation (3) also implies that:
                                                                       (4)
            R_r+e
where e is serially uncorrelated and orthogonal to any element of

Market efficiency is normally tested by adding regressors drawn from

to (4) and testing the hypothesis that their coefficients equal zero,

and/or by testing the hypothesis that e follows a white noise process.5

The former represent tests of "semi—strong" efficiency while the latter

are tests of "weak" efficiency. A vast literature, summarized in Fama (1976),

has with few exceptions been unable to reject the hypothesis of market effi-

ciency at least for common stocks. This has led to its widespread
acceptance as a scientific fact.

     The  transversality condition serves to rule at speculative bubbles.
     5Abel and Mishkin (1980) and Jones and Roley (1982) show that other
standard tests of efficiency are essentially eouivalent to those
described   in this paragraph.
                                       —5—


II. Tests of Market Efficiency

      The inability of a body of data to reject a scientific theory does

not mean that the tests prove, demonstrate or even support its validity.

As students of elementary statistics are constantly reminded, failure to

reject a hypothesis is not equivalent to its acceptance. This principle

applies to all scientific theories, not just those that are stated

statistically. Experiments can falsify a theory by contradicting one of

its implications. But the verification of one of its predictions cannot

be taken to prove or establish a theory.6

      How then dove evaluate the strength of the evidence supporting a•

hypothesis? Clearly we do not simply count the number of implications of

a hypothesis which are validated. We give more weight to the

verification of some implications than to the verification of others.
For example, almost everyone would agree that findings that excess returns

cannot be predicted using past data on sunspots provides less support

for the hypothesis of market efficiency than do demonstrations that

excess returns are not serially correlated. This is because we find it

much easier to imagine alternative models in which returns are serially

correlated than we do alternative models in which sunspots can help

predict returns. The point here is that the usefulness of any test of a

hypothesis depends on its ability to discriminate between the hypothesis

and   other plausible formulations. The validity of evidence purporting to
demonstrate or support a hypothesis cannot sensibly be evaluated in a vacuum.
Below I examine the usefulness of standard tests of market efficiency according
to this criterion.

     6A discussion of what it means to establish evidence in favor of a
scientific hypothesis may be found in Hempel (1965).
                                                —6—




           Evaluation of any test of a theory requires pecificatiOfl of an

alternative hypothesis. A natural specification of an alternative

hypothesis to market efficiency holds that:

                             =      +   u
                                                                             (5)

                             =
                                 cxu1
                                        +
                                            v
where lower—case letters indicate logarithms and u and v represent

random shocks. This hypothesis implies that market valuations differ from

the rational expectation of the present value of future cash flows by a

multiplicative factor approximately equal to (l+u). The deviations

are assumed to follow a first—order autoregressive process.

It seems reasonable to suppose that deviations tend to persist so that

0 <   cx   <   1.   The assumption that u follows an AR process is made for ease of ex-

position and does not affect any of the substantive points at issue. For simplicity,

it is assumed that u and v are uncorrelated with e at all frequencies.


        Many, though not all, of the plausible senses in which markets might

be inefficient are captured by this specification. It clearly captures

Keynes's (1936) notion that markets are sometimes driven by animal

spirits unrelated to economic realities. It also is consistent with the

experimental evidence of Tversky and Kahneman (1981) that subjects overreact to new

information in making probabilistic judgements. The formulation considered here

captures Robert Shiller's (1979; 1981a,b) suggestion that financial

markets display excess volatility and overreact to new information. One
                                                    —7—




deviation from standard notions of market efficiency which does not take

this form is Blanchard and Watson's (1982) suggestion of intermittent

rational speculative bubbles.7
                                                                              Dive         Div
      Adopting the approximation that log(l+u) u, and that

equations (3), (4) and (5) imply that excess returns Z (Rt_r) follow

an ARNA (1,1) process.8 That is:9


             Z          —   e    —
                                      cLe1 + v —              v1     .               (6)

Granger and Newbold (1978) show that since Z can be expressed as the sum

of   an ARNA (1,1) process and white noise, ARNA (0,0), it can be

represented as an ARNA (1,1) process. Equation (6) can be used to

calculate the variance and the autocorrelations of Z. These calculations

yield:
                                       2                  2
                        2   =   2(l—a)u +             oe                             (7a)
                        z

                                      k—l           2 2
                                —o.         (l-c)
                                             2        2                              (7b)
                             2(1_o.)c5 +            0e


where k denotes the kth—order autocorrelation, Note that the model

predicts that the Z should display negative serial correlation. When



7Olivier Blanchard has pointed out to me that if ct=l+r equation (5) will
characterize a speculative bubble. In this case however, market valuations
will come to diverge arbitrarily far from fundamental valuations.

8These approximations are necessary in order to obtain simple analytic
expressions. I do not believe that they have a material impact on the
conclusions since in most time periods dividends are not paid. Shiller
(l981b) presents an example similar to the one here in his defense of
volatility tests.

9This can be seen as follows. With the approximations assumed here,
     Divt +             Div
Rt —         t+l — Pt =      + +l —             —
                                                              + u1
                                                      where the last
                                                                         u,
equality is implied by equation (5). This can be written, using (3)
and (4) as: Rt =   r
                  + et + u1 —.
                                             u.
                                      Combining this last equation with
equation (5) yields equation (6).
                                       —8—




excess returns are positive, some part is on average spurious, due to a

shock v. As prices revert to fundamental values, negative excess returns

result.


Weak Form Tests of Market Efficiency

       At this point the power of "weak form tests" of market efficiency

can be evaluated. These tests involve evaluating the hypothesis that the

   =   0.   Table 1 presents the theoretical first order autocorrelation for

various parameter combinations. In all cases, the paranters are chosen

to accord with the observed variance in stock market returns. Note that

(7b) implies that all subsequent autocorrelations are smaller in absolute

value. In order to get a feeling for the magnitudes involved, it is

useful to consider a concrete example. Suppose one is interested in testing

market efficiency using aggregate data on monthly stock market returns over a

50—year period. With 600 observations, the estimated autocorrelations have a

standard error of i//57 .042 on the null hypothesis of zero autocorrelation.

This calculation leads to an overstatement of the power of tests because it

counterfactually assumes a constant variance of excess returns and the

normality of e. Suppose that         = .08 so that the standard deviation of the

market's error in valuation is close to 30 percent, and that a =   .98.
This implies that it takes about three years for the market to eliminate half

of any valuation error u. These assumptions along with the observation

that        .004 imply, using (7a), that        .001.10 Equation (7b)

implies that the theoretically e,xpected value of p1 is —.008. Thus,

in this example, the data lack the power to reject the hypothesis of market

efficiency even though market valuations frequently differ from the

rational expectation of the present value of future cash flows by more


10This estimate for     is consistent with the 20 percent annual standard
deviation of market returns reported by Ibbotsen and Sinquefield (1976,1979).
                                           —9—




                                     Table 1


         Theoretical Autocorrelation of Excess Return Assuming
                          Market Inefficiency


                                                    a

                 .75          .9          .95             .99           .995


•2 2
a /0
 e   u



1.0          -   .0.42    - .008         _..003           .000          .000



            —             - .014
 .5              .062                   -.004             .000          .000


            —             — .022        - .007
 .25             .083                                     .000          .000




 .1—        —
            —      rI
              ...L'.J'4   — .U.)J         — 'J.LL         • UU.1.
                                                                        rr ,


            -             -
 .05             .113         .040        .017            .001          .000


                 .122     - .048        - .023          — .003      —   .001
 .01




Note: Calculations are based on Equation (7b).
                                          —10-




than 30 percent.11 In order to have a 50 percent chance of rejecting

the null hypothesis it would be necessary to have data for just over

5000 years. Note also that in this example three—fourths of variance

in excess returns is due to valuation errors u, rather than genuine
                            2
information e .   Even if       =   .10, so that all the variance in
market returns is spurious, and e2 =      0,   the theoretical value

of p1 is only — .01, so that deviations from efficiency could not be

detected. If, as is plausible, the serial correlation in valuation

errors is greater, the power of standard tests is even lower.

      Note that these results have implications for testing efficiency in

other markets. Take, for example, ,the propositiot that long—term bond

yields represent the rational expectation of average short—term yields.

As is widely understood, this is equivalent to the proposition that no

predictable excess returns can be earned in the long—term bond marketJ2

This is frequently tested in a manner which parallels the tests described

here. It is instructive to note that if interest rates average 10

 percent, and long—term bonds are approximated as consois, a 30 percent

 valuation error implies a deviation of 300 basis points between the yield

 on long—term instruments and the rational expectation of average future

 short—term rates. Thus, the results in this paper also suggest that

 evidence purporting to demonstrate tha validity of the "expectations" theory

 of the term structure of interest rates using long term bonds is not very powerful.


    more formal procedure would calculate the distribution of the test

statistic (i—) under the alternative hypothesis. It should be obvious
that carrying out this procedure would support the assertions in the text

12See Jones and Roley (1982).
                                            —11—




      Two plausible objections might be lodged against this discussion.

It might be that data at higher frequencies would yield             more powerful

tests. Further, the discussion so far has focused only on tests for

first—order autocorrelation. Suppose one had daily rather than monthly

data on excess returns over a 50—year period. It is true that one could

then estimate daily autocorrelations much more accurately. In fact, the

standard error would be approximately 1//50:250           .009. However, if a

was .98 using monthly data, it would be approximately .9990 using daily

data so that the theoretical autocorrelation under the assumptions made

earlier would be —.0005. Thus, the power of the data to reject

inefficiencies of the type considered here is not enhanced by obtaining

more frequent observations. Given the nature of the inefficiency being

considered —   persistent   miscalculations —   this   should not be surprising.

      As has been noted, the model predicts that the first—order

autocorrelation should exceed those at higher orders. Thus, the remarks

above apply to tests of other individual autocorrelation coefficients.

Sometimes, however, a joint test of the hypothesis of zero

autocorrelations at' all orders is performed. The Box—Pierce Q           statistic
is normally used for this purpose. This statistic is computed as


           Q-n
             k1 k
                                                                                (9)


and   is distributed as x2 with m degrees of freedom under the null

hypothesis. In the example considered here, using monthly data, the

theoretically expected value of Q      is   .29 for ml0, .49 for m=20, and         .61
                                        —12—




for m=30 compared to critical values at the five percent level of 18.3,

31.4, and 43.8, respectively. To state the conclusion more dramatically,

in order to have a 50 percent chance of rejecting the hypothesis of market

efficiency, assuming 30 autocorrelations are used to form the a—statistic,

one would have to have approximately 1200 years worth of monthly data.

     These results have implications for tests of market efficiency which

go beyond the examination of serial correlation in excess returns. It

has frequently been noted that one is unable to reject the hypothesis

that excess returns follow a white noise process after a jump, following

significant events such as stock splits and dividend announcements. The

preceding discussion makes clear that this provides essentially no evidence

against the hypothesis that the market either systematically over— or

under—reacts to these announcements. In neither case would significant

serial correlation be observed.


Tests of Semi—Strong Efficiency

     In closing the last section on weak—form tests we considered one

type of test for semi—strong efficiency — examining the profitability of

strategies of buying or selling following certain types of announcements.

Here we consider a different type of test. Equation (5) implies that

expected excess returns should be negative when Pt >
                                                       p   and positive

when Pt <
            p.   This reflects the assumed tendency of market prices to

return towards the rational expectation of the present value of future

cash flows. The key question is whether these expected excess returns

are large enough to be detectable.

     In practice any effort used to test efficiency in this way runs into

the problems that p is unobservable. This problem is assumed away so

that the hypothetical tests considered here have far more power than any
                                           —13--




test that could actually be devised. Under the assumptions that have

been made so far, it is easy to see that:


                                       =               —                         (10)
             E(z) =      _(l_a)u   1        (l—ct)(p

In the example considered above with a =           .98,    and 0u =   .28,   (10) implies

that when the market was undervalued by one standard deviation, the

expected excess monthly return would be (.02)(.28) = .0056.                  This contrasts

with a standard deviation of monthly returns of .06.

     How much data would it take for these excess returns to be

discernible statistically? Suppose that the regression equation


              Z =   a + b(p —           +                                        (11)
                                            nt

is estimated. Equation (10) implies that E(b) =              (1-a).   The

standard error of b can be calculated from the expression:

                    02
                =                                                                (12)


     In the example considered above one can calculate that 0b                    .01.

This implies that the hypothesis of market efficiency would not be rejected

at the five percent level, with probability of one—half.13 If a =                  .99,
the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis is less than one—sixth.

Of course this discussion vastly overstates the power of any test that could

actually be performed. In addition to the problem of measuring p,

there are the problems of non—normality in the residuals, and the problem

of measuring expected returns. These factors combine to suggest that tests

of semi—strong efficiency do not have much more power against the type of


13There is one—half chance that b <          E()
                                         = .02.              In these cases the
null hypothesis of efficiency will be accepted.
                                        —14—




inefficiency considered here, than do tests on serial correlation

properties of excess returns.


II .   Implications   and Conclusions

       The preceding analysis suggests that certain types of inefficiency

in market valuations are not likely to be detected using standard

methods. This means the evidence found in many studies that thehypothesis

of efficiency cannot be rejected, should not lead us to conclude that

market prices represent rational valuations. Rather, we must

face the fact that our tests have relatively little power against

certain types of market inefficiency. In particular, the hypothesis that

market valuations include large persistent errors is as consistent with

the available empirical evidence as is the hypothesis of market efficiency.

These are exactly the sort of errors in valuation one would expect to see if

market valuations involved inflation illusion or were moved by fads as some

have suggested.

       The weakness of the empirical evidence verifying the hypothesis that

securities markets are efficient would not be bothersome if the hypothesis

rested on firm theoretical foundations, and if there were no contrary empirical

evidence. Unfortunately, neither of these conditions is satisfied in practice.

       The standard theoretical argument is that unless securities are priced

efficiently, there will be opportunities to earn excess returns.    Speculators

will take advantage of these opportunities arbitraging away any inefficiencies

 in the pricing of securities. This argument does not explain how speculators

 become aware of profit opportunities. The same problems of identification de-

 scribed here, confronting financial economists also plague tiwould be" speculators.

 If the large persistent valuations errors considered here leave no statistically
                                  —15—




discernible trace in the historical patterns of returns, it is hard to see how

speculators could become aware of them. Moreover, cautious speculators may be

persuaded by the same arguments used by economists to suggest that apparent

inefficiencies are not present. There is another logically separate point to

be made here as well. Even if inefficiencies of the type considered here could

be conclusively identified, the excess returns to trying to exploit them would

be small and uncertain.

     These inferences are supported by a cursory examination of the activities

of actual speculators. A vast amount of speculative activity is directed at

exploiting riskless arbitrage opportunities through triangular trades and the

like. Traders engaged in this activity often are reluctant to hold naked

positions for as long as ten minutes and typically admit to being completely

oblivious to market fundamentals. Most risky speculation occurs in markets

such as commodity futures, where the nature of traded securities insures that

valuation errors cannot persist. In commodity markets for example, the

futures price must ultimately draw close to the spot price as the contract

date is approached. Very little professional speculation appears to take

place in markets like the stock market which have an indefinite horizon.

The principal exception to this assertion is the activities of risk arbitrageurs

who trade takeover candidates. Here again, the major uncertainty has a short
           14
horizon.

     While tests of the type consdered have little power to detect ineffi-

ciencies, other forms of evidence suggest that valuation errors are pervasive.

In markets, where the horizon is short and so very persistent valuation errors


14
   The argument here that the rational expectations assumption is untenable
in settings where it is difficult to estimate structural parameters without
extremely long time scries is similar to that made in a macro—economic
context by Benjamin Friedman (1979).
                                   —16—




are impossible, inefficiencies are frequently detected. For example, almost

every examination has concluded that forward prices are not efficient predictors

of futures spot prices in the foreign exchange market. (See Meese and Rogoff

(1982) for a recent example.) Other evidence comes from an examination of the

relation between market valuations and fundamentals. A classic example is pro-

vided by the discounts on closed end funds. Corporations whose only assets

are easily valued marketable securities sell at a substantial discount relative

to the value of their assets. Observed patterns of takeover suggests that the

same is true of many other corporations whose assets are less easily valued.

A different kind of observation suggesting the incompleteness of current the-

ories is the enormous trading volume observed on speculative markets. This

is difficult to account for on the view that market valuations are rational

expectations of rational calculations performed by market participants.

       The foregoing discussion suggests that a more catholic approach should

be taken to explaining the behavior of speculative markets. It may be possible

to develop alternative models of pricing based on the observed experimental

responses of persons to risky environments,    These models may have testable

implications differing from those of standard formulations. More modestly,

it may be possible to explain how valuation errors once made can persist, by

formalizing the notions of speculator learning discussed above, Finally, the

analysis here suggests the importance of developing tests which have some

power against the type of alternative hypotheses we considered.    These

might focus on the aftermath of apparently irrational market responses.15


 15
      I am currently engaged in sh a study of the market reaction following money
supply   arinour:cetnents.
                                 Re ferences


Abel, Andrew and Frederick Nishkin, "A Unified Framework for Testing
     Rationality, Market Efficiency and the Short Run Neutrality of
     Monetary Policy," unpublished, 1980.

Arrow, Kenneth J., "Risk Perception in Psychology and Economics,"
     Economic Inquiry, January 1982, pp. 1—9.

Blanchard, Olivier and Mark Watson, "Bubbles, Rational Expectations and
     Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper #945, July 1982.

Brainard, William C., John B. Shoven and Laurence Weiss, "The Financial
     Valuation of the Return of Capital," Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, 2:1980, pp. 453—502.

Fama, Eugene, Foundations of Finance, Basic Books, 1976.

Friedman, Benjamin, "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme Information
     Assumptions of Rational Expectations MacrQ Models," Journal of Monetary
     Economics, January 1979, pp. 23—41.

Hempel, Carl, Aspects of Scientific Explanation, 1965.

Ibbotsen, R.G. and R.A. Sinquefield, "Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation:
     Year—by—Year Historical Returns (1926—1974)," Journal of Business,
     January 1976, pp. 11—47 (and update, 1979).

Jensen, M.C., et al., "Symposium on Some Anomalous Evidence Regarding
     Market Efficiency," Journal of Financial Economics, June/Sept. 1978,
     pp. 93—330.

Jones, David and V. Vance Roley, "Rational Expectations, the Expectations
     Hypothesis, and Treasury Bill Yields: An Econometric Analysis,"
     unpublished, 1982.

Keynes, J.M., The General Theory of Employemnt, Interest and Money, 1936.

Neese, and Rogoff, "Exchange Rate Models of the 1970s: Are Any Fit to
     Survive?" unpublished, 1981.

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Cohn, "Inflation, Rational Valuation and
     the Market," Financial Analysts Journal, March/April 1979, pp. 24—44.

Shiller, Robert, "The Volatility of Long—Term Interest Rates and Expec-
     tations Models of the Term Structure," Journal of Political Economy,
     December 1979, pp. 1190—1219.

Shiller, Robert, "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by
     Subsequent Changes in Dividends?" American Economic RevIew, June
     1981(a), pp. 421—436.
Shiller, Robert, "The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market
     Efficiency," Journal of Finance, May 1981(b), pp. 291—304.

Summers, Lawrence H., "The Non—Adjustment of Nominal Interest Rates:
     A Study of the Fisher Effect," forthcoming in Symposium in Honor
     of Arthur Okun (1982).

Tversky, Amos and D. Kahneman, "The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology
     of Choice," Science 1981, pp. 453—458.
