                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TAX POLICY, THE RATE OF RETURN, AND SAVINGS




                       Lawrence H. Summers




                      Working Paper No. 995




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          September 1982




I am grateful to Andrei Shleifer for research assistance, and to
the National Bureau of Economic Research and the National Science
Foundation for financial support. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations,
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics, and in Taxation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NEER Working Paper #995
                                                    September 1982




                Tax Policy, the Rate of Return, and Savings



                                 Abstract



     The theoretical and empirical results in this paper make a strong

prfria facie case for the proposition that increases in the after tax

rate of return caused by tax policy are likely to bring forth signi-

ficant increases in saving. Theoretical analysis using a variety of

standard models tends to suggest that the aggregate response to savings

incentives is likely to be substantial. It is argued that the existing

empirical evidence sheds little light on the question. Empirical anal-

yses are then conducted using three alternative approaches. All three

confirm the hypothesis of a significant positive response of savings to

changes in the rate of return.



                                     Lawrence H. Summers
                                     National Bureau of Economic Research
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138

                                      (617) 868—3909
                                         —1—




      The effects of the rate of return on the level of savings and the

rate of capital formation are of central concern to both economists and

policymakers. Although the welfare effects of tax reforms do not directly

depend on their impact on savings, the effects of taxes on savings is

crucial to considerations of tax incidence and equity and to the issue of

long run growth. The impact of the rate of return on consumption and

savings decisions also bears on questions regarding the appropriate govern-

ment discount rate, the short run crowding out effects of fiscal policy,

and the effects of public indebtedness on capital intensity.

      The'traditional view among economists is that changes in the rate of

return are likely to have only a small effect on the savings rate. This

consensus is supported by theoretical arguments pointing to the opposing

income and substitution effects associated with changes in the rate of

return. The ambiguous implications of theory are matched by empirical

studies which yield conflicting estimates as to the size of the impact of

changes in the rate of return. The polar empirical estimate is Michael

Boskin's (1978) suggestion that the interest elasticity of savings is .4.

This estimate is widely regarded as too high.
      This paper re—examines the theoretical arguments and presents new
enpirical   evidence regarding the interest elasticity of savings. Both the

theoretical analysis and the empirical work demonstrate the strong likelihood

that increases in the real after—tax rate of return received by savers would

lead to substantial increases in long run capital accumulation. While it is

not possible to quantify the impact with any precision, the econometric results

here suggest that a shift towards expenditure taxation would lead to substantial

increases in the private savings rate.
                                   —2—



    The theoretical analysis emphasizes the importance of recognizing hetero-

geneity among savers in examining the effects of tax changes which raise the

rate of return available to savers. It begins by demonstrating that even if

all savings decisions are determined by rule of thumb, savings are likely to

be elastic with respect to the rate of return, as long as the rules of thumb

differ persistently across households. The effects of changes in the rate of

return on savings is then considered in a realistic multi—period life—cycle

framework. Within such a framework, the importance of recognizing future

labor income in analyzing savings is stressed. It is shown that for a wide

range of utility function parameters, the interest elasticity of savings is

likely to be positive. Since recent research suggest the importance of bequests

in determining aggregate capital formation, models of intergenerational trans-

fers are also considered. It is shown that as long as any part of the economy

is comprised of households with operative intergenerational transfer motives,

the long run elasticity of savings is infinite. Some illustrative calculations

suggest that the short run impact is also likely to be substantial. While the

sign of the response of savings to a change in the interest rate cannot be

determined unambiguously from theoretical considerations, consideration of

several models leads to a presumption in favor of a positive response.

     No single empirical model can possibly capture all the many factors which

influence aggregate consumption. This paper utilizes three different empirical

approaches to examine the effects of changes in the rate of return on the level

of capital accumulation. The fact that all three methods, each based on quite

different simplifying assumptions, yield quite similar results suggests the

robustness of the conclusion that rate of return effects on savings are both

substantively and statistically significant. The first method is based on a

modification of the standard consumption function specification to take account

of the effects of changes in the interest rate on the level of human wealth.
                                       —3--




This   type of estimation is necessarily dependent on a procedure for modelling

expectations. The second method follows recent work by Hall (1981), Hansen

and Singleton (1981), and Mankiw (1981) in attempting direct estimation of the

utility function of the representative consumer. Earlier work is extended

by allowing for demographic changes and the existence of liquidity constrained

consumers. A third approach involves estimating reduced forms linking the

wealth—labor income ratio to the after tax real rate of return. This procedure

allows for a more direct test of the impact of changes in the rate of

return on capital intensity. The plan of the paper is as follows.

       The implications of economic theory for the relation between the rate of

return and savings are reviewed in the first section. The link between theory

and previous empirical work on rate of return effects on savings is also

considered. The second, third and fourth sections utilize three alternative

empirical approaches in order to test the theoretical predictions. A final

section summarizes the paper and considers the implications of the results

for future research.
                                        —4—




I.   Taxation and Savings



     In a closed economy, it is not possible to imagine how the rate of return

to savers could change without other relevant economic variables also changing.

Thus, it is necessary to be clear about the nature of the shock causing the rate

of   return to change. Discussions of the "interest elasticity of savings" are apt
to   be misleading since the change in savings associated with any given change in

the rate of return to savers will depend on what caused the rate of return to

change. The analysis here focuses on the effects of tax policies which alter

the rate of return available to savers. Any tax change will affect revenue col-

lections and so must be associated with changes in either government spending,

public borrowing or other tax collections. The analysis here is all based on

a differential incidence approach, where it is assumed that spending and total

revenue collections remain constant so that changes in capital income taxes are

offset by adjustments to payroll or consumption taxes. All the discussion is,

therefore, about compensated effects. An effort is made to maintain this dis-

tinction in drawing implications from the empirical work reported below.

       The discussion here focuses on the "partial equilibrium effects" of a

change in the rate of return. It is assumed that factor prices are unaffected

by changes in the savings rate. Thus the analysis addresses the supply of

savings schedule rather than the reduced form relationship between tax changes

and capital intensity. In the special cases of a small open economy or a


    noted below, "compensated savings effects" are not well defined because
savings are not a commodity. As illustrated in Summers (1981), the effect
of a tax change will depend on the timing of compensation.
production function with an infinite elasticity of substitution, the assump-

tion of constant factor prices will be valid. Otherwise, it would be neces-

sary to consider the aggregate production function in assessing the effect

of a change in tax policy on savings.

      It is natural to ask why the effect of tax policy on the level of

capital accumulation is an interesting question, since the government can

always neutralize the effect of any tax change by enlarging or contracting

the deficit. For this reason, Stiglitz (1978) advocates the use of a

"Balanced Growth Incidence" approach. As already noted, the excess burden

associated with a capital income tax is not directly dependent on its impact

on savings. At a minimum, in order to carry out an appropriate offsetting

debt poliby, it is necessary to know the savings effect of a given tax reform.

Equally important, the government has multiple targets and may be unable or

unwilling to assign debt management policy to the goal of attaining optimal

capital intensity. Beyond its utility in determining optimal tax policy,

an analysis of the effect of changes in the rate of return on private savings

decisions is of scientific interest since it may help to explain differences

in savings rates across time and space. The sensitivity of savings to the

rate of return is also of central importance to macro—economic questions

such as the relative short run efficacy of fiscal and monetary policies.




  Rule of Thumb Savings

       We begin by examining the simplest possible model of savings behavior,

  one which assumes that Individuals have fixed savings propensities. Even in

  such a setting, compensated reductions in capital income taxes will increase

  capital accumulation as long as there is heterogeneity among income earners.
                                     —6—




    At the outset it is useful to review the effects o f changes in tax policy

in a simple economy where all individuals are identical and save a fixed s of

disposable income. It is assumed that the labor force grows at rate n, and

that the rate of labor augmenting technical change is g.   In steady state, the

ratio of capital to effective labor supply is constant.    This condition implies

that steady state capital intensity is determined by the condition:


    s(w(l—t w) + r(1—t r)k) =   (n+g)k,                                (1)



where w is the wage, r is the rate of return on capital, and t and tr are

respectively the tax rates on labor and capital income. It is useful to re-

cord for future reference that government revenue R is given by:


    Rtw+trk.
       w  r                                                            (2)



Equation (1) implies that steady state capital intensity can be written expli-

citly as a function of the exogenous variables as:


    k-—     SW(l_tw)
                                                                       (3
          n+g—s(l-t)r
                                    —7—




    At this point we are ready to compare the effects of wage and capital income

taxation on the level of capital accumulation. Two types of comparison are of

interest. The short—run effect can be gauged by considering a revenue preserving

tax cut on the level of savings holding the size of the capital stock constant.

The long—run impact can be gauged by examining the change in the steady state

capital stock following a change In tax structure. In the simple model described

here it is easy to verify that any change from wage to capital income taxation

which holds the level of revenue collections constant will have no impact on

savings in the short run on capital accumulation in the long run. Note, how-

ever, that if the specification is taken literally it implies that a switch to

expenditure taxation would raise savings. This is an artifact of the definition

of disposable income and is of little economic significance.

     These strong conclusions disappear once heterogeneity among savers is re-

cognized. It is immediately apparent that in a Kaldorian world where the savings

propensity out of capital income exceeds that out of labor income, a shift from

capital income taxes towards labor income taxes will raise the savings rate.

Here we consider the case where the savings rates among different individuals

differ, but do not depend on the source of income. A variety of considerations

suggest that there are likely to be large variations in individuals' propensity

to save. Many individuals are permanently liquidity constrained. One estimate by

Hall and Mishkin (1982) suggests this description fits 20 percent of the population.

Individuals also differ in their desire to leave bequests, and in their subjective

rates of time preference. These are further reasons to believe that savings

propensities differ. This inference is strongly supported by the available empi-

rical evidence. Cross section studies typically find substantial variations in

individual consumption and wealth holding even after taking account of a variety
                                              —8--




of economic variables and individual characteristics. For example, Feldstein

(1980) finds that after taking account of a large number of individual

characteristics, the explanatory power of an equation explaining the wealth!

lifetime income ratio of aged married couples was quite low.

     There is little evidence available on the persistence of individual

differences in savings propensities. In order to illustrate the effects

of heterogeneity, I consider the polar case where all differences are

permanent. To the extent that differences do not persist, the analysis here

will overstate the effects of heterogeneity. Suppose that a fraction

a. of effective labor input is supplied by individuals in class i, who identi-

cally have savings rates s. Then it is clear that in steady state:



                  1   — t)s1                                            (4a)
     k =
           n+g— s.r(l— tr)


            N

        k= Yki,                                                         (4b)
           i= 1




where k. represents the capital owned by class i. The share of the capital

stock    owned by individuals of class i is given by:




                  n + g —           —
                            s1r(l       tr)
           N           as
                        ii
           j±1n+gsjr(l—t)
Equation (5) implies that high savings classes own a disproportionate share
                                              —9—




of national wealth. e consider the effects of changing the tax rates on

capital and labor income. Equations (2) and (5) imply that in the short run,

with k constant:


      ds
     dt                                                                           (6a)
          W        = —)    S
      dR                  ii
     dt
          w




       ds
      dt
                                                                                  (6b)
      dR              1i5.
      dt r




Inspection of equation (5) shows that the expression in (6b) is greater

than that in (6a).              Since capital is disproportionately owned by

individuals with a high marginal propensity to save, taxes on capital income

reduce savings more than taxes on labor income.

     The potential significance of heterogeneity can be illustrated with a

simple numerical example. Suppose there are two classes with equal labor

incomes, so l 2 .5, and that s1 = .15 and s2                  .05. Suppose for

approximate realism that n + g =          .03, and that r = .1,   =   .2 and tr
     N                          N
Then Z cs.= .10 and E Y1s= .13. This implies that replacing one dollar
              :i
     1=1                       1—i
of capital income tax with that of labor income tax would raise national

savings by about three cents. In this example, a switch to complete wage

taxation which held revenue constant would raise the savings rate by about

five percent in the short run.

    This calculation describes the short—run impact of a change in tax

policy. The long—run effect of substituting capital income taxes for labor
                                     —10—




taxes is to shift the distribution of after—tax income towards the high

savings classes, further increasing the impact on capital accumulation.

This is easily seen using the preceding numerical example. A switch to

wage taxation raises the steady state capital stock and savings rate by

12 percent. It raises the share of capital owned by the high savings

class from .78 and .83. This calculation underestimates the likely actual

effect of heterogeneity because the dispersion of savings rates is quite

narrow. A more realistic calculation which allowed for liquidity constrained

consumers with zero marginal propensities to save would suggest even larger

effets.
     The basic result here would continue to be valid in any model of

heterogeneous consumers. Tax changes which redistribute income towards

"high savers" will raise capital accumulation. It is likely that individuals'

wealth holdings are positively related to their savings propensities.

Hence reduction in capital income taxes redistributes income towards

persons with high savings propensities and increase total savings.

     The same argument implies that any tax measure which redistributes

income toward high income individuals is likely to encourage savings, since

high income earners are likely to have high savings propensities, if only

because the return on wealth is one component of income. A final application

of the argument is to the effect of a tax levied at the corporate level, if

individuals cannot completely pierce the corporate veil.
                                                         —11--



           Life Cycle Savings

           This section reviews and extends the argument in Summers (1981)

suggesting that realistic formulations of the life—cycle hypothesis imply

a very substantial long run response of capital accumulation to tax measures

which change the after tax rate of return. The simulation results reported

there are extended by considering a wider class of utility functions and tran-

sitory as well as permanent changes in the rate of return.

           I    work here with a simple continuous time formulation of the life—cycle
hypothesis. It is assumed that                     all workers at a point in time receive the

same    real wage which grows at rate g, and that                     capital   markets are perfect
so that individuals                can both borrow and lend at the riskless interest rate r.
Also,      I assume that individuals maximize a constant elasticity of

substitution utility function with a fixed discount rate, subject to the

constraint that the                present value of future lifetime consumption equals the
sum of assets and the present value of future labor income. That is,

they solve the problem:


                    T
        Max f —-            e5(5_t)     ds                                                        (7)
                    ti
                        T     C5
               s.t.                  e_r_tr5_t) ds

                    —
                        At + 5   w   (l_w)   _[r(l_tr)g1 (s-t) ds.

where T is the individual's certain age of death, T is the retirement age,
is   the   wage         and t, tY and tc are the tax rates of interest income, labor income
and consumption. Solving the maximization problem (1) yields the consumption

and savings functions:



                                                                 '1




                        —(A
                                               /     —
                              + HWt)L                                 (l_c)
                                         l—y             r(l—t')J                                     (8a)
               Ct
                                 (r(l_tr)_o -      r(l_tr))T1
                                      —12—




           = w(lt') + rA     (lr) — Ct                                       (8b)
                                      1— t



where HWt equals the second term on the right hand side of (7) .   Note that

the after tax interest rate affects consumption in two ways. The marginal

propensity to consume out of total wealth       + HW3 is a positive function

of the rate of return if y<O and a negative function if y>O. In the y0

case, which corresponds to the case of Cobb—Douglas utility, the propensity

to consume is independent of the interest rate. Inspection of (7) shows

that human wealth HW is unambiguously negatively related to the interest rate

since increases in the rate of return reduce the discounted present value

of future labor income. It follows immediately that if y>O, the uncompensated

value of        is positive, for consumers of all ages so that aggregate private

savings is negatively related to the rate of capital taxation. If changes in

capital tax rates are financed from permanent changes in consumption rates,

the same result unambiguously holds for compensated changes.

      In the more plausible case where y<O, the effect of a reduction in

capital    income taxation is ambiguous depending on whether the "human wealth"
effect outweighs the effect on the propensity to consume. Note that the
human wealth effect is likely to be greatest for young workers since their

labor income lies furthest in the future.       Below, this is illustrated

numerically for some plausible utility function parameters.

      The maximum problem (7) can be solved to determine the effects of

transitory as well as permanent changes in the rate of return. The analytic

solution is cusbersome and not very revealing. Therefore, Table 1 reports

some numerical calculations of the interest elasticity of consumption expen—
                                        —13—




diture and savings based on plausible parameter values. The trans-

itory change in the interest rate is assumed to last for five years. In

these calculations, the parameter values assumed are: •T      50, T = 40,

'S   .03, and y =   .02 and initial r = .04.   The initial value of At for

each age group is calculated from the solution to the maximization problem (7).

The results regarding the sensitivity of savings and consumption to the after

tax rate of return are not sensitive to these choices of parameter values.

In interpreting the table, note that in some cases, which are asterisked,

the initial savings rate is negative. These calculations can be interpreted

as either uncompensated elasticities, or, since (8) implies that t does not

affect the level of savings, as compensated elasticities of savings, where the

adjustment to restore revenues is made through the consumption tax.

      As one would expect, consumption responds more negatively to the rate

of return in the cases where the elasticity of substitution between present

and future consumption (-)     is   greater. Permanent changes in the rate of

return reduce consumption by more, or increase it by less than do

transitory changes. This is because of the greater impact of permanent

changes in the interest rate on human wealth. The results also show a

tendency for the interest elasticity of consumption to rise with age

reflecting the diminishing importance of the human wealth effect.

      These calculations have serious implications for previous empirical

studies of the interest sensitivity of aggregate consumption. First, they

show clearly for all age groups the importance of distinguishing between

permanent and transitory changes in the rate of return. In all likelihood,

the five year long transitory shocks considered here overstate the persistence

of the variations in interest rates during the sample periods usually studied

in empirical work. Thus, it is clearly possible that even though transitory
                                                    —i-LI—




changes in the rate of return are found to have little or no effect on

consumption, permanent changes, such as those caused by tax policy, might

have a large effect. The existing empirical evidence sheds no light on

this possibility.

     There is a second problem with traditional empirical approaches——the

use of labor or disposable income rather than human wealth as an explanatory

variable. The importance of this error can be seen by considering the y=O

rows of Table 1. Since, in this case, the effect of changes in the rate of

return on the propensity to consume is zero, the elasticities reflect only

the human wealth effect. Clearly, they are quite substantial. It is,

perhaps, surprising that,            not   taking account of these effects, previous

eapirical work has            failed     to find a positive relationship between the real

rate of return and consumption.

      In Summers (1981), I show how the effects of changes in the after tax

rate of return on long run capital accumulation can be calculted by aggregating their

effects on consumers of different ages. The following expression is derived

for the steady state ratio of savings to disposable labor income.



             =
                                                    (gr(trTI -
  wt(l_tw)       {       ly          -
                                         r(l_tr)]
                                                                            1)                  (9)




                        rrr(1_tr)_6
             x
                 te

                 I
                      e (I.    l—y
                                           )gn)T
                                             —
                                                       —1 (n)(n+g)




             •
                                                                       —
                                                                           r(l_tr))T   —
                 [(      r(i—t'.— _n_g)(g_r)(e(t9i_)                                       1)



                                                                      n+g
             x (1 —           eT') (r(1_tr) — n —        g)]
                                                               -
                                                                   r(l_tr)_n_g
                                        -15-


                                     Table 1

      Effects of a Change in the Rate of Return on Life Cycle Consumers




                Permanent      Permanent         Transitory    Transitory
       Value    Consumption    Savings           Consumption   Savings
       of y     Elasticiy      Elasticity        Elasticity    Elasticity
 0*     0         —.70          —12.1             —.18          —3.18
 0*    —1         —.33          — 2.3             —.09          — .65
 0*    —5         —.112         — .59             —.03          — .17
 0*    —50        — .02         — .09             — .01         — .03
10      0         — .55             15.70         —.18              5.07
10*    —1         — .25         — 5.1             —.10          —1.42
10*    —5         — .08         — .21             —.04               .162
10*    —50        — .001        — .620            —.02               .434
20      0         — .36              2.16         —.165             1.087
20     —1         — .14               .898        —.088              .50
20     —5            .004       — .049            —.054         — .149
20     —50           .061       — 1.341           —.018         — .536
30     —0         — .051              .71         —.114              .623
30     —1            .01              .17         —.041              .297
30     —5            .12        — .15               .005             .101
30     —50           .61        —     .0271         .025             .020
40      0            0                .47           .077             .360
40     —1            .094             .270          .162             .195
40     —5            .161             .17           .218             .113
40     —50           .183             .19           .242             .082

Source: Calculations described in the text. In   the cases marked   *, the
        initial level of savings is negative.
                                        —16—




      Table 2 presents calculation of the savings rate given in (9) for

a variety of combinations of utility function parameters and rates of

return. The earlier assumptions that T50, T'=40, and g.02 are maintained

and it is assumed that n.02.        The results bear out the conclusion in

Summers (1981) that for plausible utility functions which generate savings

rates reasonably close to those which are observed, the response of savings

to changes in the rate of return is strong and positive. Calculation of

elasticities is not very meaningful given that rates of return may be

close to zero. In the case where y=-2, which is supported by the empirical

work reported below, each one percentage point increase in the real after

tax   rate   of return raises savings by about 1.3 percentage points.

      As the elasticity of substitution between present and future consumption,

      declines the responsiveness of savings to changes in the rate of

return falls off quite sharply. However, it becomes difficult to generate

reasonable sized savings rates, without resort to negative rates of pure time

preference. Furthermore large negative values of y (y—5) imply an implausibly

high degree of risk aversion.'




1The empirical work reported below provides strong evidence against the
hypothesis that (y 1 —5).
                                          —17—


                                     Table 2

                  The Interest Sensitivity of Aggregate Savings

                                   (Value of r)


                   .01     .02     .03           .04     .05       .06



     = .00         .099    .163    .230          .305    .390      .489
     = .01         .024    .087    .152          .222    .299      .389
6 = .02           —.051    .012    .075          .141    .212      .292



I =   -l                           .114          .141    .171      .202
6 = 0              .062    .087
6 = .01            .025    .050    .076          .102    .130      .159
6 = .02           —.013    .013    .038          .064    .091      .119



y =    -2
6 = 0              .050     .062   .076          .090    .104      .119
6 = .01            .025     .037   .051          .064    .078      .093
o      .02         .00      .013   .026          .040    .034      .068



I -5                                                               .044
6 =    0            .037    .038    .038         .040    .042
       .01          .025    .025    .026         .028    .030      .033
iS

o = .02             .012    .013    .014         .016    .018      .021


Note: The calculations all assume that n                .02, g =   .02,    T       50 and T' = 40.
                                                                               S
             The numbers in the table are calculated values of
                                                                          (1- t' ) wL
                                       —18—




     These results suggest that if the life cycle model accurately charac-

terizes aggregate savings behavior, reductions in capital income taxes which

increase the after tax rate of return havea significant positive effect on

capital formation. The figures in the table give an indication of the con-

sequences of measures to change the rate of return which are financed using

consumption taxes. As is clear from (8), measures financed with wage taxes

would have a somewhat smaller effect on steady state capital intensity.


     The analysis here has considered only the additively separable constant

elasticity utility function. While this is the only utility function which

is both additively separable and homeothetic, the analysis is not completely

general. However, the CES utility function can generate most plausible

types of behavior. As y '-   -°', it   approaches the %aximin" function. It

is also capable of generating a smooth path of consumption with any given

slope. The model here is also stylized in its treatment of demographic

issues, and its assumption of certainty about the date of death. Tobin

(1967) reports some more realistic simulations which suggest that the re-

sults are not sensitive to these omissions.


     Intergenerational Transfers

    Much of the theoretical and empirical analysis of savings has been

carried out using models which ignore intergenerational transfers.

Recent research suggests that this is likely to be an important omission.

Laurence Kotlikoff and I (1981) have estimated that about 80 percent of
U.S. wealth holdings are the result of intergenerational transfers rather

than life cycle savings. This finding is corroborated by the work of Mirer

(1979) and Bernheim (1982) suggesting that liquid wealth does not decline with

age following retirement, in contradiction to the implications of the pure life cycle

hypothesis. It is also supported by the fact that the savings rate was quite

high in the 19th century before retirement was an important economic phenomenon.

     There are three standard ways of extending the pure life

cycle theory to take account of intergenerational transfers) The most

straightforward is to assume that the utility function in (7) includes the

level of bequests as an additional argument. This modification is exactly

equivalent to treating bequests as an additional form of terminal consumption.

It does not importantly alter the conclusions from the analysis of the

life cycle model. A second possibility is that bequests are involuntary,

resulting from life cycle savings in conjunction with the absence of perfect

annuities markets. In this case, the preceeding analysis is also applicable.

Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) call the realism of this possibility into

question by pointing out the role of family risk pooling in providing annuities.

      Almost surely a preferable way of introducing intergenerational

transfers is to postulate interdependent utility functions, in which the

utility of parents depends on either the utility or the consumption of their

offspring. That is:


              =
                  U(c,      (c+1, u2 (c÷3                               (10)



where the subscript t now indexes generations. This formulation is

preferable because a motivation for bequests in terms of the welfare of

subsequent generations is introduced. It has the additional virtue of

1) Yet another alternative would be to model "manipulative" bequests as described
    in Bernhein, Shleifer and Suniners (1982). This would lead to results quite
    similar to those implied by pure life cycle calculations.
resolving the conflict between the very high "income elasticity" of bequests

found in cross sectional work, and the much lower elasticity implied by the

absence of secular increases in the savings rate.

        Adopting this formulation has radical implications for the

elasticity of savings with respect to the rate of return. Successive sub-

stitution using (10) demonstrates that the problem of generation

t, is to choose           to maximize some function of the form:

                   u= V(C1,
                                         .   . .)                                          (11)

In what follows, it is assumed that                 this   function is homeothetic.

                                                                               1
Now suppose that consumption reaches a steady state level Z.                          It follows

immediately from the assumption that (11) is maximized that:

         t+l       =   1+r(l—t')   =   i+6                                                  (12)
       Vt CE)


That is, the marginal rate of substitution and the after tax interest rate

are equated. Equation (l2)implies that there is a unique after tax rate

of return which is compatible with the existence of a steady state. It is

notdifficult to verify that if r(i—t') exceeds 6, wealth grows without bound,
and that if r(1t') is less than 6, it shrinks indefinitely. This implies
that   in the partial equilibrium sense considered here, the long run

elasticity      of savings with respect to the after tax rate of return is infinite.

Of course, infinite responses are not observed in the world, because the

accumulation of wealth drives down the rate of return.


1) The argument here could easily be modified to take account of the
    effects of population and productivity growth.
                                     —2]—




      Now suppose that the utility function (10)     characterizes   tilL


behavior of some but not all economic agents. The remainder can be thought
of as life cycle, rule of thumb, or liquidity constrained consumers. The

argument just made continues to imply that there is only one after tax rate

of return which is compatible with the existence of a steady state.

Otherwise, the wealth of the "bequest" class will be growing without bound,

and so its consumption will be ever increasing. In a setting with some but not

all consumers possessing bequest motives ,   the   general equilibrium rate of

return will be determined by the bequest consumers. The distribution of wealth

will depend on the savings propensity of the remaining consumers at this

interest rate. It follows that as long as any part of the economy is

characterized by intergenerational altruism of the type suggested by

Barro (1974), the long run partial equilibrium elasticity of savings will

be infinite.

      Of course, the long run elasticity may not be a very useful guide to

the short run response of the economy to a tax change. However, the illustrative

calculations of Chamley (1981) suggest that convergence to a new steady state

is fairly rapid. He finds that with a Cobb—Douglas production function, about

10 percent of the adjustment to a new steady state occurs within one year,

in the Cobb—Douglas utility case, and about 7 percent occurs if y = —1.

Much more rapid convergence occurs with elastic labor supply. His

calculations imply that a permanent increase in the after tax interest rate

from 4 to 5 percent would raise savings by 40 percent in the short run in

the Cobb—Douglas case and 30 percent in the y = —l case, even without

allowing for variable labor supply. These figures would be lower if only
                                    _')2_




a fraction of savings is done by bequest consumers. However, it should be

emphasized that even if only a small fraction of consumers have bequest

motives, they are likely to account for a large part of the savings. This

inference is supported by the great inequality in wealth

holdings.

      The analysis so far has failed to recognize a variety of complicating

factors. Labor supply has been assumed to be inelastic. Relaxing this

assumption would strengthen the conclusions reached here, since increases in

the rate of return would cause consumers to shift their work effort towards

the earlier stages of the life cycle. Liquidity constraints have not been

incorporated into the analysis. Including them would also be likely to

strengthen the conclusion that compensated increases in the net rate

fraction would raise savings. Tax reforms which reduced capital income taxes

would redistribute resources away from the consumers who by definition have

a marginal propensity to save of zero towards other consumers, raising the

aggregate savings rate. A final complicating factor is uncertainty about

future labor income and future rates of return. As Sandmo (1970) has shown,

uncertainty has an ambiguous effect on the level of savings. There does

not seem to be any clear reason for expecting the effects of deterministic

changes in the rate of return,such as would be brought about by tax reforms,

to be affected by the presence of uncertainty.

     The theoretical arguments here suggest that economic theory creates

some presumption that savings should respond positively to changes in the

after tax rate of return. The standard argument pointing to conflicting

substitution and income effects is misleading in several respects. First,
                                       —23—




for most purposes, it is the compensated effect of changes in interest

rates that is relevant. Second, the usual argument implicitly assumes that

all income is received in the first period. Allowing for human wealth effects

makes it far more plausible that savings respond positively to changes in the

after tax rate of return. Third, the standard analysis neglects the effects

of    heterogeneity emphasized here. As long as some savers have a very elastic
response to changes in interest rates, their behavior is likely to determine
the   aggregate response to changes in the rate of return.

        While the considerations stressed here are suggestive, it is certainly

possible to construct models in which the rate of savings responds negatively

to increases in the rate of return. The question is ultimately an empirical

issue. In the next sections, we explore alternative empirical approaches to

resolving it.
                                     —24—


II. Structural Consumption Function Estimatioi.

     A number of studies, including Wright (1969), Weber (1970, 1975).

Boskin (1978), 1-iowrey and Hymans (1980), and Blinder (1981), have attempted

to estimate the effects of changes in the rate of return on consumption and

savings. Despite the profusion of studies, no consensus has been reached.

Only Boskin obtains a statistically significant and substantially positive

estimate of the interest elasticity of savings. I-lowrey and Hymans (1980)

show that his results are sensitive to the choice of sample period and to

issues of data construction. The other studies find insignificant effects,

although in some cases nominal pre—tax rather than real after tax returns

are used in the estimation. As Feldstein (1970) demonstrates, this is

likely to cause serious underestimates of the effects of changes in the properly

measured real net yield.

     All of these studies attempt to investigate interest rate effects by

adding an interest rate variable to a standard life cycle consumption

function involving disposable income and wealth as arguments. The coefficient

of the interest rate variable is then used as basis for inferring the

interest elasticity of savings. There are several serious problems with

this type of approach. First, the equation deviates from the life cycle

theory discussed in the preceeding section in several respects. The most

important of these is the inclusion of disposable income rather than an

estimate of human wealth. This obscures an important channel through which

the interest rate night be expected to affect savings and consumption decisions.

M additional problem is posed by the use of an income measure which includes

capital as well as labor income. This leads to a kind of double counting

since the wealth variable already represents the present value of current and

future capital income. The specification also does not allow the propensity

to consume out of wealth to depend on the interest rate as the theoretical

model suggests that it should.
      The second difficulty is that this specification makes it difficult

to interpret movements in the interest rate. It is not possible to conceive

of circumstances in which the real net yield would change, but disposable

income and wealth would remain constant. This means that the partial

derivative   of the consumption function equation with respect to the included
interest rate variable is not directly informative as to the effect of a
change in the interest rate. Since increases in real interest rates are
likely to be associated with increases in disposable income and decreases in

wealth, there is a strong presumption that the standard procedure will

understate their positive impact on savings.

      A third problem with standard consumption function approaches is

difficulty in measuring accurately all the relevant variables. The variable

normally used to proxy the rate of return in most studies is the real after

tax bond yield. This involves the construction of a measure of long term

inflationary expectations, and the average marginal tax rate on interest

income. Neither can be measured with much precision. In any event, bonds

represent only a very small fraction of wealth, so it is unclear how well this

yield provides the rate of return which will be received on all savings.

Insofar as the rate of return is measured with error, the estimated

response of savings to changes in the interest rate will be biased towards

zero. There are equally serious difficulties involved in measuring expected

future income. Lucas (1976) has pointed out the limitations of the

standard distributed lag expectational formulations.

     Additional problems with standard consumption functions as vehicles

for examining the interest sensitivity of savings include failure to include

other relevant variables such as those reflecting the age structure of

the population. There is also a problem of simultaneous
                                       —26—




equations bias. Savings decisions determine the accumulation

of wealth which in turn affects future income. In an important recent study,

Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1981) illustrate, in a simulation context, the

seriousness of the problems discussed here. They simulate the behavior of

an economy in which the life cycle hypothesis holds exactly, and then estimate

standard consumption function specifications. The results indicate that

the parameter estimates are extremely sensitive to the choice of sample

period, and that the estimated parameters do not provide a useful guide to

the effects of policy interventions.

      These considerations suggest that structural consumption function

estimates do not provide a very useful basis for estimating the effects

of changes in the rate of return on savings behavior. There is some pre-

sumption that the effect is underestimated because of errors in the measurement

of the rate of return and the failure to take account of interest rate effects

on savings and income. In the next section I present estimates of the

effects of the rate of return on savings which are based on the direct

estimation of first order conditions. These circumvent most of the

difficulties raised in the preceeding paragraphs and, I believe, provide the

best available method for estimating the effects of tax policy changes.

Because structural consumption functions have been used in most recent work

in this area, it is perhaps useful to reconsider the role of interest rates

in equations of this type. This is done below. It should be clearly

recognized that these estimates do suffer from some of the problems just

considered, although a number of important difficulties are avoided.

      Equation (8a) is approximated by an aggregate consumption function of

the form:
                                       —27--



                                 YLC
        =   r   + ft   + Rt) (A + R-fd +                                  (13)



This equation holds that consumption is a function of total wealth

 (including human wealth) with a propensity to consume which depends on the

real after tax long term interest rate .       Human wealth is estimated as

permanent disposable labor income discounted at the sum of the real after
                                                                                 1
tax long term interest rate and an econometrically estimated risk premium d.

Equation (13) is estimated using non—linear least square with annual

data the 1950—1978 period. While it would be possible to estimate this

equation using quarterly data, this was not attempted because the

primary interest here is in the effects of low frequency changes in

the independent variables. The sample period was stopped in 1978

because the disposable labor income series used in the estimation is not

available past that point.

     Before examining the results, it is necessary to describe the

construction of the variables. The dependent variable in the equations

reported here is real consumption expenditure per—capita drawn from the

National Income Accounts. This measure treats outlays on durable goods as

consumption rather than savings. The equations were re—estimated for

consumption with the services of durable goods imputed. These modifications

had little impact on the results and are not reported here. The value

of At is the NPS model series on the market value of wealth as reported

in Hayashi (1982). The variable is used in per—capita form. Assets

are included at market value rather than replacement cost. A variety

of measures of permanent labor income, YLe     ,   were tried.

     In the results reported here, YLS is estimated as a three period

1The formulation adopted here thus explicitly models the human wealth effect
discussed above. It also avoids pitfalls in simulation by using disposable
labor income rather than total disposable income. A final advantage of this
formulation is that the interest rate is entered as a factor effecting the
marginal propensity to consume.
                                       —28—




distributed lag on per—capita disposable labor income, with the weights

constrained to sum to one. The data on disposable labor income are also

drawn from Hayashi (1982). Alternative lag structures (including relaxing

the sum constraint) had little effect on the results and so the estimates

using them are not reported here.

        Four alternative measures of the real after tax rate of return were

tried. The after tax nominal bond yield was proxied alternatively by the

municipal bond yield and by AAA yield multiplied by an estimate of the

average marginal personal tax rate on interest income. Inflation expecta-

tions are proxied using the rolling ARNA procedure described in Sunmiers (1982b),

    and a weighted average of past rates of inflation, 71e2 Combining

two alternative bond yields, and two alternative measures of expected

inflation yields four measures of the real after tax rate of return.

        The estimated equations are displayed in Table 3. All the equations

yield positive estimates of S      implying that y<0. This indicates that
the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth is a rising function of

the rate of return. The estimated risk premium used in discounting future

labor income ranges between .09 and .141. While these estimates may seem

large, they are only a little greater than the risk premium attached to

dividend income. Labor income is likely to be much less easily diversified,

so these estimates are not unreasonable. It is encouraging that

similar estimates are obtained using each of the rate of return variables.

In all cases the explanatory power of the equations is very high, and

comparable to that of standard structural consumption functions.

        The two effects of interest rate changes in the equations reported in

Table 3 conflict. Increases in the interest rate reduce human wealth, but
1This   terminology may   be misleading since d will also capture the
effects    of   trend growth in income.
                                               Table 3

                              Structural Consumption Function Equations




Equation

   1       R =R
            1 mun
                    ire
                                     _____
                                     —.001
                                                 l
                                                .405      .066
                                                                    d

                                                                   .094    .994
                                                                                   13W


                                                                                  1.49
                          1
                                      (.063)   (.125)    (.014)   (.028)

                     e
   2       R =R                      —.318      .318      .090     .137    .993   1.66
            2 mun         2
                                      (.090)   (.100)    (.012)   (.029)


  3                                    .012     .397      .068     .101    .993   1.40
           R3=RA.(1_0)_irel
                                      (.074)   (.149)    (.017)   (.036)


  4
           R4=RAAA •(l—e)— 2           337      .324      .090     .137    .994   1.63
                                     (.088)    (.097)    (.012)   (.028)




  Note: Estimates obtained using nonlinear least squares for the 1950—1978
        period. Distributed lag weights used in forming YLe are not reported.
                                            —30—




                                           Table 4

               Effects of a 1 Percentage Point Change in the Rate of Return
                               on Consumption and Saving


                Equation 1            Equation 2           Equation 3          Equation 4
Initil R       %AC                                                  %AS       %AC      %xS

   —.02    —2.48       20.73     —1.61        13.44   —1.96       16.42   —1.53      12.82

   —.01    —1.61       13.49     —1.18        9.90    —1.25      10.46    —1.12       9.32

    0      —   .97      8.09     —   .84      6.99    —   .71     5.94    — .77       6.45

    .01    — .48        3.99     — .55        4.59    — .29               —
                                                                  2.45        .49    4.08




Note: These estimates are based on the equations reported in Table 3. All the
       calculations are done using 1978 values for the independent variables
       other than R. The calculations assume that no other variable changes
       when R does.
                                       -3]—




raise the propensity to consume out of wealth. The total effect of changes

in the real rate of return is evaluated in Table 4. The effect of a 1 percent

increase in the real rate of return on consumption expediture and savings

is calculated using 1978 values of the exogenous variables and various

initial real rates of return. These calculations refer to the effect of a

change in the real return caused by a reduction in taxes on interest income,

which is compensated for by a change in taxes on consumption expenditure.

The results almost universally suggest than an increase in the after tax

real return would have a significant effectJ

      For most of the last few years, real after tw bQnd yields have been significantly

below zero. The estimates here thus suggest that a one percent increase in

the real rate of return would be likely to raise savings by close to 10 percent

in the short run.

      These estimates suggest that   structural   consumption functions

estimated in ways consistent with the underlying theory, imply significant

effects of interest rates on savings.2 However, they involve

a somewhat unsatisfactory treatment of expectations, and serious problems

in measuring expected real returns. An alternative approach is presented in

the next section.



1The numbers in %AC columns of the table should be interpreted as the change
 in consumption inclusive of consumption taxes.

21t might be objected that this is a consequence of the specification's
 twinning the labor income and rate of return variables. Efforts to
 explore this by adding YLt as a separate variable were not successful
 because the parameter estimates failed to converge.
                                           _32.




III.     Direct Estimation of Utility Function Parameters

       This section reports on an attempt to directly estimate the parameters of

the utility function of the representative consumer. The approach here follows

the work of Grossman and Shiller (1981) ,         Hall   (1981) ,   Hansen and Singleton

(1981), and Mankiw (1981) in attempting to estimate the Euler equation for the

representative consumers' stochastic dynamic optimization problem. Their work

is extended by allowing for the possibility that some consumers are liquidity

constrained.

       Consider a consumer choosing a lifetime consumption plan. She always has

the option of consuming one dollar more or less at time t, and investing or

disinvesting in any available asset and then consuming the proceeds at time t+1.

It follows that:


            U'(ct) =
                       E(U'(ct÷i)(-)   I                                                   (14)


where      is the subjective discount rate attached by the consumer to future

utility and r is the real return on any freely traded risky asset

and       is the full information set at time t. Note that the

first order condition given by (14) will be satisfied for any free traded asset

even    if some   assets such as human capital cannot be traded freely. This con-

dition    will hold for consumers who expect with certainty to be alive in the next
period regardless of the length of horizon of their maximization problem.
Note also that this condition does not depend on any assumptions about expec-
tations regarding future labor income or rates of return. The assumption is
maintained here that different types of consumption may              be   aggregated and that
the utility function is separable in consumption and leisure. The importance
and    validity of these assumptions are discussed in Mankiw, Rotemberg and Summers
(1982).
                                       —33--




        in order to exploit (14) it is necessary to assume that aggregate

consumption can usefully be modelled as the outcome of utility maximization

by a representative individual, It should be clear that this assumption

is not exactly accurate. However, it is to be hoped that the estimated

utility function for the representative consumer in some sense typifies

individual utility functions. Grossman and Shiller (1981) rigorously

justify this hope in a continuous time setting. I assume that the

instantaneous utility function has the familiar constant elasticity form

        CI
Ut = __-! ,   With this assumption, equation (14) implies that:



                     C÷1     1(l+r)   = 1   +                               (is)
                              (1+6)
                      Ct


where         is orthogonal to any element of   and is serially uncorrelated.

Given data on consumption and the returns on an asset, the parameters

óand yin (15) can be estimated using non—linear two stage least squares.

Any element of      which can help to forecast r can be used as an instrument.'

     Before turning to a discussion of the cholies made in actually

estimating (15), it may be helpful to comment on the underlying economics.

Consider the special case where r is nonstochastic. Equation (15) then

holds that the growth rate in consumption is dependent on the real return

r. The greater is the responsiveness, the greater is the implied value

of y. Essentially y is estimated from information on the strength of the

relation between consumption and er-ante real returns.


1For more details on the estimation procedure, see Hansen and Singleton
 (1981) or Mankiw, Rotemberg and Summers (1982). Note that the assumption
 of conditional homeoscedasticity is maintained here. This does not
 affect the consistency of the estimates but may bias the standard errors.
                                   —34—




     In estimating (15) one must choose a meaaure of consumption,

and asset return, as well as the sample period and data frequency.

In an effort to wdfy the robustness of the conclusions, a variety of

different implementations of (is) were estimated. Three alternative

measures of consumption were used, including total real consumption expen-

ditures, consumption of non—durables and services and consumption of

non—durables alone. The choice between these concepts involves trading

off comprehensiveness, and the problem of expenditure diverging from

the service flow for durable goods. Consumption was measured either per

adult (16 and over), or "per adjusted capita", weighting each cohort according

to its relative consumption. The latter procedure controls for movements

in consumption due to the changing age composition of the population.

    The estimates were performed with both quarterly and annual data.

Since the results are very similar, the more precise estimates obtained

with quarterly data are reported here. The real after tax return on

corporate stocks, long term government bonds, treasury bills, and savings

deposits were used as proxies for r in these estimates. Inflation was

calculated using the price deflator for the consumption concept appropriate

to each equation. A thirty percent tax rate on interest and dividends

was assumed, while capital gains on stocks and bonds were assumed to be

untaxed.1

     The results of estimating ( 15) using a variety of specifications

are shown in Table 5. In each case, two lagged real returns, two

lagged values of inflation, and two lagged consumption growth rates


1Alternative assumptions about taxation had little effect on the results.
 The tax series in the previous section was not used because weighting
 by interest income in finding the average marginal tax rate is not
 appropriate in the context of the current model.
                                                                                                 Table     5


                                                         Nonlinear           2SLS Estimates      of Consumption              Euler    Equations
             —
Cons t.mip
      tion                                         C72                                                         CN7 2                                          CNS72
                      per capita
                                      1                                                         1                                                     1      F
                      using the                      I               DW                                         Y              DW                                 •1              DW
 AsseI                *dult pop.                                                               1+'s                                                  1+I
Return       N
  Treasury billSa                    1.005      .396             1.60                          1.009           .090           1.70                  1.02      —.99            1.69
                                                                 •
                                    (.001)     (.186)                                         (.003)       (.456)                                   (.007)    (.860)
                   p                  .        —.                        .                     1.017
  Government bonds                                                                                         —.337              1.81                   1.03     —1.67               1.79
                                    (.005)     (.787)                                         (.011)       (1.55)                                   (.019)       (2.24)
  Stocks                             1.003     —2.83             2.08                          1.02        —4.55              2.14                  1.14      —18.0           2.03
                                    (.01)      (1.48)                                         (.018)       (2.54)                                   (.084)    (9.54)
                             C
  Saving deposits                    1.01      —1.05             1.88                          1.01        —.60               1.82                  1.03      —1.76           1.83
                                    (.004)     (.753)                                         (.005)       (.664)                                   (.01)     (1.11)



Consump-
   tion                                            C72                                                     CN7 2                                             CNS 72
   a sure             per capita
                      using ad-       1                                                         1               I                                     1           '1
Asset                                               I            DW                                                           DW                                              DW
Re                    justed pop     i+S                                                       1+t                                                   1+
  turN
                                     1.008      .004             1.63                          1.006       —   .116           1.66
  Treasury billsb                                                                                                                                   1.01     —.98                 1.86
                                    (.194)     (.291)                                         (.002)       (.408)                                  (.003)     (.609)
  Government bondsb                  1.008         .630          1.85                          1.006           .150           1.87                  1.01         .21          1.86
                                    (.009)     (1.31)                                         (.007)       (1.50)                                  (.011)     (1.89)
                 b
  Stocks                             1.02     —4.88              2.07                          1.01        —5.93              2.02                  1.08     —16.1                2.00
                                    (.016)     (2.28)                                         (.013)       (2.83)                                  (.039)     (6.61)
                                                                                                       -
                             c       1.02                        1.88
  Saving deposits                             —.990                                            1.01        -.764              1.73                  1.02     —1.56            1.93
                                                                     •



                                    (.004)     (.670)                                         (.003)       (.608)                                  (.005)     (.756)




   Note:             Parameters refer to                                       a.                                      —                                               —
                                            (1 )    in    the   text,               Sample period:         48:4            81:4      b.   Sample   period: 51:4            78:4
                                                                                                                       —
                                                                               C.   Sample period:         55:3            78:4
                                      —36--




are used as instruments. The results in Table S are not

very sensitive to the choice of a consumption concept. However

they are quite dependent on which asset is used in the estimation. In

general, the point estimate of y is greater using treasury bills, time

deposits or government bonds, in the estimation than it is using stocks.

Using assets other than stocks, the data suggest that the utility

function is approximately logarithmic (y=0) .    The estimate appears to be

fairly precise.         In each case one can conclude at a very high level

of confidence that y>—3. The estimated value of y varies between -2.83

and —18.0 using corporate stocks to represent rt. However in only one

case are the estimates strongly inconsistent with the hypothesis that

y=0.

       The estimates of the intertemporal utility function derived fr®m the equations

using treasury bills and time deposits to prov asset returns are to be pre-

ferred on both economic and econometric grounds. The first order condition (14)

on which the estimation is based is only valid for assets which are freely

priced. The vast najority of consumption is done by persons who do not directly

hold any equity or long term bonds. Nor are they short in these assets. While

it is conceivable that some individuals are at an interior solution which calls

for exactly zero holdings of these assets, it is unlikely that this con-

sideration can account for the fact that most indivudals never buy or sell these

assets despite changing economic condition. If the assets used to proxy r is

not freely traded by all consumers, inconsistent estimates will result.

       The econometric difficulty with using long term bond yields or

stockmarket returns involves the problem of "overfitting" in the first stage of

two stage least squares. As Merton (1981) and many others have noted, it is

extremely difficult to demonstrate that there is any variation in the expected
                                      —37—




return on the market. The difficulty arises because of the markets extrern-

volatility. While instrumental variables will yield consistent estimates of the

model's parameters, they are unlikely to be unbiased because the first stage of

the estimation procedure is likely to find spurious variations in the ex—ante

real rate. Hall (1981) demonstrates this by showing that the fitted values of

the first stage of the estimation yield very implausible estimates of the ex—

ante rate of return. Because of their substantial volatility, a similar point

applies to the use of bond returns.

     Taken together, these results strongly suggest that the value of y is not a
large negative number. As the simulations in the preceding section illustrate,

this means that savings are very responsive to changes in real after tax

rates of return. Indeed it is precisely the fact that the growth rate of

consumption depends strongly on the expected real rate of return that drives

these results.

      It should be acknowledged that the overidentifying restrictions

implied by (15) frequently fail. Similar findings have been reported by

others including Mankiw (1981) and Hansen and Singleton (1981). This

does not seem to me to be a cause for concern. Before embarking on

estimation of the type reported here, one knows that the model is not

literally true. Therefore with enough data one can be certain of rejecting

the model at any desired level of significance. Learning that the model

fails tells at least as much about the quantity and quality of data

available as it does about the model.

      The important question is whether or not there is evidence that

consumers are liquidity constrained and so are unable to satisfy the first
                                         —38-




 order condition U4). Flavin (1981), Hall and Mishkin (1982) and Hayashi

 (1982) have all suggested that some consumers are liquidity constrained.

 This possibility can be examined by extending the model to allow for the

 possibility that a fraction of disposable labor income is consumed directly

 by liquidity constrained or rule of thumb consumers. In this case,

 equation (15) becomes:


                     C     —tYL           (1+ )
                                                  =   +
                   [ C
                           -
                               £YL        (1+)
                                     J



The parameter £ can then be estimated along with y and

      The results of estimating (16) are displayed in Table 6. They provide

little support for the hypothesis that liquidity constraints are important.

In every case, the hypothesis that £=O cannot be rejected. The

estimates of £ are as often negative as positive. There is no evidence

that supplementing the intertemporal optimization model with a simple

Keynesian consumption function improves its performance. Nor is there any

indication that the estimated value of y is affected.

      The results in this section provide very strong support for the

hypothesis that savings are responsive to real returns. Direct estimation

of utility function parameters suggests that the the elasticity of

substitution between present and future consumption is quite high. This

leads ineluctably to a high long run response of savings to rates of

return. Calculations of the type reported in Summers (1981) and Table 2

suggest an interest elasticity of savings greater than unity. Of course

these results came from a restrictive model of optimization by a repre-

sentative consumer. The next section takes a different approach by

examining in an atheoretic way the relation between wealth accumulation

and real interest rates.
                                                                                     Table 6

                                  Nonlinear 2SLS Estimates of Consumption Euler Equations                    Allowing   for Liquidity Constraints
 Consump—
    tion                                                   C72                                        CN72                                                CNS72
       \Meas—      per capita                                                    1                                                    1
                                          1                              DW                                             DW                          I
AS S               using the                                                                    I
                                                                               l+5                                                l+5
Return N           adult   pop.
                           a
  Treasury         bills                1.006  .080              .045   2.01    1.01          —1.55          —.185      1.76          1.02        —2.06       .059        l.)8
                                      ( .002) (.364)         (.403)            (.007)         (1.63)         (.264)               (.006)           (1.33)    (.208)
  Government bonds a                      1.007    .626       .643      1.83    1.02          -2.14          -.327      1.71      1.01            -.91           .008     1    73
                                      (.007)      (1.18)     (1.14)            (.012)         (2.85)         (.577)               (.011)           (2.24)    (.618)
  SOCkSa                               1.01 —4.10           —.088       2.13    1.003         —6.45           .069      2.33       1.04           —12.3       .060        2.
                                      (.015) (2.58)          (.605)            (.021)         (3.76)         (.216)               (.028)          (5.68)     (.239)

  Saving deposltsC                     1.01 —.032           —.117       1.75    1.02          —1.71          —1.36      1.89          1.02        —1.72       .019        1.
                                      (.002) (.423)          (.495)            (.008)         (1.62)         (3.63)               (.005)           (.949)    (.252)

  All assets



Cons ump—                                                  C72                                        CN72                                                CNS72
       tion
        eas—
                   per capita
                           ad-             1                             DW      1                                      DW             1
Asse"t' re         using                             I            2.                                               2.

                                          l+                                    l+5                                                   1-uS
Ret    urn'        justed pop.
                                              .013          —           1.60    1.02                         —                                               —
                 b                     1.01                     .871                          —1.78              .417   1.63       1.01             .101         .701             3
  Treasury bills
                                      (.002) (.324)          (1.70)            ( .008)        (1.71)         (.583)               (.002)          ( .240)    (1.01)

  Government bondsb                    1.001       .371     -10.2       1.87    1.02          -1.97          -.660      1.76       1.01            .484          .053     1

                                      (.009)      (1.38)    (292)              (.016)         (3.17)         (1.53)               (.010)          (1.10)     (2.52)
  Stocks       b                                              .609      2.52    1.04          —10.1          —.202      1.95      1.07            —5.04          .298     1       3
                                                             (.344)            (.029)         (4.66)         (.497)               (.030)          (3.22)     (.366)

  Saving depositsL                     1.01       —.321     —.149       1.76    1.02          —1.62          —.577      1.76      1.02            —.239      —.117
                                      (.003)      (.391)     (.513)            (.007)         (1.28)         (.971)               (.003)          (.291)     (.344)
  All assets


                                                                                                                                                                        1:4   -
                                                                                         a.    Sample period: 48        :4 —   81:4          b.   Simpie period:                  78:
 Note:         Estimates refer       to    the parameters of (17) in the text,
                                                                                         c.    Sample period: 55        :3 —   78:4
                                           —40—




IV. Wealth Accumulation Equations

     The approaches in the preceding two sections focused on effects of

the rate of return on consumption decisions. This section examines the

effect of changes in the rate of return of desired wealth holding. The

hypothesis being tested is that increases in the rate of return raise the

desirec level of sealth holding relative to labor income. This relationship

is an implication of all the models of savings behavior developed in

the first section of this paper; it is tested by estimating the simple

partial adjustment model:


                          A '1*
                         YLJ a+bR+u
                                t
                                                                              (17)




                        (-4)        = (-k-)       +
                                                      x((4_)*
                                                                —




     This   leads to the estimating equation:


                                    =a   + SRt + (1-A)              + u       (18)
                        (-4-)

The data and sample period are the same as those used in Section II.

Before turning to the results it is important to note that there are strong

reasons to expect the estimate of S        to   be biased downwards. The value of

Rt will be negatively correlated with the error term in (18) because

increases in the capital stock reduce the real rate of return and because

increases inR will be associated with downwards recapitalizations of

asset values. Also as argued above,R is likely to be measured with

substantial error.

     Estimates of (18) and some variants on it are reported in Table 7.
                                                                         Table   7


                                             REDUCED FORM WEALTH ADJUSTMENT EQUATIONS

                                                        = ri   +            +                      +
                                                                                 (i—))(--)              Vt
             INPEDT                         1950— 1978                                       1950   —   1964                             1965 — 1978
EQUATION                                                             —
_______________________                                              R2/p                    B           l—X         R2/p   _______—     B           —x
   1)             R1          2.41         .119     .504             .795         1.55     .090          .688        .886    3.25       .150         .328     .689
                              (.713)      (.035)   (.145)            .054        (.645)   (.035)        (.132)   -.171      (1.28)     (.065)       (.260)   -.081

   2)             R           4.10         .082     .177             .767         3.47     .093          .328        .870    2.39       .135         .487     .744
                      2
                              (1.30)      (.027)   (.262)            .654        (1.82)   (.050)        (.356)   -.074      (.843)     (.045)       (.973)   -.203

   3)                         2.88         .124     .417             .797         .181     .103          .642        .877    3.86       .156         .212     .743
                              (.881)      (.036)   (.177)            .255        (.912)   (.047)        (.184)       .081   (1.27)     (.053)       (.256)   —.067

   4)             R           4.41         .099        .119          .794        4.36      .118          .163        .876    3.08       .149         .353     .819
                              (1.09)      (.027)   (.220)            .713        (2.54)   (.068)        (.493)       .114   (.794)     (.036)       (.162)   -.217
___________________


                                                   =     +               + (1—A)
                                                               BR1
                                        (YLT2END                                     (YLTEND)1
             INDEPENDENT                    1950 — 1978                                      1950 — 1964                                 1965   —   1978
               VARIABLE                                 [                                                                     a                                    /
   1)             R            3.13        .155        .359         .759          2.59     .105          .478         757    3.42       .206         .291     .757
                      1
                                                                   -.027                                         -    285                                    -.   159
                              (.731)      (.036)   (.148)                        (.902)   (.042)        (.184)               (1.12)    (.068)       (.226)

   2)             R            4.22        .085     .158             .663         3.96     .076          .227        .650     2.66      .201         .424     .811
                      2
                              (1.40)      (.032)   (.281)            .584        (3.58)   (.079)        (.705)   -.006       (.703)    (.048)       (.145)    .06

   3)             R            3.41        .153        .314          .764         2.51     .101          .502        .726    3.93       .201         .198     .801.
                              (.801)      (.036)   (.161)            .037        (1.04)   (.048)        (.209)   -.200       (1.07)    (.053)       (.214)        ft2
   4)             R            4.63        .102        .081          .685         4.07     .078          .212        .638    3.41       .211         .281     .892
                              (1.22)      (.033)   (.246)            .647        (4.63)   (.100)        (.905)       .068    (.570)    (.032)       (.117)   -$5
Note:   the variables             are   defined in Table 3.
                          R1—R4
                                    —42—




The results uniformly suggest that increases in the long term rate of

return are associated with increases in the wealth labor income ratio —-

despite the biases noted in the previous paragraph. This conclusion is
robust to variations in the sample period and the way in which the real

rate of return is measured. They are also insensitive to the choice

between actual labor income and its trend value as a scaling variable.

     The estimates here imply that wealth accumulation is quite sensitive

to the rate of return. Increases of one percentage point in the real

after tax rate of return are estimated to increase the desired wealth—labor

income ratio by about .15 or 3 percent. Adjustment appears to be quite

rapid with mean lags on the order of two years. This suggests that savings

are likely to be very responsive for the short run to changes in the real

after tax return.

     The model here is quite crude in that it does not include many other

determinants of wealth—labor income ratio, such as demographic variables and

changing expectations of future income growth. It is possible that this leads

to biased estimates of the effects of changes in the after tax rate of

return, although there is no presumption as to the direction of the bias.

Proxies for other factors affecting savings were not included because of

the difficulty in estimating the effects of slowly changing variables, using

short time series.
                                       —43--




V.    Conclusions

      The theoretical and empirical results in this paper make a strong

prima fade case for the proposition that increases in the rate of return

are likely to bring forth significant increases in saving. Theoretical

analysis indicates that a variety of standard models tend to suggest that

the aggregate response to savings incentives is likely to be substantial.

It is argued that the existing empirical evidence sheds little light on

the question. Empirical analysis is then conducted using three alternative

approaches. All three suggest a significant response of savings to changes

in the rate of return.

     While the work in this paper suggests strong rate of return effects

on savings, it is too crude to provide a basis for estimating the effects

of savings incentives frequently considered by policymakers. A micro—

econometric approach recognizing the non—linearities introduced into

consumers' budget by tax incentive schemes such as IRAs, would be necessary

for this task. The techniques in Section III of this paper can easily be

adapted to the study of individual consumption behavior. Such research would

also shed light on the extent of heterogeneity among consumers and the

importance of liquidity constraints.
                                    —4 /   —




                                References


 Auerbach, A.J. and Kotlikoff, L., "An Examination of Empirical Tests
      of Social Security and Savings," NBER Working Paper 730, August
      1981.

 Barro, R., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
      Economy, Vol. 82, November—Deceither 1974, pp. 1095 — 1117.

Bernheim, B.D., "Post Retirement Wealth Decumulation," mimeo,   1982.
Bernheim, B.D., A. Shleifer and L.H. Summers, 'A Model of Manipulative
     Bequests," mimeo, 1982.

Blinder, A.S., "Temporary Tax Cuts and Consumer Spending," Journal of
     Political Economy, Vol. 89, February 1981, pp. 26—53.

Boskin, M.J., "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," Journal of
     Political Economy, Vol. 86, April 1978, Pt. 2, pp. S3—S27.

Chamley, C., "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation in a Growing
     Economy," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89, June 1981, pp.
     468—496.

Feldstein, M.S., "Social Security Benefits and the Accumulation
     of Preretirement Wealth," NBER Working Paper #477,
     May 1980.

Feldstein, M.S., "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate
     Capital Accumulation: A Correction and Update," NBER Working Paper
     #579, November 1980.

Flavin, M.A., "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations
     about Future Income," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89,
     October 1981, pp. 974—1009.

Hall, R., "Intertenaporal Substitution in Consumption," NBER Working
     Paper #720, July 1981.

Hall, R. and F. Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory
     Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households," Econometrica,
     Vol. 50, March 1982, Pp. 461—482.

Hansen, L. and Singleton, K., "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion,
     and the Interteinporal Behavior of Stock Market Returns," unpublished.

Hayashi, F., "Liquidity Constraints and the Consumption Function,"
     forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy, 1982.
                                    —45--




1-lowrey, E.P. and Hyuians, S.,, "The Measurement and Determination of
     Loanable Funds Saving," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     1978, 3, pp. 655—685.

Kotlikoff, L. and Spivak, A., "The Family as an Incomplete Annuities
     Market," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89, April 1981, pp. 372—391.
Kotlikoff, L. and Summers, L.H., "The Importance of Intergenerational
     Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 89, August 1981, pp. 706—732.

Lucas, R.E. Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in
     Karl Brunner and Allan H. Metzler, eds., The Phillips Curve and
     Labor Markets, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
     Vol 1, Ajuterdam, North Holland, 1976, pp. 19—46.

Mankiw, N.G., "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real Interest
     Rate," Economic Letters, 7, 1981, pp. 307—311.

Mankiw, G., j. Rotemberg, and L. H. Summers, "Intertemporal Substitution
     in Macroeconomics," NBER Working Paper #898, June 1982.

Merton, R.C., "On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market: An
     Exploratory Investigation," Journal of Financial Economics, 1980.

Mirer, T.W., "The Wealth—Age Relation Among the Aged," American Economic
     Review, Vol. 69, June 1979, pp. 435—443.

Sandmo, A., "The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions," Review of
     Economic Studies, Vol. 37, July 1970, pp. 353—360.

Stiglitz, J., "Notes on Estate Taxes, Redistribution, and the Concept
     of Balanced Growth Path Incidence," Journal of Political Economy,
     Vol. 86, part 2, April 1978, pp. S137—50.

Summers, L.H., "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth
     Model," American Economic Review, Vol. 71, September 1981, pp. 533—544.

Summers, L.H., "Inflation and the Valuation of Corporate Equities," NBER
     Working Paper #824, 1982.

Tobin, J., "Life Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth," in William Feliner and
     others, Ten Economic Studies in the Tradition of Irving Fisher,
     1967, John Wiley and Co., pp. 231—256.

Weber, W.E., "The Effect of Interest Rates on Aggregate Consumption,"
     American Economic Review, Vol. 60, September 1970, pp. 591—600.
                                  —4




Weber, W.E., "interest Rates, Inflation and Consumer Expenditures,"
     American Economic Review, Vol. 65, December 1975, pp. 843-858.

Wright, C., "Saving and the Rate of interest," in Harberger and Bailey,
     eds., The Taxation of Income from Capital, 1969, Washington: The
     Brookings Institution, pp. 275—300.
</ref_section>
