NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COSTOF_LIVING ADJUSTMENT CLAUSES
IN UNION CONTRACTS

Ronald G. Ehrenberg

Leif Danziger
Gee San

Working Paper No. 998

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

October 1982

Professor

of Economics and Labor Economics
at Cornell University
and Research Associate
at the National Bureau of
Economic Research;
Visiting Assistant Professor at
Cornell
University,
and Ph.D. candidate at
Cornell University, respectively. Our
research has been supported
by a grant to Ehrenberg from the
National Science Foundation.
Earlier versions of the
presented at workshops at the NEER, the University of paper were
Rochester,
and the University of
Pennsylvania, as well as at the Summer 1982
Econometric Society Meetings. Without implicating
them for what
remains, we are grateful to the
many
participants
at
those sessions
for their comments. The
research reported here is part of the
NBER' research program in
Labor Studies. Any
Opinions expressed
are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #998
October 1982

Cost—of—Living Adjustment Clauses
in Union Contracts

ABSTRACT

Our paper seeks to provide an explanation for why the prevalence of
COLA provisions and their characteristics vary widely across U.S. indus-

tries. We develop models of optimal risk sharing between a firm and
union that allows us to investigate the determinants of a number of charac-

teristics of onion contracts. These include the presence of wage indexa—
tion, the degree of wage indexation if it exists, the magnitude of deferred

noncontingent (on the price level) wage increases, the duration of labor
contracts and the trade—off between temporary layoffs and wage indexatlon.
Preliminary empirical tests of some of the implications of the model are
conducted using industry data on both the prevalence of COLA provisions and

layoff rates, and using contract level data on the characteristics of COLA

provisions and contract duration. One key finding is that the level of
unemployment insurance benefits appears to simultaneously influence the
level of layoffs and the extent of COLA coverage.

Ronald C. Ehrenberg
Leif Danziger
Gee San
New York State School of
Industrial and Labor Relations
Cornell University
P.O. Box 1000

Ithaca, NY 14853
607—256—3026

I. INTRODUCTION

Cost—of—living escalator clauses in union contracts tie, or index,
workers' wages to some index of prices, such as the Consumer Price Index.
The first major U.S. labor contract to contain such a provision was the
1948 contract between General Motors and the United Automobile Workers.'

The prevalence of such provisions spread duringthe-inflatjon that accompanied the Korean War, but interest in them waned as the economy experi-

enced stable prices during the early 1950s. As a result, by January 1955,
only 23 percent of those workers covered by major collective bargaining
agreements, agreements that covered 1,000 or more workers, were also
covered by contracts that included cost—of—living provisions (Table 1).
When prices rose during the late 1950s coverage expanded, as large national
Contracts in steel, aluminum and can, railroads, and electrical equipment

incorporated such provisions. The relative price stability of the early
1960s led to a reduction in coverage; indeed the cost—of—living provision

was dropped from the steel contract in 1962. Since 1966, however, high
rates of InflatIon have been associated with steady increases in coverage
and during the 1976—1981 period roughly 60 percent of workers covered by
major union contracts were also covered by cost—of—living provisions
(Table 1).

The growth in the prevalence of cost—of—living provisions (COLA's),
has led to a rekindling of both academic and public interest in the topic
and this interest has taken a number of forms. 2

First, attention has

been directed towards the role of COLA's In the inflationary process.
During the l97Os the wages of employees in heavily unionized industries
who were covered by COLA's grew significantly relative to the wages of

2

of
other employees in the economy.3 In addition, the growing prevalence
provisions has been shown to reduce the
multi—year contracts with COLA

the aggregate
responsiveness of the aggregate rate of wage inflation to

"buy" less
unemployment rate; increases in the rate of unemployment now
than they did in the 1960s.4 Because

of a reduction in wage inflation

of these facts COLA's are thought by

some to be •one pf the causes of the

in the United
persistent high rates of inflation we have experienced
with much less
States; this even though COLA's typically provide workers

than 100 percent protection against
Second, attention has been

inflation.5

directed to the role that COLA's may play

reason that
in reducing the level of strike activity in the economy. One
negotiation may not be settled prior to a strike
a collective bargaining
about future
union's forecasts and perceptions
is that an employer and a
substantially differ. The presence in a contract
rates of inflation may
the wage over the course of a contract to
of a COLA provision, which ties
union's price
future prices, reduces the need for the employer and the
reduce the likelihood of a strike
forecasts to coincide arid thus may

occurring.6 Since strike activity involves lost output,

the presence of

COLA's may well have a positive effect on aggregate output.
Third, numerous economists have
for macroeconomic stabilization

focused on the implications of COLA'S

policy.7 Among the questionS they ask

are "Can indexing schemes protect

the aggregate economy from real and/or

influence government
monetary shocks?", "How does the degree of indexing

stabilization policy?", and
the perspective of

"What is the optimal degree of

indexation, from

macro_stabilization or aggregate efficiency policy?".

outcomes,
Their objective is to show that in a world of uncertain future

3

where the establishment of contingent contracts that

cover every possible

state of th world is impossible, the presence of COLA's does lead to
welfare gains.

Finally, another stream of research has focused on the implications
of COLA's for microeconomic efficiency, in particular the sharing of risks

of uncertain outcomes by firms and workers. These papers are in the tra—
dition of the "implicit contract" literature and they focus on the optimal
degree of indexation from the perspective of a micro—level decision
making
8
unit.
In particular, they examine the effects of such variables as the
expected rate of inflation, uncertainty, employee risk aversion, the cost
of indexing and nonlabor income on the optimal degree of indexing.
Somewhat surprisingly, although the latter two streams of literature
have focused on the determination of the optimal degree of indexation at
the aggregate and micro levels, there have been only a few attempts to see
if these theories can be used to explain either the varying prevalence of
COLA's in the aggregate U.S. economy over time or why the prevalence of
COLA's and their characteristics varies across industries at a point in

time.9 Table 2 presents data for November of 1980 that indicate quite
clearly that the prevalence of COLA's in major collective bargaining agree-

ments varies widely across industries. Moreover, one can not attribute
these differences solely to differences in union strength; for example, a
strong national union exists in bituminous coal mining and strong local
unions exist in construction, but in neither industry are there many
contracts with COLA's.

Our paper seeks to provide an explanation for why the prevalence of

COLA

provisions

and their characteristics vary widely across U.S. industries.

4

do this in the context of models of opt imal risk sharing bLtwcn

We

firm

a

investigate the determinants of a
and a union that allow us to

contracts. In addition to focusing

number of characteristics of union

we focus on the determinants of deferred

on the degree of wage indexatiOfl,

nominal or real wage increases in

multiperiod contracts that are not con-

the duration
tingent on the realized price level, on the determinants of
of labor contracts, and, to integrate

our research more fully into the

the unemimplicit contract literature, on the influence of parameters of

ployment insurance (UI) system on

the extent of indexation and the level

of temporary layoffs.

which
We begin in the next section with a simple one—period model in
employment is predetermined

and indexatiOn is assumed to exist and ascer-

tain the factors that determine

the extent of indexatiOn. Section III

relaxes the assumption that indexed

contracts exist and focuses on the

forces that influence the probability of observing indexed contracts.
In Section IV we move to a two—period
mined employment and analyze how

model with indexation and predeter-

the extent of indexation varies across

and
periods what factors determine, the size. of deferred wage increases
extent of indexatiOfl. Section V addresses
how such increases vary with the
the issue of the choice of contract
section, Section VI, returns to a

duration. The final theoretical

one—period model with indexation, but

allows employment to be variable across

states_of_the—world. This section

influence both
provides an explanation of the forces that simultaneously
the extent of indexation and the level of temporary layoffs, highlighting
the role of parameters of the UI system.

The major message of the

theoretical sections is that even in rather

these
simple models, there are a large number of variables that influence

5

contract provisions. The following two sections attempt to test sonic of

the hypothuses that these models generated. Section VII uses pooled cross—
section time—series data at the two—digit manufacturing industry level
to ascertain the determinants of both the proportion of unionized workers

who are covered by COLA's and industry layoff rates. Section VIII uses
individual contract data to ascertain the determinants of COLA coverage,
the characteristics of COLA's when they exist, and the determinants of

the duration of contracts. Finally, Section IX summarizes what we have
learned from the paper and provides some concluding remarks.

II. A ONE-PERIOD MODEL WITH FIXED EMPLOYMENT

Consider first the following simple one—period model. A union and
an employer must decide on the provisions of a collective bargaining agree—
nient before the aggregate price level is known. At the time negotiations

take place, the aggregate price level p. is equal to unity, but during
the period that the contract will cover the price level is uncertain; the

expected value of p during the period is denoted by
ficient of variation by

>

0.

and its coef-

We also treat the firm's production function,

its demand curve, and the prices of its nonlabor inputs as being uncertain,
in a manner to be specified below.

In principle, an optimal risk sharing arrangement would make both the

wage and the employment level contingent on the realized outcomes of the
aggregate price level, the firm's productivity, its demand curve (as

proxied perhaps by its output price level), and the price of its nonlabor

inputs. For now, however, we assume that the employment level is pre-

determined and equal to the number of union members, N. Thus, there is

6

no temporary layoff unemployment in this model; in Section VI we relax this
assumption and allow the employment level to vary across states of the world.
In addition, we assume that when the employer and the union negotiate

a wage schedule w, this wage is contingent upon, or indexed only to the
aggregate price level

(1)

w =

w(p).

Virtually all contracts with COLA's in the United States are structured
in this manner and only rarely are wages explicitly tied to future productivity, industry price levels, or input price levels.10 Our failure to
observe more contracts which also tie wages to these variables, undoubtedly
reflects factors such as moral hazard (firms may have some control over
their output prices) and the costs of obtaining information and enforcing
such contracts (the difficulties involved in measuring productivity and

demand shifts, etc.))' Later, however, we will indicate how allowing
contracts to be contingent on these variables would alter the results.
Suppose that workers are risk averse and have cardinal utility functions

of the form

(2)

U =

U[(w/p)

+ M]

U' > 0

U" <

0.

Utility depends on the worker's real income in a period, with M being

the level of real nonwage labor income. For now we treat M as being
identically equal to zero; later we will indicate how the extent that it

varies with the price level effects the optimal degree of indexation of

7

wages. Note that when M is equal to zero, for a given wage schedule,
a worker's expected utility (E U(w/p)) depends only on the distribution
of the price level during the period.

The firm uses labor (L) and a composite variable input (X) to
produce output (Q) via the production function relationship

(3)

Q =

f(L,X,e1).

Here e1 is a random productivity shock whose realized value becomes
known only after the contract is signed. That is, productivity is uncer-

tain at the time of the negotiations. For simplicity, we assume that e1
is independent of both the distribution and realization of the aggregate
price level.

Demand for the firm's output is assumed to depend both on the price
charged by the firm and on the amount of unanticipated inflation, with the
latter defined by

The notion is that unanticipated inflation in the aggregate price level may
lead to increases In the demand for some firms' products and decreases in
the demand for others.'2
Specifically, we assume that the inverse demand function can be
written

(5)

q =

pg(Q,,e2)

8

where q is the price of the firm's product, e2 is a random demand
shock whose realization becomes known only after negotiations are concluded

and the inclusion of Q allows the firm to face a downward sloping
demand curve. The demand shock is assumed to be independent of the distribution of the aggregate price level and accordingly we assume that the real

price of its product (q/p) that the firm can charge for any specified
output level is independent of the expected inflation rate.

The price of the variable input X is also assumed to depend on the
amount of unanticipated inflation and is given by

(6)

where

z =

z is the price of the input and e3 is a random cost shock. As

with the other shocks, the realized value of e3 becomes known only after
the negotiations are completed and e3 is assumed to be independent of
the distribution of the aggregate price level (although it need not be

independent of e1 and e2). The firm is assumed, in (6), to be a price
taker in the market for the other input for expositional convenience only.

Since initially employment (L) is always equal to the number of
union members, the firm's profit

(7)

ii

(ir)

is given by

= pg[f(N,X,e1),P,e2)f(N,X,e1)

—

ph(,e3)X

— wN

The variable input X is chosen after the realized values of all of the
random variables are known and, conditional upon them, X

is always chosen

by the firm to maximize profits. Assuming an interior solution always
exists, this requires that

9

=

(8)

0

y p and e

where a =

(e1,e2,e3).

The firm's objective is to maximize its expected utility from real
profit

(9)

E [V(ir/p)]

p,e

where V is a cardinal utility function, V > 0,

and V'1 <

0(=0)

if

the firm is risk averse (risk neutral). Given a wage schedule w(p), the
firm's expected utility obviously depends upon the distributions of all of
the random variables in the model.

The goal of the union is to maximize the representative worker's

expected utility, while the goal of the firm is to maximize its expected
utility. It is beyond the scope of this paper to model the bargaining
process and show how it may lead to an agreed upon contract.13 The only
assumption that we make here is that the parties will reach a contract
that provides for efficient sharing of all risks stemming from unanticipated

inflation. Such contracts can be obtained by choosing a wage indexation
schedule that maximizes

(10)

=

E[U(w/p)]

+ X E [V(i/p)]
p,e

where A is a parameter that indicates the "share of the pie" that the

employer receives. Other things equal, higher values of A reflect
greater employer bargaining power.

10

It is useful to define the

dwR

(11)

p

a E

b -

E

-

the

elasticity

functions:

of the wage rate, ,

w.r.t.

the

aggregate price level, p,

the elasticity of the firm's demand curve, g,

g w.r.t. unanticipated inflation, ,

p h

the elasticity of other input prices, h, w.r.t.
unanticipated inflation, ,

_-

the (absolute value) of the elasticity of demand
w.r.t. the firm's real price, q/p,

g

E

following

1—ni the elasticity of total revenue w.r.t. the firm's
output, Q,

the elasticity of output w.r.t. the other input, X,
the elasticity of the firm's real value—added w.r. t.
the aggregate price level, p,

A

and

U"w the
S - =——Up

workers relative risk aversion.

In general each of these variables is a function and not a parameter.
In what follows when we talk about a change in any one of them we mean a
shift in the whole schedule.
The elasticity of the wage rate witli respect to the aggregate price

level, c, is a measure of the extent to which the wage rate is indexed
to the price level. It is straightforward to show (see Appendix A) that
maximization of (10) subject to (1) —

(9)

yields that the optimal degree

of indexation is given by

+ wN

EV"A

(12) =i_eSEV'
e

—

peEV"

That is, the optimal degree of wage indexation depends on both factors

-

exogenous

to the bargaining process (such as the

11

extent

of employer and

employee risk aversion) and on the outcome of the bargaining process
itself (such as the level of wages).

Note that if the firm is risk neutral

plete (c =

1).

(V't =

0)

indexation is com-

In this case, the real wage is independent of the aggre—

gate price level and the firm fully insulates workers against inflation

risks. Since collective bargaining agreements seldom call for
complete indexation, throughout the rest of the paper we assume that the
firm is risk ,averse.

It is apparent from (12) that the elasticity of the firm's real value

added with respect to the aggregate price level, A, is a key variable in

determining the extent of indexation. If A is greater (less) than zero,
so that increases in the aggregate price level increase'(decrease) the

firm's real value added, then the firm shares the rewards (costs) of inflation by providing workers with a more than (less than) complete indexation.
That is,

(13) c1

as AO

That is, indexation is not necessarily less than full; optimal risk—sharing

agreements may call for workers to be "overcompensated" for inflation. Of
course, if inflation is neutral In the sense that the firm's demand and
the price of nonlabor inputs are unaffected by unanticipated inflation
(a = b

= 0

for all e), then e = 1.

In this special case inflation

risk affects the firm only through its effect on real wages, and full

indexation elimintes all inflation risk for both workers and firm. The

12

firm is stil.l exposed to other risks (e), but since these are not
related to inflation they cannot be alleviated by indexation to the
aggregate price level)4
The first column in Table 3 summarizes the main comparative static
results that follow from equation (.12); how changes in various factors

influence the optimal degree of indexation. An increase in the elasticity
of the demand curve with respect to unanticipated inflation (a)

increases

the degree of indexation since the larger the increase in real value—added
that results from an unanticipated increase in prices, the larger the "pie"

that is available to share with workers. Conversely, the larger the
elasticity of other input prices with respect to unanticipated inflation

(b), the more disadvantageous is the unanticipated inflation to the firm
and therefore the smaller the degree of wage indexation that occurs.
The effect of the elasticity of the firm's demand curve with respect
to its real price ii,

depends upon the relationship of a and b. To see

this, consider first the special case where these two elasticities are

equal (a =

b).

ifl this case, unanticipated inflation causes identical

percentage changes in the real marginal revenue product of nonlabor inputs

(MRP) and in the inputs' real price. Since the input level, x, is always
chosen so that its real marginal revenue product equals its real price
(eq. (8)), there will be no adjustment in the amount of the input used and

hence in output. In terms of Figure la the firm will move
Consequently, the value of

i-i

from M to N.

does not affect the change in real value—

added in this case and c will be independent of n.

In contrast, if a is greater than b, a higher unanticipated inflation implies a higher percentage increase in MRP

than in z. In order

13

to maintain the equal ity between the
product and
higher.

its price

the

variable

amount of the input

input's marginal revenue
and hence

output must be

The magnitude of this effect will be larger the higher the

elasticity

of the marginal revenue product curve with respect to the input.

This is illustrated in Figure lb where we assume that a is greater than

b. The firm will move from M to 0 with a less elastic demand curve and

from M to P with a more elastic one. The latter case is associated with
a greater increase in real value—added and thus we should observe a higher

degree of indexation associated with it. Since,other things equal, higher
values of the elasticity of the firm's demand curve with respect to its
real price are associated with more elastic marginal revenue product curves
for the variable input, higher elasticities of the demand curve will lead

to higher values of wage indexation in this case.'5 In contrast, if a is
less than b, similar reasoning shows that increasing the elasticity of
the firm's demand curve with respect to its own price will reduce the
extent of indexation.

The key point here, then, is that the firm's elasticity of demand with
respect to its own real price (ri) does affect the optimal degree of wage index—
ation, but that the direction of the effect depends upon the relationship

of a and b, the elasticities of the firm's demand curve and its other
input prices with respect to unanticipated inflation. If a is greater

(less) than b, higher values of r lead to more (less) wage indexation.
Since a higher elasticity of output with respect to the variable input ()

is

also associated with a higher elasticity of the variable input's MRP

curve, analogous results follow with respect to this variable. That is,
increases in

are associated with increases (decreases) in the extent

of indexation if a is greater (less) than b.

14

Several other results are easier to explain. First, the more risk
averse woikers are, the greater is the value to them of smoothing varia-

tions in the real wage. Consequently, increased risk aversion (S) is

associated with values of c closer to unity. Note that if the optimal
degree of indexation is initially less (greater) than unity because A is
less (greater) than zero, increasing the extent of employee risk aversion
will increase (decrease) the extent of indexation.'6
Second, the optimal degree of indexation is independent of both the

expected level of inflation (5) and the uncertainty of inflation (s).

These results follow directly from the assumption that all 'real variables
are unaffected by the distribution of p, as opposed to its realized
value.

17

Finally, the optimal degree of indexation also depends on the residual
uncertainty in real value added; the uncertainty in real value added caused
by shocks to productivity, demand, and other input prices.

Unfortunately,

its effect on the optimal degree of indexation depends upon many parameters

in the model and how they change. If one further assumes, however, that
is the firm's relative

a, b, r, , A and R (where R = —(V"/V)(lT/p)

risk aversion) are constant, it can be shown (see Appendix A) that

(14)

where

' 0

as A(S — R)

-

0

the coefficient of variation of real value added is used as

a measure of the residual uncertainty in real value—added. If employee

relative risk aversion (S)

is greater than employer relative risk

aversion, this implies that increased residual uncertainty makes indexation
less perfect (further from unity).18

15

Before

conci uding this section, two

extensions

of the mode.I warrdnt

being briefly discussed. First, suppose that we relax the assumption that
employee's

the

level
of

nonlahor income, M, is always zero. Assuming that the

of nonlabor income is positive, its effect on the optimal degree

wage indexation dependsupon how it varies with the price level. If

the level of nonlabor income is fixed in nominal terms, then to stabilize
the sum of real wages and real nonlabor income will require a greater
degree of wage indexation than in the absence of the nonlabor income, assum-

ing that indexation is positive. In contrast, if the nonlabor income is fixed
in real terms (perfectly indexed), then any desired degree of real income stabi—
lization (not equal to perfect stabilization) can be achieved with now less

perfect wage indexation Cc further from unity).
Second, suppose we now allow wages to be indexed not only to the aggregate price level, but also to the shocks to the firm's productivity, demand

curve, and input prices. In this case, one can show that

+

+

=

(15)

[1

Si+RwN

[ai + a2

+ a3

where
a1 =

a2

—

1Cfe1/(1

ip) and

c ge2Rl — p3)

a3 = Jsch

1(1 —

and

B) and

=

(f/e1)(e1/f)

=

(2g/e2)(e2/g)

Cfe

Cge

=
Ch

(h/3c3)(e3Ih)

Observe that (15) suggests that if employers are risk neutral (R = 0)
then wages are tied only to the aggregate price level (in this case recall

that c = 1)

and not to the other forces. If firms are risk averse, in

16

theory wages should be tied to all of the other forces. However, small
values of the elasticity of the firm's total revenues with respect to

its output (),
inputs (s),

of

the elasticity of its output with respect to other

and of the elasticities of output, demand, and input prices

with respect to the random shocks will reduce the extent to which wages

are tied to the other forces. These factors, in addition to the ones we
have described above, may explain why wages are typically not indexed to
anything other than the aggregate price level.

III. THE DECISION TO INDEX

As Table 1 indicates, in recent years approximately 60 percent of
all unionized workers covered by major collective bargaining agreements

are also covered by COLA provisions. It would be coincidental if the
optimal degree of wage irtdexation implied by (12) was zero for 40 percent

of unionized employees. What factors are responsible then for such a
large fraction of workers having contracts that are not indexed at all?
The answer hinges on the possibility that there may be fixed real
costs per worker of negotiating or administrating indexation clauses that

must be borne either by the union or the employer. These costs may arise
from a number of factors. For example, if a contract is indexed, union
leaders may not receive "credit" from their members for the periodic

nominal wage increases that automatically arise due to inflation. As a
result, to maintain their political positions in the union, union leaders

may push during contract negotiations for additional periodic noncontingent
money wage increases; this may make it more difficult to reach a contract
settlement.

To take another example, in a world of heterogeneous workers of
differing skill levels, employers would like to have the flexibility to
alter relative wages in response to external shortages or surpluses of

workers in particular skill classes. COLA provisions, however, typically
are specified as a given percentage increase in wages for each percentage
increase in prices, or as a given absolute increase in wages for each
percentage point increase in prices.

The former scheme rigidly preserves

relative wage rates, while the latter causes skill differentials to be

compressed. In either case, the employer loses the ability to alter relative wages during the period covered by the contract and this reduces his
willingness to agree to COLA provisions.
Suppose that we can represent these fixed real costs per worker of

having an indexed contract by c., then the total cost of indexation is
c1N. Indexation of course yields benefits to both the employer and the
employees in terms of risk sharing. The monetary value of these benefits
to them is the total amount in real terms that both parties would be

willing to pay to have wages indexed. Appendix B shows that this real
amount is approximately equal to

1 22

(16)

=

where

(S —

NEV"/EV'),

w()/, = ()/, c

is evaluated at ,

S

is evaluated at

and V' and V't are evaluated at 9Thus, the sum of the net benefits
per employee to both parties from having an indexed contract is

(17)

B =

2c2(S

— NEV"/EV') —

18

observe the continUOUS variable B, one

While in general one cannot

can observe whether a

contract contains a COLA and it is reasonable to

postulate in empirical implementations that

(18)

B =

1

= o

if B v>O
otherwise

Here B equals 1, if a

contract has a COLA and is zero otherwise, and

other unobservable forces
v is a random variable that summarizes all
that may influence COLA coverage.

From (17) and (18) it is
influence the probabilitY

straightforward to see how various forces

of a COLA's existing and these

Table 3. First, note that a,

b, ri

thus their effect on the probability

are summarized in

influence B only through c,

and

of observing a COLA is the same as their

occurs and is posieffect on the degree of indexatiOn, given that indexation
workers are the greater
tive. Second, one can show that the more risk averse
them and thus the more likely one will observe an
the gain from indexatiOn to
inflation has no
contract.2° Third, while the expected rate of
indexed
workers are risk averse,
effect on the probability of indexation, given that
to them of indexa—
is the greater is the gain
the more uncertain inflation
indexation. Fourth, an
tion and thus the greater is the likelihood of
obviously reduces the
increase in the costs of having an indexed contract
Finally, if one additionally

probabilitY of having such a contract.2

assumes that a, b, r, 3, A, R and S are constants

and that the extent

risk aversion
of employer risk aversion just equals that of employee
(R =

S),

then an increase in residual

uncertaintY increases the proba-

bility of observing indexed contracts.22

'9

In the main then, the same variables that affect the degree of indcxa—
tion, if lit

as

occurs,

also influence the probability of indexation. However,

Table 3 indicates, in several cases the effect of a variable on the

former may be different than its effect on the latter, and one variable,
the coefficient of variation of expected inflation, influences only the
latter.

IV. A TWO—PERIOD MODEL, DEFERRED PAYMENTS, AND THE
RELATIONSHIP BEWTEEN CONTRACT LENGTH
AND COLA GENEROSITY

The models discussed in the previous two sections provide a number of
insights into the determinants of COLA provisions in union contracts.

They are not structured in a way, however, that enable us to address a
set of related issues. These include, what determines the length of collective bargaining agreements? How do COLA provisions vary with contract

duration? What determines the size of deferred wage increases that are
not contingent on the price level in multiperiod contracts? Is there a
trade—off between deferred increases and COLA provisions? To answer these
questions one must move to a multiperiod model and we do so in this and
the following section.

We consider for simplicity a two—period model in which neither firms

nor workers can borrow or lend. Let a subscript 1 (2) denote period
1 (2). A representative worker's utility is given by

(19)

U=

U1(w1/p1)

+ 1J2(w2/p2)

20

and the firm's utility by

(20)

V =

V1(1/p1)

+

V2(i2/p2)

where the within—period utility functions may differ to allow for discounting and other factors.

The production function in period i (for i equal to 1 or 2) can be written

(21)

Q. =

f.(L.,X.,e1.)

and this function may differ between periods to allow for productivity

growth. Finally, the inverse demand functions and the prices of nonlabor
inputs are assumed to be given by (22) and (23) respectively.

(22)

q1 =

p1g1(Q1,1,e21),

q2

(23)

z1 =

p1h1(1,e31)

z2 =

Note that this specification also both allows the demand function and input
price schedules to change between periods and the effects of unanticipated
inflation to persist over time, so that unanticipated inflation in period

1 may affect the demand curve and other input prices in period 2.23 While

the vector of error terms e1 =

(e11,e21,e31)

and e2 =

(e12,e72,e32)

are

21

assumed
are

not

to be independent of

the real ized

values of p1 and p2,

they

required to be independent of each other.

The wage that will prevail in the second

period

of the contract can

be written as

(24)

w2 =

w1y()

where w1 is the wage that prevails expost in period 1,

equal to

p2/p1 is the actual relative increase in the price level in the second

period, and y() is the multiplier that translates the wage in period
1 into the wage in period 2. We assume that the realization of

is

independent of the realization of p1 and that its expected value (the

expected inflation rate in period 2) is ,

the

same expected rate as in

period 1. It is straightforward to see that the deferred wage change, as

a percentage of the wage that prevails in period 1 is given by D minus
one where

(25)

D =

y(l).

When D Is greater than (less than) unity a deferred increase (decrease)
is called for in the contract.

As before, the firm will always choose the variable inputs in each
period to maximize the profits in that period and, assuming that an Interior
solution exists,

(26)

=

it2/X2

= 0

, .)

and

all contracts that optimally share inflation risks can be obtaintd

by choosing indexation schemes w1(p1) and v() to
U (—i) + E JJ2

= E

(27)

p1

1 p1

p1,p

+ ArE
p2

LPle1

V

1

maximize

+
p1

E-

V

(i?.)1

Prpe2 2 P2J

As in Section II, it is useful to define the following expressions
(remembering that in general each of these may vary and hence is not necessarily a parameter)

(28)

.

the elasticity of the wage rate in period i w.r.t. the
change in the price level in period i

a the elasticity of the firm's demand curve in period i
w.r.t. unanticipated inflation in that period

a* the elasticity of the firm's demand curve in period 2
wr.t. unanticipated inflation in period 1

b1 the elasticity of other input prices in period I w.r.t.
unanticipated inflation in that period
b* the elasticity of other input prices in period 2 w.r.t.
unanticipated inflation in period 1

A1 the elasticity of real value added in period i w.r.t.
a change in the price level in period I
A* the elasticity of real value added in period 2 w.r.t. a
change in the price level in period 1

Using derivations similar to those found in Appendix A, one can obtain
expressions for the optimal degree of indexation in each period

23
I.

E V A
(29)

=

1

+

C1 1

+ w1N
+
p

1

F

(m, + w yN)y
*
I

V.)A -—-.r—
P P
1

2

—4u
+Eu
1
p

U'
1

)
p

(E v'1

+ EUt -

p2P

(TT
2,

p1,e2 2 2
(30)

+

'

p,e2 2 p

w N

+

+wyN)w
1
1

p1 p

2

E U"

p1 2 2..

p1
p1
£

w1

IE

w1

2

w

V'—\+---Ep1,e2v"—
2 2

\p1,e, 2 p1)

p1

p1 2 p1

Note that we have restricted the way in which inflation in period 1

may affect the wage rate in period 2 by the specification of (24). Efficient
sharing of inflation risks would in general require the second period wage
to depend directly on inflation in p&riod 1, not only indirectly via the

latter's effect on wages in period 1. In the more general case the expres-

sions for c1, C2t and the elasticity of wages in period 2 with respect to
prices in period 1 would be similar to equation (12), the optimal degree

of indexation in the one—period model. The complexity of (29) and (30)
arises for two reasons. First, since unanticipated inflation in period 1
affects the real value added in both periods, the degree of indexation in

period 1 depends on both A1 and A*. Second, since thi elasticity of
wages in period 2 with respect to inflation in that period must (by (24))
be independent of the actual inflation rate in period 1, optimal risk
sharing requires that the elasticity of wages with respect to inflation
in each period depend upon the distribution of inflation in the other
period.

2

V" +
V" Y)
p,e2 2 ..2
p1 e1 1

2
While it is possible for one to analyze the determinants of wage
iridexation in each of the two periods in this general case, for our

purposes it is much more useful to make a set of further simplifying

assumptions. Suppose, first, that p1 and

are identically and

independently distributed, as are e and e2. Next, suppose that the
workers' and the firm's utility functions both exhibit equal constant

relative risk aversion (S) and can be written

(19a)

U =

U(w1/p1) + pU(w2/p2)

(20a)

V =

V(n1/p1)

and

+ pV(n2/p2)

where p(>O) is a discount factor common to both workers and firms.
Suppose, also, that the firm's production function can be written

as a Cobb—Douglas function

(21a) Q =

LX.t11e1
in

where t1 equals one in period 1 (t111) and t1. equals t1(>O)

period 2 (t1ft1). Larger values for t1 indicate higher expected rates
of productivity growth in this formulation.

Finally, suppose the inverse demand functions and the input price
functions are of constant—elasticity type and are given respectively by

(22a)

q1 = p1Q1

P1 e21

yaa

—1/nm
q2 = p2Q2
p1 p2t2e22

and

25

(23a)

z1 = p1p1e31

te
2fl '2332
Sb,.b

z

2

Here

y(S) is the degree of serial correlation in the effect of unantici-

pated Inflation on the demand function (input prices). If y(S) equals
zero, unanticipated inflation in period 1 has no effect on the demand

curve (input prices) in period 2. In contrast if y(5) equals unity then
unanticipated inflation in period 1 has the same effect on demand (input

prices) in period 2 as unanticipated inflation in period 2 does. The expected
growth between periods in real demand is given, in the absence of any

unanticipated inflation by t2 and the expected growth in input prices is

similarly given by t.
Solving equation (26) for the optimal input levels, X1 and X2, and
substituting these into the expressions for the realized profit levels,
one obtains

(31)

=

IT2 =

p1p1Cv1

p1

where A

—

w1N

A
2Ctv2 — w2N

(=A1A2) is the now constant elasticity of real
value added w.r.t. the increases in the aggregate
price level in the same period,

A* =

aybS*8

(=A) is the now constant elasticity of the real
value added in period 2 w.r.t. the increase in
the aggregate price level in the previous period,

(eje2ie3j8)l is the composite random multiplicative shock
to real value added in period i

26

t =

(4t2t3)""18

is the expected growth in reaL value added
when unanticipated inflation is zero in both
periods

and
C =

(1_)(NB)8)

is

Moreover, Appendix C shows that the magnitude of the deferred payment
is given by

D =

(32)

Finally,

substituting (31) and (32) into (29) an (3O) and making use of

the other specific assumptions we have made one can show that the formulas
for the optimal degree of indexatiori become

(33)

c 1 + ((A + *)/(1 + k))

24
f

c2al+A
where k a

pD1_SE(l
p

is the common, for workers and the firm, ratio

of the expected marginal utility in period 1 from an increase in the wage
in period 1 to the expected marginal utility in period 2 of an increase in
the wage in period 1, when the rate of inflation in period 1 equals its
expected value.

Equations (32) and (33) immediately highlight a number of points.
First, with the assumptions we have made, the formula for the optimal degree

of indexation in

the

second period i idntical to the formula for the

optimal degree of indexation in the one—period model

(see

footnote 22).

Second, the deferred increase D i proportioni1 to the expected growth

27

in real value added which the firm faces (t) when unanticipated inflation
is zero in both periods. While the expected rate of productivity growth

(t1) influences this variable, so does the expected growth in demand (c2)

and the expected growth in other input prices (t3). Third, unless the
elasticity of real value added with respect to the increase in the price

level in the same period (A) is zero, the expected inflation rate
influences the size of the deferred increase, with higher expected infla-

tion rates leading to lower (higher) deferred increases if A is greater

(less) than zero.25 Moreover, any parameter that influences A (a, b, r,
will have opposite effects on the size of the deferred increase and on the

degree of wage indexation in the second period. There is, then, a trade—off
between COLA provisions and deferred wage increases.

What about the extent of wage indexation in the first period of the

two—period contract? Is it larger or smaller than the extent of indexation

that would prevail in a one—period contract (1 + A)? With workers and
firms having the same relative risk aversion, perfect sharing of p1 —

in the first period would require that w1 and IT1

with respect to p1, and hence that

risks

have the same elasticity

c.. would equal 1 + A. On the

other hand, due to the serial correlation in the effect of unanticipated
inflation on demand and on input prices, unanticipated inflation in period
I also affects the wages and profit in period 2, and perfect sharing of
p1 —

risks

in the second period would require that w2 and 112 have the

same elasticity with respect to p1, and hence that the elasticity of w2

with respect to p1 would equal 1 + A*. However, since w2 may depend
on p1 only through w1, the elasticity of the wage with respect to p1
is constrained to be the same In the two periods, and unless A =
some Inefficiency In the sharing of p1 —

risks

is unavoidable.

28

is

Equation (33) shows that a weighed average of 1 + A and 1 +

chosen, where the weights when p1 equals

depend only on

k26

It is clear that the degree of indexation is larger in the first

period of the two—period contract than it is in the one—period contract
(recall the latter equals the degree of indexation in the second period

of the two—period contract) only if A is less than A*. The latter
requires that

(34)

Is

ay

— b6 > a

—

this likely to occur? While no general theoretical statements can

be made, we can consider two special cases. First, suppose that b equals
If

zero, so that unanticipated inflation does not influence input prices.

the degree of indexation in period 2 is less than complete (c2 <

1),

which

is typically the case, then A and hence a will be less than zero. In
this case, (34) will be satisfied as long as y < 1.

That is, the extent

of ndexaton will be greater during the first period of the two—period
model as long as the effect of unanticipated inflation on the firm's demand

curve depreciates overtime (y <

Second, suppose that b is not equal to zero but that the effect of
unanticipated inflation on the demand and input price curves depreciates

at the same rate (y = 5).

In this case, again as long as indexation is

less than complete, so that A and a —

bB

are both less than zero, it

follows that if y is less than unity the extent of indexation will again
be greater during the first period of the two—period contract.

29

These special cases suggest that a reasonable hypothesis to test
empirically is,

that

as long as the observed extent of indexation is less

than unity in the second period of a two—period contract, the extent
of indexation will be higher in the first period. Since the former equals
the extent of indexation in the one—period contract, on average the extent

of indexation will be higher in the two—period contract. Put more generally,
one might expect to observe contracts of longer durations having more

generous COLA provisions. Since the same factors that influence the
generosity of a COLA also influence the probability of COLA coverage (see
Section III), one should expect to observe the incidence of COLA's ircreas—

ing with contract duration. In fact, this occurs.28

V. THE OPTIMUM DURATION OF LABOR CONTRACTS

The last

section suggested that, other things equal, the extent of

indexation will be greater in a multiperiod contract than in a single

period contract. But, what determines the optimal duration of a collective
bargaining agreement? Clearly the parties to the agreement must consider
the benefits and costs of contracts of different lengths and it is to this

question that we now turn. For expository purposes we shall continue to
contrast one— and two—period contracts.

Consider first the benefit side. We have emphasized before that,
because inflation in the first period

(p1) can affect wages in the second

period (w2) only through its effect on wages in the first period

(w1),

inflation risks are generally not shared efficiently in the two—period

contrLct. Straightforward calculation shows that efficient sharing of
inflation risks in the two—period model would require that the optimal

30

degree of wage indexation would be equal in the two periods

(35)

c1 = £2

1+A

and that the base wage in period two would be the base wage in period one

multiplied by

(36)

Suppose that instead of the two—period contract, the union and the
firm negotiate a sequence of two one—period contracts that actually have

the properties specified in (35) and (36). That is, they actually agree
in each period to have the extent of indexation called for in (35) and
agree at the time they negotiate the second contract to have a deferred

increase called for by (36). Such a sequence of contracts might arise if
they consider each contract negotiation as an incident in a long—term relationship, if they are concerned with total expected utility rather than

expected utility for any single period, and i they seek to negotiate a
contract in period two which insures that all inflation risks are shared
efficiently, when considered as of the time of the first negotiation.

Such

a sequence of two one—period contracts would clearly be preferred to the
two—period contract.

The sequence of two one—period contracts has costs as well as benefits,

however. These costs are of two types. First, there are costs to the
employer and the union of conducting collective bargaining negotiations.
These are the explicit and implicit resource costs of the negotiations
process including, but not limited to, the time diverted from production,

31

contract administration, and planning activities. While lost output due

to strikes is an example of such costs, we emphasize that these costs may
be substantial even in the absence of a strike or threat of strike.

Multiperlod contracts obviously reduce the frequency with which these
costs are incurred.

Second, since the two oñe—perod contracts arenegotiated

sequentially,

there is invariably some uncertainty, as of period one, as to what the terms

of the second contract will be. Even if, on average, the outcomes in the
second contract correspond to (35) and (36), the uncertainty will generate

costs for the parties if they are risk averse. Multiperiod contracts reduce
this form of uncertainty.

The choice of contract duration obviously involves a weighting of the
loss from inefficient sharing of inflation risks if a multiperiod contract
is chosen with the loss from additional bargaining costs and the uncertainty
about the second period contract if two one—period contracts are chosen.
To see the implications of this point, let

Cb be the fixed real bargaining

costs of each round of contract negotiations. Suppose, for simplicity,
that the uncertainty in period one about the period two contract occurs
with respect to the base wage in period two and that this has an expected
value (as of period one) that is implied by equation (36) and a coefficient

of variation of b Then using the same techniques that are used in
Appendix B, one can show that the total real amount

that the workers

and the firm are jointly willing to pay in period i in order to have
one two—period contract rather than two one—period contracts is given for
each period by

32
—s—i

—

—

(37)

(A_A*)2k22

H1

(1 +

(1+k)

1N —s
E1
e1

— —s—i

(38)

Elt]•

(A_A*)2c2

2

H2 tb —

-}(1

+

(1+k)

E1
Cl

—s

+

Cb

While in general one cannot observe the continuous variables H1 and H2,
one can observe whether a contract is two periods long and it is reasonable
to postulate in empirical implementations that

H

(39)

1

if H1 + H2 + u > 0

0 otherwise

Here H equals one if a two—period contract is chosen and zero if two one—
period contracts are chosen, and u is a random variable that summarizes
all other unobservable forces that may influence contract duration.
it immediately follows from (37) to (39) that

(40) (a) H/cb > 0
(b)

''b > 0

(c) H/ =

0

(d) H/y 0 as a(A — A*)

0

(e) H/S 0 as b(A — A*)

0

An increase in the cost of concluding collective bargaining negotiations

(cb) or in the uncertainty in the first period associated with the sequence
of two one—period contracts due to not knowing what the wage bargain will be

33

in the second period

both obviously increase the probability of

observing a two—period contract. Since the expected inflation rate ()

does not affect the expected utility from contracts of either duration, it
does not affect the choice of contract length.

The results for serial correlation in the effects of unanticipated

inflation on demand (y) and other input prices (6) can be explained as

follows. We know that if A* equals A, a two—period contract distributes
inflation risk efficiently and dominates two one—period contracts. Given A,

the more A* deviates from A, in absolute value, the less efficient is
the distribution of inflation risks in the two—period contract, and consequently, the smaller would be the net benefits from having such a contract.
Since

(41)

A*/y 0 as a

0

0 as b

0

and

the results for the effects of serial correlation, in unanticipated inflation

on demand and other inputs prices fo1lo directly.
The remaining parameters unfortunately influence the length of contract

in complicated ways. For example, the uncertainty about the aggregate

inflation rate (&)

affects

H both directly and through its effect on k.

Without still further restrictive assumptions, unambiguous implications

about the signs of the effects of ,S (risk aversion), a and b (demand
and input price elasticities with respect to unanticipated inflation),
(the firm's own

price

elasticity of demand), and $

(the

elasticity of

output w.r.t. non—labor input) cannot be drawn. All of these parameters do
affect, however, the optimum duration of contracts.

34

VI. TEMPORARY LAYOFFS AND COLA COVERAGE

In this final theoretical section, we return to a one—period model
with indexation of wages, but allow employment to be variable across

states—of—the—world. This section stresses that temporary layoffs and
the extent of indexation are simultaneously determined and highlights the
role that several parameters of the unemployment inêurance (UI) system
29
play.

Suppose that the nominal unemployment benefits that a laid off worker

receives in a period is Wb• The benefit level may be specified as a
function of the individual's previous earnings; what is important for our

purposes is that wb is not contingent on the realized price level during
the period.

To capture the essence of the imperfectly experience rated aspect of
the UI system, we assume that the nominal unemployment insurance tax that
—

the firm must pay in the period is

L) + T. Here L is the number

of union members actually employed during a period which implies, given the

union membership level N, that N — L

workers are on temporary layoff.

If r is less than one, experience rating is said to be imperfect and the
firm does not bear the full marginal cost of the UI benefits that its laid

off workers receive. If r is equal to one, the system is perfectly
experience rated. Finally, if the firm is paying either the minimum or
maximum tax rate, so that laying off an additional worker will not increase

its UI tax rate, then r will equal zero (and T will be positive)°
In the presence of UI taxes, the firm's profit function becomes

(42)

r =

pg[f(L,X),1f(L,X)

—

ph()X

— wL —

b(N

—

L)

— T

35

where for simplicity we have assumed that there is no residual uncertainty

In the demand (e1), production function

(e2) or inthe price of non—

labor inputs (e3).
Suppose that the utility of a laid off worker is
Z' >

0,

Z(wb/p), with

and that the utility of an employed worker continues to be U(w/p);

Z can be sufficiently general to allow for nonwork time to yield positive
utility. If each worker has the same, probability of being laid off
(1 —

CL/N)),

a worker's expected utility, given the price level, wage rate

and employment level is (L/N)U(w/p) + (1 —

(L/N))Z(wb/p).

As before, we do not attempt to fully describe the bargaining process

by which a firm and a union reach a contract settlement. Contracts which
provide for efficient sharing of inflation risks, however, will require
that both the wage rate and the employment level will depend upon the price
level and all such contracts can be found by choosing wage and employment

schedules w(p) and L(p) to maximize

(43)

c.

[(L/N)U(w/p)

+ (1

—

(L/N))Z(w/p)]

+ XEV(,r,'p) +

iiE(N — L)

where larger values of A again indicate that the firm wins a greater share
of the "pie", p will be equal to (greater than) zero if we are in a layoff
(full employment) state of the world, and we have assumed a unique solution
exists.

It is straightforward to show that the optimum wage and employment

schedules must satisfy (for L(p) <

(44)

—

[U(w/p)

—

N

and all p)

Z(wb/p)]/U'(w/p)

=

,f)

That is, the worker's loss of utility from being laid off, divided by
the marginal utility from raising the wage rate when employed should be
set equal to the marginal real profit that the firm obtains from increasing employment.

Now if we hold the wage schedule, w(p), constant, as well as p, N,

and Wb partially differentiating (44) with respect to r implies
that

31

(45)

L/3r =

— (wb/p)/[2(/p)IaL2

> 0

that the term in

As the second order conditions for a maximum require
brackets be negative, it immediately follows

(46)

aL/sr >

that

0.

Because increased marginal experience rating

increases the cost of a layoff

to the firm, increases In r lead to higher employments and hence to fewer
layoffs being associated with each realization of the price level.

Similarly, holding w, p, N, and r constant and partially differentiating (44) with respect to Wb one obtains that

(47)

L/wb =

- (r

—

(Z'/U'))[2(/p)/L2

Since the bracketed term is negative, the effect of increasing UI

benefits on the employment level is the same sign as

r —

(Z'/U').

With

imperfect experience rating r is less than one and if the marginal
utility of income does not depend on whether the individual is working,

-

37

then risk aversion on the part of workers and UI benefits that are less

than the wage in each state—of—the—world

V/U' is greater than 1.

(48)

(wb <

w(p))

giarantee that

32

As a result,

3L/wb < 0

Higher UI benefit levels should lead to lower employment and hence more
layoffs.

To obtain implications about the effect of changing UI system parameters on the optimal degree of wage indexation, we contrast a realization of the price level for which there are layoffs (L(p) <

N),

with a

realization in which all union members are employed. Assuming that the
wage, but not necessarily the employment level, in the unemployment state
is unchanged when the UI parameters are changed, we investigate what
happens to the wage in the full employment state.

Let a subscript L indicate the unemployment state and an N the
full—employment state. It is straightforward to show that the maximization
of (43) requires that

(49)

UIu =

V/v

Differentiating with respect to r for a constant

WL allowing L and

WN to change, one obtains that

(50)

3wN/r

=

NL

(V"/V')(p /p )
—

(U/U)

[IT

-•E — wb(N

—

L)J

38

L/r is greater than zero

Since /L is less than zero and

(from (45)) it follows that increased experience
wage in the full—employment state.

rating leads to a higher

Thus, as long as the price level in

the full—employment state is less than (greater than) the price level in
the underemployment state, increases in experience rating increase
(decrease) the extent of wage indexation.

(51)

as

0

h/ar

That is

Which of these situations is more likely to

prevail? One can show

real
that the answer hinges on the value of A, the firm's elasticity of
value added with respect to the aggregate price

as AO

(52)

From (13) we know that if A < 0
(c <

1).

(53)

level. Other things equal,

indexation will be less than complete

Hence,

as c

0

ac/sr

1

As long as indexation is less than complete, an increase in experience
indexatiofl.33
rating will lead to an increase in the extent of wage

By similar reasoning, holding r

constant and allowing L and wN

to vary, one obtains

—

(54)

=

(vL/vL)(PN/PL)

/U) + (VN/V) L

3L
-——

— r(N —

1
L)j

39

Substituting (47) into (54) and noting that the product of al.1 of the

terms

outside the brackets in (54) is negative, it follows that

r
(55)

=

sign of

b

sign

of fr(N —

L) +

(r

—

,

2

-j-) - ( ()

The two terms within the brackets have opposite signs and hence one
cannot unambiguously determine the sign of

wN/Bwb without further assump-

tions. Note, however, that the smaller the extent of experience rating

(the smaller r), the more the second (negative) term dominates. Indeed,
if r equals zero, we unambiguously know that increasing UI benefits will
lead to a lower wage in the full—employment state. Following the logic
used before, one can conclude in this case that

(56)

C/Wb > 0

as

1

That is, if experience rating is zero (r = 0)

an increase in UI

benefits will decrease (increase) the extent of wage indexation, as long

as indexation is less than complete. More generally, if experience rating
is positive, but sufficiently small to leave (55) negative, the above

result will continue to hold. While we have not formally modelled the
forces that influence the decision to have an indexed contract in the
variable employment model, Section III suggests that most parameters that
influence the degree of indexation, if it exists, also influence the proba-

bility of observing an indexed contract in a similar manner. Thus, it also
seems likely that increased UI benefits will reduce the probability of
observing an indexed contract.

40

VII. EMPIRICAL ANALYSES: TWO—DIGIT
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY DATA
series of theoretical models
The preceeding sections have presented a
that sought to ascertain the variables that influence the existence and

generosity of COLA provisions in union contracts, the magnitude of deferred
of
wage increases that are not contin5ent on the price level, the duration

labor contracts, and the level of temporary layoffs. The variables that
the models suggest may play important roles are
one can see they are a varied lot encompassing

summarized in Table 4; as

characteristics of the firm's

demand curve, employee and employer risk aversion,
bargaining relationship, macroeconomic

characteristics of the

variables, and parameters of the

unemployment insurance system.

This section and the following one provide
few of the hypotheses generated by these

initial empirical tests of a

models. In this section we use

data at the two—digit manufacturing industry

level of aggregation and focus on

the determinants of both the fraction of the workers covered by major collective bargaining agreements that are

a-iso covered by a COLA provision and

the industry layoff rate. In the next section, we use data at the individual
collective bargaining agreement level and analyze

the determinants of COLA

of
coverage, characteristics of COLA's (when they exist), and the duration

collective bargaining agreements.

Our approach in this section is to estimate equations of the form

13
(57)

and

Fit

jEj.OjiVjjt

4

+ k1k1ak1t +

3

+ m1'm1'it + u11

41

it

(58)

2..

4

13

3

.),, v.k1 +k2 •a
2
i ml tn2 it
kit +LUI.+Dd.
j1 j2 jit

+u

Lit

Here Fit represents the fraction of the workers that are covered by
major collective bargaining agreements in industry i in year t that
are also covered by COLA provisions and

represents the three—year

average layoff rate in industry i in year

t.3 The v's are variables

that reflect personal characteristics of unionized workers in the industry

and the industry bargaining structure, the a's are estimates of several
demand related variables (elasticity of industry demand w.r.t. unanticipated

inflation (a1), serial correlation in the effect of unanticipated infla-

tion on industry demand (a2 = i) the expected growth of demand (a3 = t),
and pure random variations in demand and productivity (a4 = 4fl, UI
represents the average net unemployment insurance replacement rate in the
industry ——

the average weekly UI benefits divided by the average weekly

net (after tax) loss of income incurred by laid—off unemployed workers in

the industry, the d are industry and year dummy variables, the u random

ih1

plete

-

rrl

1

T
, , —,
4, -

fl

t-crc tr, hø cf 4ini t . A .-A inrr

description of the data, including its sources, is found in Appendix

D and a complete list of the explanatory variables is found in Table 5.

Several comments should be made about this specification. First, we
use data pooled across three years. Since many labor contracts are long—
term in nature, we do not use adjacent years' data which would allow for
the possibility of the same contract influencing the industry "outcome"

variables in more than one year. Rather, we use data for 1975, 1978 and 1981.
Second, it is difficult to make unambiguous predictions about the

expected signs of many of the v variables because they do not always

42

correspond neatly in a one—to—one fashion with the list of variables in

Table 4. For example, bargaining structure variables such as the number

of unions in the industry (v2), the percentage of unionized workers (v3)
and the percentage of workers covered by multiemployer agreements (v5) may
all be proxies for the costs of having indexed contracts (c.),

the costs

of concluding collective bargaining agreements (cb), and the share of the
"pie" that the employer wins (X). Similarly, while personal characteristics

of unionized workers such as mean age (v7), percent married (v5), percent

white (v9), percent male (v10), percent residing in SMSA's (v11) mean
schooling (v12), and mean number of children (v13) may reflect employee
relative risk aversion (S), some may also influence the costs of conducting negotiations, the costs of indexed contracts, and indeed employer and

As such, we will

employee demands for long—term employment relationships.

not spend alot of time below discussing these variables' coefficients.

Third, the estimated parameters of the demand function were obtained

as follows. Using quarterly data on the consumer price index (Pr) from

1970 to 1978, an expected consumer price index series (E(P(t)) was
35

generated using a fourth—order autoregressive model.

For each two—

digit manufacturing industry, equations of the form

(59)

log(S/P) = h11 + h12log(P/E(P)) +

(60)

log(S/P) =

h13T

+

u1

and

h21

+

h22log(P/E(P))

+ h24T +

+ h23log(S...1/P_1)

43

were then estimated using quarterly data from 1971 to 1978, where S.. is

the value of shipments in industry i in year t, T is a time—trend
term that is incremented quarterly and the u are random error terms.
When equation (59) is used, which assumes that there is no serial correla-

tion in the effects of unanticipated inflation, a1, a3 and a4 are estimated respectively by h12, 'l3 and

Similirly,

when equation (60)

Is used, which allows for serial correlation in the effects of unanticipated

inflation on demand, one can show that a1, a2, a3 and a4 are given
respectively by h22, h23, h241(1 —

h23),

and aZ2.36

Fourth, a key explanatory variable is the average unemployment insurance

net replacement rate (UI); the average weekly UI benefits divided by the
average weekly net (after tax) loss of income by laid—off unemployed workers

in the industry. These data are obtained from a large scale microsimulation
model

of

the unemployment insurance system built by the Urban Institute,

and are based on data from the Survey of Income and Education.37

Finally. dummy variables that indicate the year the data are from and
whether the industry Is in durable manufacturing are also included In the

model. The former are meant to control for variations in expected inflation
and in the coefficient of variation of expected inflation over time. The
latter is another proxy for negotiations costs, the elasticity of the firms'
demand curve w.r.t. its own price and the costs of indexed contracts.

Estimates of variants of equations (57) and (58) are found in Tables 5,

6 and 7. The dependent variables in these tables are the fraction of the
workers under major collective bargaining agreements who are covered by a
COLA, the fraction of such agreements that contain COLA's, and the three—.

year average of the Industry layoff rate, respectively. Quite strikingly
a number of key implications of the models are confirmed.

44

For example, as suggested in Section VI, higher UI replacement
rates in an industry are associated with a lower probability of observing
an indexed contract (Tables 5 and 6) and a higher level of industry layoffs

(Table 7). These results support the notion that cost of living indexation
and the level of temporary layoffs are simultaneously determined.
To take another example, an increase in the .elas.ticity of the demand

curve w.r.t. unanticipated inflation (a1) does appear to be associated
with an increase in the probability of observing an indexed contract

(Tables 5 and 6), as suggested in Section III. Furthermore, the effect of
an increase in the serial correlation of unanticipated inflation on the
probability of observing an indexed contract can be shown, from equation

(33), to be the same sign as the elasticity of the demand curve w.r.t.

unanticipated inflation. If Indexation is less than complete (c <

1),

which is what one typically observes, ceteris paribus this elasticity will
tend to be less than zero (from (31), which implies that an increase in the
serial correlation parameter should decrease the probability of observing
an indexed contract. In fact (Tables. 5 and 6), this is what we do observe.

An increase in residual uncertainty does appear to reduce the probability of observing indexed contracts (Tables 5 and 6); this result is
consistent with the theoretical result that degree of indexation declines

with increased residual uncertainty when the optimal degree of indexation
is less than unity and employee relative risk aversion is greater than
employer relative risk aversion (see equation (14)).38 Wliere statistically
significant, increased residual uncertainty also increases the industry

layoff rate (Table 7); a result consistent with one's a priori expectations.

45

Also,

industry

an increase in the expected growth of demand

does

reduce the

layoff rate (Table 7), as might be expected and, where significant,

appears to increase the probability of observing indexed contracts (Tables 5

and 6). One can show, from (33), that the effect of an increase in the
expected growth of demand is of the same sign as (A* —

it is likely that A* > A,

A)(1

—

S).

Since

this result is consistent with employees'

relative risk aversion (S) being less than unity.39
Numerous associations between the other explanatory variables, COLA

coverage and the layoff rate are also found. High quit rates, which suggest
less permanent attachment of workers and firms, are associated with less

COLA

coverage

and higher layoff rates. With respect to the bargaining

structure variables, an increase in the number of unions in an industry,
which reduces the bargaining power of each union, reduces COLA coverage,

while an increase in the proportion of workers covered by unions increases

it. The latter also is associated with higher layoff rates; a result consistent with the evidence presented by James Medoff (1979). Finally,
increased coverage by xnultiemployer contracts, which tends to reduce wage

competition among firms in an industry also leads to a greater probability
of observing COLA's.

Where statistically significant, the greater the percentage of family
income attributable to the wage earnings of the union member, the greater

the probability of observing COLA coverage. In terms of the discussion in
Section II, this suggests that other forms of family income tend to be
fixed in real rather than nominal terms.

Finally, increases in the mean age of union members and their mean
education level, and decreases in the percentages of them who are married,

46

white, or reside in an SMSA, all are (where significant) associated with

increased COLA coverage. The result for whites may reflect their greater
access to capital markets and thus less need for COLA's to stabilize consump-

tion over time. Similarly individuals residing in SMSA's may face more
stable alternative earnings opportunities than individuals residing in
smaller labor markets, again reducing the former's need for COLA coverage.
Finally, higher levels of schooling may reflect higher levels of specific

human capital and increased desire by firms and workers for long—term

employment relations. This would lead to both increased COLA coverage and
lower layoffs; the latter result is observed in Table 7.
In sum, while the results presented in this section can not be described as being totally unambiguous, they do generate some support for the
relevance.of the models that we developed in earlier sections.

VIII. EMPIRICAL ANALYSES:
INDIVIDUAL CONTRACT DATA

This section provides further empirical tests of our models using
data on COLA coverage, on the characteristics of COLA's when they exist,
and on the duration of contracts, for individual manufacturing collective
bargaining agreements covering more than 1,000 workers that were on file

with the Bureau of Labor Statistics in 1981. The data on the characteristics
of COLA's are of interest because contrary to popular impression, COLA provisions vary widely across union contracts., on a number of dimensions. For

example, they vary in the frequency of review. Some contracts call for
quarterly reviews and adjustments of wages, some for semi—annual reviews,

and still others for annual ones.4° Some allow for a COLA increase in the

47

initial year of the contract, while others do not. Other things equal,
the earlier the first cost—of—living adjustment and the more frequent the

reviews, the greater the "yield" of the COLA. That is, the more complete
indexation will be.

To take another example,. COLA provisions also vary in their generosity

per review. Some specify minimum price increases before any cost—of—living
wage increase is granted. Others specify maximum cost—of—living adjustments,

or "caps". Still others specify bands of price increases (e.g., 5 to 7
percent) for which no COLA wage increases will be granted. Clearly, such
provisions affect the yield of a COLA.
Increases are typically specified as a one—cent increase in wages for

each fractional point increase in the consumer price index. Among 102
41
major union contracts in 1979, this fraction varied between .3 and .6.

Larger fractions obviously represent less generous COLA's. The generosity
of a COLA provision also depends upon the level of earnings of the covered

employees. Since COLA's typically are specified in absolute terms (so many
cents/hour), the higher the earnings of employees, other things equal, the
less generous a COLA will be.

42

When seeking to ascertain the generosity of a COLA provision, there

are a number of strategies one might follow. First, one might estimate the
eante degree of indexation by the expost degree of indexation; the elas—

ticity

of

wages with respect to inflation that actually occurred. This is

the approach followed by Hendricks and Kahn (1981).
Its weakness is that given the complex way COLA's are formulated,
this number will typically depend nonlinearly on both the actual level of

inflation and the various COLA provisions. Since the elasticity of wages

48

with respect to inflation typically varies with the level of inflation,
it is unclear whether one should attempt to suniinarize the provisions of a

COLA by this single number. Furthermore, such a number at best would be
an average expost elasticity; it would tell us nothing about the marginal

effect of inflation on wages. Indeed, it is not difficult to think of
circumstances in which contract A shows a greater COLA increase than
contract B, given the actual inflation rate that occurred, but where the
marginal COLA increase for Increments of Inflation would be larger in B

than in A because of a cap on the COLA increase in A. It is unclear in
such a case which contract one would want to argue has the more generous
COLA provision.

A second approach is to argue that it is dlfficult to disentangle
COLA increases and the portion of deferred noncontingent wage increases
that are Implicitly based on expectations of inflation.

Indeed, if

intracontract real wage changes are generally small, one might treat them
as being zero and argue that the sum of the percentage deferred wage
increases and the COLA increases that occurred expost, divided by the
expost inflation rate, is a good measure of the exante elasticity of wages
with respect to prices.

The theoretical models we presented In Sections IV and V suggest that
such an approach may be incorrect; it is possible to model both the determi-

nants of COLA increases and of deferred increases. Moreover, a simple
numerical example illustrates the empirical difficulties inherent in such

an approach. Consider two contracts. Suppose that the first calls for a
five percent deferred increase and no COLA increase, while the second calls
for no deferred increase, but a one percent COLA increase for each one

49

percent increase in prices. If the expost increase in prices was five
percent, the two would yield equal percentage increases in wages and, if
the exante increase in prices was also five percent, the two would also

yield equal expected wage increases. However, the former would provide
workers with no protection against unanticipated inflation, while the

latter would provide them with complete protection. Since we, and Card,
have argued that a major motivation for COLA's is their risk sharing provisions, in particular the sharing of risks due to unanticipated inflation,
it seems strange to argue that the two contracts offer equal COLA protection.43
A third approach, followed by David Card (1982), is to argue that

because of the interdependence between deferred and COLA increases, it makes

little sense to focus on the overall expost change in wages. Rather, Card
measures the exante elasticity by the marginal elasticity of the wage escalator; the cents per point increase in the CPI that the escalator yields
(while active) divided by the real contractual wage at the start of the

contract. The weakness of this approach, of course, is that it ignores the
presence of CAPS, nonlinearities, etc. For example, two contracts may initially
offer the same COLA payment per point incxease in the CPI, but if one has a
CAP on the maximum size of the COLA payment and the other does not, one would

not want to argue that both offer equal COLA protection. The weakness of
his measure then lies in the restriction twhile active".

The discussion above suggests that it may be inappropriate, indeed
nearly impossible, to summarize all of the information about the generosity

of a contract's COLA provisions in a single number. Hence, the strategy
we follow in this section is to use information on a whole vector of contract
provisions and to estimate a set of eleven equations of the form

50

(61)

Here

Z = F(X) + u

I =

1,2,...11

is a dichotomous variable that takes on the value of unity

if there is a COLA provision and zero otherwise, Z2 is a polytomous
variable for contracts with COLA's that takes the value of one if the
frequence of COLA review after the first year is monthly, two if it is

quarterly, three if it is semi—annually, and four if it is annually, Z3
is a dichotomous variable that is unity if there is a COLA review in the
first year and zero otherwise, and

and Z5 are variables that, for

contracts with COLA's, show the number of cents that workers would receive
for each one—point increase in the CPI and an estimate of the percentage
point increase in wages the workers would receive for each percentage

point increase in the CPI. For contracts with COLA's, Z6 is the natural
logarithm of the number of months until the first COLA review, while Z7
is the logarithm of the contract duration (in months) for all contracts.

Again for contracts with COLA's, Z8 and Z9 are dichotomous variables
that capture the presence of guaranteed mInimum COLA increases and caps, or

maximum permissable COLA increases, respectively. Finally, Z10 and Z11
are variants of Z4 and Z5 that assign the value of zero to contracts
in which COLA's do not exist. The latter two measures combine information
on both the existence of a COLA provision and its generosity.

Each of these variables provides information on either the existence

of a COLA, its generosity, or the duration of the underlying contract. A
stringent test of our models then, is to look at the coefficients of a given
explanatory variable across equations and to see if a consistent pattern of

results is present. That is, does it appear that a given variable Is

51

influencing each of the

outcomes

in

a way that

is consistent with the under-

lying theoretical models?4
The explanatory variables (the X's) in this specification are similar
to those used in the previous section and are meant to capture the

same forces described there. With the exception of the number of employees
covered by the contract, another proxy for the cost of concluding collective
bargaining negotiations, all are specified at the two— or three—digit

industry level and merged in from other sources. Three variables not
used in the previous section, but included here, are the eight firm concentration ratio, the import/sales ratio in an industry, and wages as a share

of shipments in the industry. The former two are meant to capture competitive
pressures that the firm faces; increased product market competition;

might lead to a reduced willingness to grant COLA's. The latter is a proxy
for the share of labor in total costs. Also included, since the starting
dates of the various contracts span a three—year period, are direct
measures of the expected rate of inflation as of the contract date and
the coefficient of variation of forecasters' expected inflation rates.

These are obtained from the Livingston survey forecasts.'5

The effect of unanticipated inflation on industry demand, the magnitude
of the general trend in industry demand and productivity, and the magnitude
of residual uncertainty are obtained from within three— or four—digit

industry regressions of the form

(62)

los(PPIj/P) =

+ a log(P/E(P)) +

+

c

where PPI is the producer price index for industry j in period t, P
is the consumer price index in period t, E(P) is the expected consumer

52

price index (which is generated as before), and T is a time trend term.46
These equations are estimated using quarterly data for the 1973—1978 period.47
Because of the small number of observations involved, it proved impossible
to also estimate the parameter that reflected the serial correlation in the
effects of unanticipated inflation on demand.

Table 8 presents estimates of each of the eleven equations. Depending
upon the sample (all contracts or only those with COLA's) and the form of

the dependent variables used, the estimation method is either probit (Zi,
13, Z8, Z9), ordered probit (Z2), ordinary least squares (Z4, Z5, Z6, Z7),

or Tobit (Z1O, Zil). A list of explanatory variables appears in the table,
while a more complete description of the data appears in Appendix D.

The results in this table can best be described as mixed. For
example, an increase in the elasticity of the demand curve with respect
to unanticipated inflation (Xli), where significant, is associated with
more frequent COLA reviews (Z2) and larger COLA increases (110), as sug-

gested in Section II. Increased residual uncertainty, however, is also
associated with more frequent COLA reviews (12), shorter duration until
the first review (Z6), and larger COLA increases (Z5); Section II suggests
that these results should obtain only if the optimal elasticity of wages

with respect to prices is greater than one——a result rarely observed in

these data. To take another example, where significant, higher UI replacement rates are associated with larger COLA increases; this contrasts both
with our theoretical expectations and the estimates of the effects of UI on
the probability of COLA coverage observed in the previous section.48
Some variables perform in a more consistent manner, either across

equations or with respect to our hypotheses. For example, increases In
the import/sales ratio (X7) are associated with decreases in both the

53

probability of COLA coverage (Zi) and the size of COLA increases (Z1O, Zil).
Similarly, increases in wages as a share of shipments (X4) are associated with
decreases in the probability of coverage (Zi) and the size of COLA increases

(Z5, Z1O, Zil). As long as the effect of unanticipated inflation on demand
is larger than its effect on other input prices, these latter results are

consistent with the theoretical prediction summarized in Table 3. Finally,
as in the macro results reported in the last section, an increase in the
share of total family income due to the wages of the union members (X25) is
associated with an increase in the COLA payment.

The results for other variables, however, are more ambiguous. For
example, increased unionization in an industry (X5), is associated with
either lower (Z4) or higher (Z1O) COLA payments, depending upon the esti-

mation method used. Similarly, some demographic variables, such as age
(X16), marital status (X17), and SMSA status (X20) affect the probability
of COLA coverage in this micro data set in exactly the opposite direction
that they did in the macro results reported in the previous section.

Table 8 also reports results for a contract duration equation. Contract
length (Z7) is positively associated with the extent of unionization (X5),
durable goods industries (X8), and the trend in productivity and demand

(X12). It is negatively associated with industry concentration (X3) and

the import/sales ratio (X7). Finally, several of the demographic characteristics variables appear to influence it; percent white (XiS) and percent
in SMSA (X20) positively and mean age (X16), percent male (X19), and percent

craftsmen (X22) negatively. While many of these results are in accord with
our prior expectations (from Section V), some are not. For example, one
might have expected situations in which skilled workers were involved (high
values for X22) to be ones in which both firms and workers pushed for long—

term contracts. Apparently, however, this does not occur.

54

In sum, the results of this section at best cin be described as mixed.
They are sufficiently ambiguous that they cannot be said to. provide strong

support for the validity of our theoretical models. A possible explanation
for the ambiguity may lie in our method of testing. It may be unreasonable
to expect that one can estimate the effect of an explanatory variable on
ten dimensions of a COLA provision and hope to observe a consistent pattern

of coefficients across equations. After all, the theoretical models provide
hypotheses about the elasticity of wages with respect to prices, not about

timing of reviews, minimum increase, caps, etc. While we believe our
criticisms of the approaches of previous investigators are valid, our
approach in this section obviously has its own problems.49

IX. CONCLUDING REMARKS

This paper has presented a series of theoretical models that sought
to ascertain the determinants of COLA provisions in union contracts, the
generosity of these provisions when they exist, the magnitude of deferred
wage increases that are not contingent on the price level, the duration of

labor contracts and the level of temporary layoffs. The factors that we
highlighted were a varied lot and encompassed characteristics of the firm's
demand curve (including how it responds to unanticipated inflation),
employee and employer risk aversion, characteristics of the bargaining
relationship (including the costs of concluding negotiations), macroeconomic
variables, and parameters of the unemployment insurance system.

Two initial empirical tests of the hypotheses generated by the models

were provided. The first test used data at the two—digit manufacturing
industry level of aggregation and focused on the determinants of the fraction

of workers covered by COLA provisions and on the industry layoff rate. This

55

analysis, which made use of pooled cross—section time—series data, appeared

to confirm a number of key implications of the models. In particular,
higher UI replacement rates were associated both with lower probabilities
of observing indexed contracts and higher levels of layoffs in an industry.
The second test used data at the individual collective bargaining agreement
level and focused on the determinants of COLA coverage, the characteristics
of COLA agreements when they exist, and the duration of labor contracts.
Unfortunately, the results here were much more mixed and did not provide
strong support for the models.

In spite of the mixed nature of these empirical results, we believe
that this paper has demonstrated the usefulness of analyzing the determinants of these union contract provisions in the context of risk—sharing

models. Numerous extensions suggest themselves. At the empirical level,
it is clear that better measures of the "exante degree of indexation" must

be devised. Neither the single parameter measures used by Card (1981) and
Hendricks and Kahn (1982) that are based on exante marginal elasticities
over an initial range and expost wage increases respectively, nor the

multiple (10) parameter measures used by us seems to be appropriate. Using
a single parameter measure based on the COLA increase that would have
resulted if the expected price increase at the time of the negotiations

actually occurred, seems qually inappropriate for reasons we discussed
in Section VIII. At the very least, what is required is a two—parameter
measure that contains information on both the expected COLA wage increase and
the marginal change in the wage increase that would result from unanticipated
inflation.

56

We have also only begun to test the implications of the models. One
productive line of testing would focus on the trade—off between COLA.

increases and deferred noncontingent wage increases that was discussed
in Section IV and see if the models proved useful in explaining such splits.
Much more work also needs to be done on the determinants of contract duration and on the effects of UI parameters (both replacement rates and
experience rating) on the COLA—layoff trade—off.

At the theoretical level, an important unresolved issue is why COLA

provisions typically take the form of "X cents per one point increase in
the CPI" rather than "X percent increase in wages for each percentage

increase in the CPI"? As is well known, the former type scheme will tend
to compress wage differentials within a firm, while the latter will keep

them constant? What is needed here are models of union decision—making
processes that highlight how heterogeneity of union members and different
voting schemes will, lead to different types of contract provisions. Ultimately, such theoretical modelling would lead to empirical research on the
determinants of the type of COLA provision adopted.

Similarly, the existence of minimum price level increases that are

required before COLA coverage starts in some contracts, and caps or maximum
increases in others, suggests that risk—sharing agreements often exist only

over a subset of possible states of the world. It may be useful to try to
model the conditions that lead such restrictions to occur and then to
empirically test the usefulness of such models.

57

Table 1
Coverage of Cost—of--Living Escalator
Provisions in Major Union Contractsa

Annual Percent
Change in the
Consumer Price
Index in the b
Previous Year

Date

Number of Workers
Covered by Major
Union Contracts
(millions)

Number Covered by
Cost—of—Living
Provisions
(millions)

1/55

7.5

1.7 .

23

—.5

1/57

7.8

3.5

45

2.9

1/58

8.0

4.0

50

3.0

1/59

8.0

4.0

50

1.8

1/60

8.1

4.0

49

1.5

1/61

8.1

2.7

33

1.5

1/62

8.0

2.5

31

1.7

1/63

7.8

1.9

24

1.2

1/64

7.8

2.0

26

1.6

1/65

7.9

2.0

25

1.2

1/66

10.0

2.0

20

1.9

1/67

10.6

2.2

21

3.4

1/68

10.6

2.5

24

3.0

1/69

10.8

2.7

25

4.7

1/70

10.8

2.8

26

6.1

1/71

10.6

3.0

28

5.5

1/72

10.4

4.3

41

3.4

1/73

10.5

4.1

39

3.4

1/74

10.3

4.0

39

8.8

1/75

10.2

5.1

50

12.2

11/75

10.2

5.9

58

11/76

10.0

6.0

61

4.8

11/77

9.7

5.8

60

6.8

11/78

9.6

5.6

58

9.0

11/79

9.4

5.5

59

13.3

11/80

9.3

5.3

57

12.4

10/81

9.0

5.1

- 56

8.9

Percent Covered by
Cost—of—Living
Provisions

-

.

58

Table 1 (continued)

Source: H.M. Douty, Cost—of—Living Escalator Clauses and Inflation (Council on
Wage and Price Stability, August 1975), Table 1 (for data through
January 1975).
Monthly Labor Review, January issues for 1976—1982 (for data from
November 1975 on). 1982 Economic Report of the President (Washington,
D.C., 1981), Table B55 (consumer price index).

aContracts covering 1,000 or more workers in private indutry. Prior to 1966
the construction, service, finance, and real estate industries were excluded.
bp1 changes are measured from December to December for all years. Hence, the
1/55 figure covers the 12/53—12/54 period, the 1/75 figure covers the 12/73—
12/74 period. The 11/75 figure covers the 12/74—12/75 period, etc.

59

Table 2
Prevalence of Cost—of—Living Adjustment (COLA) Clauses
in Major Collective Bargaining Agreements,
November 1980

SIC
Code/Industry

All Contracts
Workers
Number of
Covered
Contracts
(000's)

Total

Percent

Workers Covered
by COLA's

Contracts
With COLA's

9,333

1,989

57.0

38.8

56

14

79.5

78.6

2

1

100.0

100.0

10

Metal Mining

11

Anthracite Mining

12

BitumInous Coal Mining

160

1

0.0

0.0

15

Building Construction,
General Contractors

685

170

7.2

5.3

Construction Other
than Building Const.

471

118

14.5

9.3

Construction—Special
Trade Contractors

432

201

11.7

10.4

20

Food & Kindred Prods.

313

99

31.6

34.3

21

Tobacco Manufacturing

28

8

88.0

75.0

22

Textile Mill Prods.

46

19

6.5

10.5

23

Apparel and Other
Finished Products

486

55

32.2

18.2

16
17

24

Lumber and Wood Prods.

66

15

4.2

13.3

25

Furniture & Fixtures

28

17

35.9

4L2

26

Paper & Allied Prods.

98

66

3.8

3.0

27

Printing & Publishing

63

33

34.7

24.2

28

Chemicals & Allied
Products

83

44

27.4

27.3

29

Petroleum & Related

37

19

0.0

0.0

30

Rubber & Misc. Prods.

83

15

81.5

66.7

31

Leather

38

16

0.0

0.0

32

Stone, Clay, Glass and
Concrete Products

91

36

73.2

63.9

33

Primary Metals

476

118

94.6

87.3

34

Fabricated Metals

116

59

78.5

71.2

35

Machinery, Except
Electrical

289

93

93.4

88.2

Electrical Mach.

448

103

90.9

77.7

36

60

Table 2 (continued)

SIC
Code/Industry

All Contracts
Workers
Number of
Covered
Contracts
(000's)

Percent

Workers Covered
by COLA's

Contracts
With COLA's

107

94.3

81.3

49.

16

57.3

43.8

23

13

15.9

15.4

432

18

100.0

100.0

16

4

93.3

75.0

Motor Freight Trans.

476

20

98.3

85.0

44

Water Transportation

95

19

37.5

36.8

45

Trans. by Air

176

43

78.6

62.8

48

Communications

734

42

90.2

61.9

49

Electric, Gas &
Sanitary Services

224

77

14.2

15.6

Wholesale Trade—
Durables

44

26

27.5

30.8

Wholesale Trade—
Nondurables

17

4

13.2

25.0

Retail Trade—
General Merchandise

85

23

34.2

26.1

532

105

62.7

48.6

11.

8.2

9.1

8

5

0,0

0.0

37

Trans. Equip.

38

Instruments and
Related Prods.

39

Misc. Manufacturing

40

Railroad Trans.

41

Local & Urban Transit

42

50
51
53
54

Food Stores

55

Automotive Dealers
& Service Stations

56

1,209

Apparel & Accessory
Stores

18

58

Eating & Drinking Places

80

25

0.0

0.0

59

Misc. Retail Stores

18

7

43.4

42.9

60—65 Finance, Insurance,
Real estate

126

21

36.5

42.9

70—89 Services

376

83

5.4

12.0

Source: Douglas LeRoy, "Scheduled Wage Increases and Cost—of—Living Provisions in
1981," Monthly Labor Review, January 1981.

61

Table 3
Summary of Main Results:
One—Period Fixed Employment Model

Probability of

Degree of
Indexat ion

Increase in Parameter
elasticity of demand curve w.r.t.
unanticipated inflation (a)

Indexat ion

(c)

(B)

+

+

elasticity

of other input prices w.r.t.
unanticipated inflation (b)

elasticity of firm demand w.r.t. its

b

as a — b

input ()

as a b

as a b

employee risk aversion CS)

as A

real price (ri)

0 as a —

elasticity of output w.r.t. other

0

+

0

0

expected inflation ()

0

+

costs of indexation (c1)

**

expected inflation ()
coefficient of variation in

pure random variation in demand,
productivity and other input

prices

—
as A(S—R) ; 0*

*

See the text for the specific assumptions necessary to obtain these results.

**

The effect will depend on the distribution of the cost between workers
and firm as well as on many parameters of the model.

62

Table 4

Variables That Influence COLA Provisions, Deferred Increases,
Contract Duration, or Temporary Layoffs

Symbol

Variable

a

elasticity of demand curve w.r.t. unanticipated inflation

b

elasticity of non—labor input prices w.r.t. unanticipated inflation
elasticity of firm's demand w.r.t. its real price

8

elasticity of output w.r.t. nonlabor inputs

S

employee relative risk aversion

R

employer relative risk aversion

p

expected aggregate inflation rate
coefficient of variation in expected inflation

c.

costs of having indexed contracts
coefficient of variation of the pure random variation in demand,
productivity and other input prices.

N

nonlabor income (family income other than the employee's
labor income)

y

serial correlation in the effect of unanticipated inflation on
the demand curve

serial correlation in the effect of unanticipated inflation on
other
t

Cb

input prices

growth in real valued added when unanticipated
inflation is zero

expected

cost of each round of collective bargaining negotiations

coefficient of variation of the uncertainty about the size of non—
contingent wage increases in future short—term contracts
r

extent of experience rating in the UI system
level of UI benefits

A

share of the "pie" that the employer wins

63
Table

S

Detcrminnnts of Fraction of Workers Covered by a COLA.
By 2—Digit M.inufacturing: 1975, 1978, 1981
(absolute value of t—statistic)5

(5)

(6)

(7)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

vi

—.117. (2.9)

—.054 (1.8)

—.056 (1.5)

—.039 (1.2)

.008 (0.1)

.014 (0.3)

.142 (1.6)

v2

—.008 (1.5)

—.002 (0.4)

—.017 (3.3)

—.007 (1.4)

—.012 (2.2)

—.007 (1.6)

—.009 (1.1)

v3

.087 (1.7)

.040 (0.9)

.268 (4.7)

.141 (2.7)

.222 (3.6)

.133 (2.5

.144 (1.8)

v4

—.001 (0.1)

—.008 (1.1)

—.007 (0.8)

—.011 (1.5)

—.011 (1.2)

—.011 (1.5)

—.012 (1.3)

vS

.559 (1.5)

.769 (2.9)

.440 (1.4)

.696 (2.6)

.220 (0.7)

.540 (1.8)

.263 (0.6)

v6

4.315 (2.9)

5.123 (4.3)

.422 (0.3)

2.795 (2.0)

—. 192 (0.1)

1.980 (1.2)

.290 (0.1)

v7

.048 (1.8)

.114 (4.5)

.031 (1.3)

.098 (3.9)

.054 (2.0)

.100 (4.0)

.089 (2.4)

vS

—6.357 (3.5)

—4.325 (3.1)

—6.127 (4.2)

—5.010 (3.7)

—3.789 (1.8)

—3.524 (1.9)

—1.255 (0.5)

v9

—1.983 (1.1)

—6.597 (3.1)

1.255 (0.7)

—4.914 (2.3)

1.522 (1.0)

—3.432 (1.4)

—2.162 (0.7)

vlO

—.933 (1.7)

—.146 (0.4)

.152 (0.3)

.524 (1.2)

.653 (1.1)

vii

.185 (0.1)

.688 (0.7)

—4.176 (3.2)

—2.172 (1.6)

v12

.329 (1.0)

.360 (1.2)

.759 (2.6)

vl3

1.187 (1.2)

1.091 (1.2)

.078 (2.6)

.044 (1.6)

*4

(1.5)

1.072 (1.9)

—3.053 (2.1)

—1.634 (1.1)

—1.365 (0.7)

.732 (2.3)

.390 (1.0)

.442 (1.1)

.193 (0.4)

—2.061 (2.0)

—1.084 (1.0)

—1.481 (1.3)

.685 (0.6)

.607 (0.4)

.065 (2.6)

.056 (2.2)

.031 (1.0)

.003 (1.0)

.000 (0.0)

—.664 (1.9)

—.834 (2.0)

—.606 (1.7)

—.995 (3.0)

*2

.685

27.120 (1.5)

1.006 (0.7)

33.506 (2.2)

1.891 (1.3)

10.794 (0.5)

1.752 (1.2)

1.111 (0.6)

—59.172 (2.2)

—5.914 (0.2)

—75.091 (3.3)

—25.556 (1.0)

—43.323 (1.4)

—7.547 (0.2)

1.144 (0.0)

—1.754 (1.6)

—1.226 (1.2)

—2.637 (1.8)

UI
Dl

.731 (4.8)

.413 (2.8)

.724 (4.9)

.431 (3.0)

.435 (2.5)

D2

.066 (1.1)

.091 (1.9)

.099 (1.6)

.112 (2.2)

—.063 (1.0)

D3

.093 (1.4)

.085 (1.6)

.138 (2.0)

.127 (2.0)

.869

.908

.945

60

60

40

LU
k2

.771

.872

.870

.904

60

60

60

60

•

64
Table 5 (continued)

where vi

3—year average of the quit rate

v2

number of unions in the industry

v3

percentage of unionired workers in the industry

v4

3—year average of the profit rate

vS

percentage of workers

v6

percentage of income due to wage earnings of the union member

v7

mean age of union members

v8

percentage of union members who are tharried

v9

percentage of union members who are white

vl0

percentage of union members who are male

vil

percentage of union members residing in SMSA'a

v12

mean schooling level of union members

v13

mean number of children in married union members' familiea

Dl

1—durable goods industry, 0-not

D2

11981. 0—not

D3

1—1978, 0—not

UI

average UI net replacement rate — average weekly UI benefits/average weekly net (after tax)
loss of income by laid—off unemployed workers in the industry

LU

lagged (3 years) dependent variable

covered

by multietnployer agreements in the industry

estimate of elasticity of industry demand w.r.t. unanticipated inflation
estimate of serial correlation in the effect of unanticipated inflation on industry demand

*3
$4

a

estimate of expected growth in demand
estimate of pure random variation in demand, productivity, and other input prices
See Appendix U for a description of data sources.

65

Table 6

Detertoants of the Fractiur of Cuntracts that Contain COLA',,
By 2—Digit Manuf.icturlng Industries: 1975. 1978. 1981
(absolute value of t—statistic)

(5)

(7)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

l

—.104 (3.0)

—.052 (1.9)

—.041 (1.3)

—.031 (1.2)

.022 (0.5)

.006 (0.1)

.116 (2.1)

v2

—.007 (1.6)

—.001 (0.2)

—.016 (3.8)

—.007 (1.8)

—.012 (2.5)

—.007 (1.9)

—.010 (2.2)

v3

.064 (1.5)

.012 (0.3)

.231 (5.0)

1129 (3.0)

.188 (3.8)

.123 (2.9)

.168 (3.5)

v4

.002 (0.2)

.005 (0.8)

—.004 (0.5)

—.008 (1.3)

—.008 (1.0

—.008 (1.4)

—.004 (0.7)

v5

.337 (1.0)

.617 (2.6)

.207 (0.8)

.507 (2.3)

—.001 (0.0)

.396 (1.7)

—.012 (0.1)

v6

4.048 (3.2)

4.982 (4.6)

.478 (0.4)

2.283 (2.0)

—.106 (0.1)

1.697 (1.3)

—.102 (0.1)

v7

.038 (1.7)

.104 (4.6)

.023 (1.2)

.085 (4.2)

.045 (2.1)

.086 (4.3)

.049 (1.9)

v8

—5.813 (3.8)

—4.740 (3.8)

—5.573 (4.7)

—5.432 (5.1)

—3.354 (2.0)

—4.363 (3.0)

—2.051 (1.3)

'9

—1.308 (0.9)

—6.130 (3.3)

1.754 (1.3)

—4.063 (2.4)

—2.007 (1.6)

—2.996 (1.5)

—1.392 (0.7)

vlO

—1.068 (2.3)

—.314 (0.9)

—.084 (0.2)

.043 (1.3)

.392 (0.8)

.547 (1.5)

.593 (1.7)

vii

.034 (0.3)

.468 (0.5)

—3.603 (3.5)

—2.756 (2.5)

—2.538 (2.2)

—2.368 (2.0)

—2.169 (1.9)

v12

.258 (0.9)

.392 (1.5)

.631 (2.7)

.798 (3.3)

.281 (1.0)

.590 (1.9)

.421 (1.3)

v13

1.319 (1.5)

1.018 (1.3)

—1.594 (1.9)

—1.425 (1.5)

—1.044 (1.2)

—1.137 (1.2)

—1.158 (1.3)

.068 (2.7)

.053 (2.2)

.056 (2.8)

.066 (3.2)

.024 (1.0)

.047 (1.7)

.019 (0.7)

—.272 (1.0)

—.486 (1.9)

a

—.230 (0.9)

—.656 (2.2)

*2

(6)

*3

21.984 (1.4)

1.915 (1.4)

28.046 (2.3)

2.862 (2.4)

6.492 (0.4)

2.763 (2.3)

1.744 (1.5)

*4

51.388 (2.2)

—8.182 (0.3)

—66.145 (3.6)

—30.104 (1.4)

—35.998 (1.5)

—17.134 (0.7)

—12.428 (0.4)

—1.664 (1.9)

—.883 (1.0)

—1.632 (1.8)

.659 (5.6)

.480 (4.1)

.420 (3.6)

Dl

.665.(5.5)

.467 (4.0)

D2

.079 (1.7)

.101

(2.6)

.111

(2.3)

.116 (2.8)

D3

.117 (5.1)

.105

(2.4)

.161 (2.9)

.136 (2.6)

—.087

LD
k2

n

.790

.878

.886

.929

.896

.924

.972

60

60

60

60

60

60

40

See Table 5 for variable definitions.

(2.2)

66
Table 7
Determinant. of the industry Layoff Rate (3—Year Average),
By 2—Digit Manufacturing Industry: 1975, 1978, 1981
(absolute value of ,t—statietic)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6.3)

.006 (7.5)

.004 (4.9)

.004 (5.7)

.003 (2.2)

.001 (0.8)

.000 (0.0)

(0.6)

—.000 (0.9)

.000 (1.5)

.000 (0.9)

.000 (0.6)

.000 (1.4)

.000 (1.6)

.004 (3.1)

.005 (4.2)

.003 (2.6)

.002 (1.8)

.004 (3.0)

.003 (2.5)

.003 (1.9)

—.001 (0.4)

.000 (0.1)

—.000 (1.6)

—.000 (1.2)

—.000 (1.2)

—.000 (1.3)

—.000 (1.2)

—.024 (2.8)

.021 (2.8)

—.015 (2.1)

(1.0)

—.011 (1.3)

.004 (0.6)

.011 (1.1)

v6

—.028 (0.8)

—.025 (0.7)

—.030 (0.9)

.026 (0.7)

—.017 (0.5)

.086 (2.4)

.127 (2.4)

vl

—.000 (0.5)

—.001 (1.4)

—.000 (0.3)

—.000 (0.1)

—.001 (1.0)

—.000 (0.4)

.000 (0.4)

v8

—.002 (0.0)

.022 (0.5)

—.016 (0.5)

—.014 (0.4)

—.066 (1.4)

—.122 (2.9)

—.197 (3.0)

v9

.215 (5.2)

.268 (4.7)

.189 (5.0)

.171 (3.1)

.184 (4.9)

.065 (1.1)

.043 (0.5)

vlO

—.021 (1.7)

—.038 (3.4)

—.014 (1.2)

—.037 (3.3)

—.025 (1.8)

—.049 (4.8)

—.063 (4.0)

vU

.042 (1.5)

.057 (2.0)

.023 (0.8)

.074 (2.0)

—.000 (0.0)

.035 (1.0)

.031 (0.7)

v12

—.025 (3.2)

—.031 (3.6)

—.020 (3.0)

—.026 (3.1)

—.012 (1.4)

—.005 (0.6)

—.002 (0.1)

v13

.064 (2.7)

.083 (3.3)

.046 (1.9)

.091 (3.0)

.033 (1.3)

.062 (2.3)

.074 (2.1)

—.001 (1.9)

—.002 (2.4)

—.001 (2.1)

—.001 (1.8)

—.000 (0.6)

.001 (0.9)

.001 (1.2)

—.020 (2.5)

—.018 (1.8)

vt

.006

v2

.000

vS
v4

vS

a

—.029 (3.0)

£2
•

:.007

(6)

—.024 (2.6)

(7)

a

—.076 (1.8)

—.107 (2.4)

—.686 (2.0)

—.085 (2.2)

—.202 (0.4)

—.075 (2.2)

—.085 (1.9)

14

1.106 (1.7)

.539 (0.6)

.967 (1.8)

.566 (0.8)

.291 (0.4)

—.739 (1.0)

—.805 (0.7)

.037 (1.4)

.089 (3.7)

.124 (2.9)

Dl
D2
.

D3

.

.003 (0.9)

—.004 (1.0)

.003 (0.9)

—.005 (1.5)

—.008 (1.8)

—.001 (0.5)

—.000 (0.3)

—.001 (0.9)

—.002 (1.7)

.005 (2.1)

—.006 (4.2)

—.006 (4.2)

—.007 (4.4)

LD
R2

n

—.009 (6.1)
.

—.284 (1.5)
.749

.788

.857

.866

.860

.903

.921

60

60

60

60

60

60

40

See Table 5 for variable definitions.

67
Table 8
DeterminInt9 of (01.A Proviiong kind Contrct Dur1on in Major
81.5 Contract File
Colitcilvu b.irgi1nin Agruuro..nt
(abbolutu v.ilue t.

Vat.

ZI

Z2

Z3

Prob

Pro

Prob

Xl

.011(1.5)

—.001(0.2)

—.000(0.1)

.006(1.8)

12

—.053(0.9)

.307(3.4)

.273(2.6)

—.071(2.0)

X3

.471(1.8)

Dep.

E8t.Mth.

Z4
OLS

HratistLca)
Z9

Z5

Z6

Z7

OLS

OLS

OLS

Z8
Prob

—.203(4.1)

.174(3.7)

.009(0.6)

—.026(0.2)

.067(0.5)

—.186(1.5)

.008(0.2)

.153(0.3)

—.000(0.0)

Prub

Z10
lob

Zll
lob

lad. Vat.
.002(1.1) —

.001(0.3)

—.000(0.0)

.043(3.2)

.112(2.2)

—.012(1.4)
-

.392(0.8)

—.430(0.9)

.002(0.3)

—.001(0.0)

—.801(3.7)

—.143(4.0)

2.703(1.5) —1.630(2.7)

.091(0.6)

6.056(2.7) —5.070(2.3) —10.100(4.5) -3.060(4.4)
1.511(2.3) —1.330(2.1)

1.248(2.3)

.212(1.3)

—.016(0.7)

.028(1.5)

.004(0.7)

—1.240(3.4) —1.190(2.7)

—.045(0.3)

14

—2.640(2.5)

3.028(1.9)

—.301(1.2)

2.266(2.4)

IS

.181(0.7)

.071(0.2)

—.175(0.4)

—.320(2.0)

—027(0.5)

.109(0.5)

.157(4.4)

16

.005(0.6)

—.012(0.8)

—.005(0.3)

.013(2.2)

.005(2.3)

.009(1.1)

—.001(0.5)

—.013(0.5)

—.144(2.3) —1.560(1.0)

1.472(1.0) —8.720(6.3) —2.320(6.1)

—.371(0.4)

—.051(0.1)

.055(0.4)

—.233(0.5)

—.094(0.4)

.242(0.9)

—.076(0.7)

—.041(1.0)

.106(0.8)

.091(4.4)

—.196(0.5)

—.037(0.1)

—.026(0.8)

—.031(0.7)

—.019(0.))

.036(2.2)

.002(0.3)

—.013(0.5)

.004(0.8)

—.142(2.4)

.129(2.3)

—.006(0.1)

—.008(0.4)

110

2.998(1.6)

—.243(0.1) —1.510(0.5)

.301(0.3)

.719(2.0)

—.346(0.2)

—.350(1.3)

1.236(0.3) —1.940(0.5)

6.118(1.7)

2.644(2.3)

Xli

.007(0.2)

—.184(2.3)

—.216(2.2)

.021(0.7)

—.008(0.6)

—.012(0.2)

.003(0.8)

—.099(1.0)

.153(1.5)

.153(1.8)

.037(1.4)

112S

.710(3.5)

.791(2.3)

1.076(2.2)

.005(0.4)

.001(0.2)

.127(0.1)

.047(1.7)

.299(0.7)

—.292(0.7)

2.325(5.6)

.685(5.6)

113a

—.007(0.0)

—1.181(1.8) —2.974(2.4)

—.062(0.2)

.018(1.2)

17

—1.580(3.5)

18

1.321(9.2)

19

—.183(0.3)

.168(2.0) —1.756(4.5)

3.521(10.5) 1.118(10.5)

.714(0.9) —1.109(1.4)

.597(1.2)

.178(1.3)

2.678(0.9)

3.666(1.4)

1.313(1.7)

.507(0.5)

1.534(0.9)

—.481(02)

1.128(1.4)

.230(0.7)

—.107(0.1)

—.165(1.1) —1.920(0.6)

115

.116(2.8)

.021(0.3)

—.008(0.1)

.074(2.9)

—.001(0.1)

—.029(0.8)

—.009(1.5)

—.294(2.9)

.242(2.4)

.251(2.9)

.077(2.9)

116

—.068(2.4)

.040(0.9)

.075(1.4)

—.011(0.6)

.008(1.2)

.079(3.0)

—.013(3.0)

—.056(0.8)

.036(0.5)

—.251(4.1)

—.072(3.7)

5.315(2.5)

1.041(1.6)

114

117

2.548(2.7)

—.238(0.2)

—.344(0.2)

1.051(1.7)

.054(0.2)

.052(0.1)

.174(1.3)

1.138(0.5) —1.500(0.7)

118

—2.620(3.1)

—.593(0.5)

—.648(0.4) —1.410(3.1)

.009(0.5)

.235(0.3)

.351(2.9)

3.784(2.3) —.3.620(2.2) —4.970(2.8) —1.110(2.0)

119

—1.550(3.1) —2.110(2.7) —1.510(1.7)

.445(1.3)

.147(1.2) —1.090(2.3)

—.217(3.1) —4.730(3.3)

4.006(3.1)

—.525(0.5)

.025(0.7)

3.318(3.7)

.949(3.5)

—.259(1.0)

—.082(1.1)

120

1.275(3.3)

—.750(1.2)

—.534(0.7)

.299(1.0)

.187(1.8)

—.375(1.1)

.235(4.3)

.640(0.6)

—.496(0.5)

121

—.120(1.0)

.511(3.0)

.343(1.7)

—.091(1.4)

.013(0.5)

.106(1.1)

—.007(0.4)

.506(2.3)

—.506(2.3)

122

—.741(1.3) —2.210(2.7) —2.170(2.2) —2.170(2.2)

—.247(0.8)

—.330(2.6)

—.748(1.6)

—.174(1.2)

2.503(1.8)

123

—.206(1.1)

.641(1.7)

.404(0.9)

.104(0.8)

—.038(0.7)

.424(1.9)

.052(1.9)

—.057(0.1)

—.192(0.4)

'24

—.370(0.8)

.531(0.8)

1.682(2.1)

—.476(1.9)

.186(L8)

.320(0.8)

—.263(3.8)

125

.239(0.3)

.629(0.4)

.016(0.0)

1.549(2.4)

—.152(0.6)

.472(0.5)

.146(1.3)

.287

,174

.366

&2

ln(L) —510.18
DY

1011

—364.02

445

.293

198.86

445

306

329

431

1009

—1.880(1.5) —2.200(1.9)
.377(0.9)

.091(0.7)

.560(0.5) —1.060(1.0) —1.090(1.2)

—.141(0.5)

.839(0.4)

.543(0.9)

—.577(2.3)

3.410(1.4)

—152.17

—159.01

290

290

—922.56

832

—590.018

855

68
Table 8 (continuod)

sample

Dep.ndcnt Variables (5

contract

includes only contracts with COLAs)

has COLA. 0 — no COLA

ZI

1 —

Z2

frequency of COLA

23*

1 — COLA review in first year, 0 — no review

Z45

COLA formula — numbers of cents for each point increase in the CPI

Z5

COLA formula — estimated percentage point increase in wages for each percentage point increase in the CU

26*

logarithm of months until first COLA

27

logarithm of contract duration (in months)

review after first year: 1 —monthly, 2

quarterly. 3 — semi—annual. 4 — Annual

revtew

Z85

I — minimum COLA increase guaranteed, 0

29*

1

210

COLA formula — number of cents per each point increase in the CPI. 0 if no COLA

Zit

COLA formula —

no minimum

maximum COLA increase or cap, 0 — no cap

estimated percentage point increase in wages for each percentage point increase in the CU, 0 if no COLA

Estimation Methods

Prob

Probit

NPro

Ordered Probit

OLS

Ordinary Least Squares

Tobit

Tobit

-

Explanatory Variables**
11

number of employees covered by the contract

12

industry

13

8 firm

14

wages as a share of shipments in the industry

X5

percentage of production workers unionized in the industry (3 digit)

X6

number of different unions representing workers in the Industry (2 digit)

X7

imports/total sales in the industry

quit rate

concentration

durable

ratio

goods industry, 0 — nondurable

18

1 *

19

mean rate of expected inflation —

110

coefficient of variation of forecasters expected inflation rate

Xli

estimate of a

X12

estimate of a2

An

e.LSSLC on resloudi,varLanlce

114

average Ui net replacement rate in the industty — average weekly UI benefits/average weekly net (after tax)
loss of income of laid—off workers
mean family income

116

mean age

117

percentage married

118

percentage white

survey forecasts — 6 month

from the within—industry regression
P
PPI

11

115

Livingston

+ at +
( 1og() o + a,log()
1J
t.!CJ
wJ

--

119

percentage male

120

percentage residing in SMSA'.

121

mean schooling

122

percentage craftsmen

123

mean number of children

124

percentage residing in the aouth

125

.hare of total family income due to wages of union member

**

Also

included were dummy

variables

Coefficient

to date of contract

t

union members in the 3—digit census industry

for nonreporcing of import/salea ratio, producer price indices, and the

concent rat ion rate.

a

forecast prior

has been divided by 100

See Appendix D for a complete description of the data.

69

HRP,z

'S
'S

MRP

'S

"S

'S
'S

'S

N
z

Figure la

MRP, z

N

\
Figure lb

NN

z

70

FOOTNOTES

1. See H.M. Douty (1975) for a more complete discussion of the history
of cost—of—living clauses in union contracts in the United States.
2. We say rekindling since academic interest in the effect of indexa—
tion schemes, such as COLA's, on the economy goes back at least as far as
Alfred Marshall (1886).
3. See, for example, Daniel Mitchell (1980) and Marvin Kosters (1977).
4. On the growing insensitivity of the aggregate rate of wage inflation
to unemployment, see James Tobin (1980). On the insensitivity of deferred
wage increases, including COLA's, in union contracts to unemployment, see
Daniel Mitchell (1978).
5. For evidence on the "yield" from COLA's, see Victor Shiefer (1979).
We will return to this point below. Henry Farber (1981), Wallace Hendricks
and Lawrence Kahn (forthcoming), Lawrence Kahn (1981), and Wayne Vroman (1982)
have presented evidence on the role of COLA's in the inflationary process.
6. For details of this argument and aggregate evidence that the presence
of COLA's reduce strike activity, see Bruce Kaufman (1981). See also Martin
Nauro (1982) for a similar argument and empirical evidence using individual
contract negotiation data.
7. Important contributions here include Robert J. Barro (1977), Olivier
J. Blanchard (1979), Stanley Fisher (1977a; 1977b), and JoAnna Gray (1976;
1978).

8. The relevant papers here are Costas Azariadis (1978), Leif Danziger
(1980), and Steven Shavell (1976). Important initial contributions to the
"implicit contract" literature include Costas Azariadis (1975), Martin Baily
(1974), Donald Gordon (1974), and Hershel Grossman (1977).
9. See David Estenson (1981), Wallace }endricks and Lawrence Kahn
(forthcoming), Lawrence Kahn (1981), and David Card (1981; 1982). The former
three studies are primarily empirical in nature; they do not provide rigorous
analytical models that permit them to identify all of the forces
that influence COLA's. Our paper is more in the tradition of Card's work,
although in some respects (which we note below) our model is more general
than his, and his empirical analyses use Canadian contract data.

10. There are, of course, exceptions to this statement. The "ton tax"
method of financing fringe benefits that prevailed for many years in the
bituminous coal industry is an example of a contract where compensation is
contingent upon productivity; as is well known, this scheme was designed to
reduce employers' incentives to substitute capital for labor. Similarly,
the recent UAW contract with Chrysler and the airline contracts with Eastern
Airlines, that tie compensation to profits, implicItly are contingent on all
uncertain events.

*

71

11. For more on this point, see the discussion between Robert Barro
(1977) and Stanley Fisher (1977—a).

12. The key role of unanticipated inflation in the indexation decision
has been previously noted by David Card (1981). Richard Parks (1978) showed
that relative prices are affected by unanticipated inflation, but not by
perfectly anticipated inflation.
13. See Jan Svejnar (1982) forrn an attempt to accomplish this objective.

14. Indexation to other variables is discused below.
15. The elasticity of MEl'

w.r.t.

x is i, where from (11)

=

16. Hendricks and Kahn (1982) erroneously concluded that increased
employee risk aversion always would lead to increased wage indexation.

do not influence c directly, it is conceiv17. Although p and
able that they influence the bargaining over the total pie available and thus
affect c through this route (see equation (12) and Martin Feldstein (1980)
and Eytan Sheshinski and Yoram Weiss (1977) on this point).
18. Note further that if A is also less than zero, so that indexation
is less than complete, this implies that increased residual uncertainty reduces
the extent of indexation. This apparently is a hypothesis that Estenson (1981)
and Hendricks and Kahn (1982) sought to test, although they did not distinguish
between anticipated and unanticipated aggregate inflation.
19. In determining the monetary value of indexation, we assume that w
and hence also r are the same for indexed and non—indexed contracts. As
our discussion about c should indicate, this may not be an innocuous
assumption and it should be viewed as a further approximation.

20. This assumes that 0 < e < 2. Differentiating B partially w.r.t.
S and using equation (12) yields

=

- W•

c[23c/3S(S—wN EV"/EV') +

+ 4 c[2(1—c)

+ ci

ci

= - 2c(2—c)

> 0 if 0 < c < 2.

21. The effect of these costs on the degree of indexation, if it occurs,
is ambiguous and depends, among other things, on the distribution of the
costs between the workers and the firm.

22.

With the assumptions stated in the text, C =
B =

1

2

-- wN+(1+A)

2

—R—1

S(1 + WNE1T

—R

/Eir

1

+ A and B becomes

-

).

Since the term in the parentheses increases with
> 0 as long as c . 0.

V

it follows that

72

23. The demand and input prices may depend also on unanticipated
inflation in periods before period 1. However, since there is no uncertainty
about the unanticipated inflation in periods before period 1, this dependenc\'
needs not be made explicit.

24. The formula is more complex for p1

p.

-A
is that although
25. The reason that D is proportionate to p
only the unanticipated change in th aggregate price level 1D2 has real
effects, the wage gets indexed to the total change in the aggregate price
(ii). To avoid the expected change in th aggregate price level
level

having real effects y must therefore be proportional to p for all p2.
=
and e2 = 1 + A, this is obtained by multiplying t by
SiRce
in D.
Consequently, assuming that p > 1, the effects of a, b,
on D are the opposite of their effects on
r, and
26. Perfect sharing of
risks requires only that w2 and
and hence that £2 = 1 + A.
the same elasticity with respect to
— risks.
there is no inefficiency in the sharing of

have
Thus,

one similarly can show that one
1
to get the same result.

27. If a equals zero, and £2 <
requires that

< 1

28. For example, Douty (1975) reports that in 1975 3.2 percent of all
contracts with a duration of one year, 14.8 percent of all contracts with a
duration of two years, and 50.0 percent of all contracts with a duration of
three years contained a COLA (these figures refer to major collective
bargaining agreements only).
Note that it may also be reasonable to assume that the effect of within—
period unanticipated inflation on demand and input prices is closer to zero
in the second period than in the first. If this is the case, it provides
another reason for the degree of indexation being closer to complete in long—
term contracts.
29. Martin Feldstein (1976) has stressed the effect of UI system
parameters on temporary layoffs, but he does so in the context of a model in
which both workers and firms are risk neutral so that the degree of indexation
is indeterminate. See also Martin Baily (1977).
30. See Frank Brechling (1982) for a more detailed parameterization of
the financing of the UI system.
31. In general, a change in UI system parameters may lead to changes in
both the wage schedule w(p) and the employment schedule L(p). Without
developing an explicit bargaining model or holding some variables constant,
one cannot obtain implications about how a parameter change af.fects either
schedule if both are allowed to freely vary. In what follows in this section
then, we always must specify carefully what we are holding constant. When
we look at parameter changes on employment, we will hold the whole wage
schedule constant. When we look at parameter changes on the extent of indexa—
tion (below), we will hold the "full—employment" employment level and the
wage rate associated with some arbitrary price level constant.

73

32. One could, of course, allow for utility from leisure by specifying
is the utility the worker receives from
in
leisure time (not working). This obviously satisfies the condition in the

that Z(X) = U(X) + in where
text.

33. This conclusion, and the one that follows, ignores that fact that
will also depend upon the parameters of the UI system.
whether L
For example, an increase in the price level decreases the real value of UI
benefits; this makes layoffs more attractive to the firm, and less attractive
to workers and,without full knowledge of the bargaining process, we cannot
unambiguously ascertain how this will affect the layoff rate associated with
each price level. We assume in what follows that. this effect is small and
and p1 can be inferred solely from the
that the relationship between
sign of A.
34. As noted earlier, major collective bargaining agreements are
those that cover 1,000 or more workers.
35. Simpler autoregressive structures yielded virtually identical
results.

36. Suppose that (S/P) = a0

r!0Pt_Et_i)]

a ar a t u.
it
1 2e
e

where

a1 represents the effect of unanticipated inflation on demand, a2
the serial correlation in the effects of unanticipated inflation and a3 the
expected growth in demand. Taking logs of the equation, lagging it one
period and multiplying the lagged equation by a2 and then subtracting this
from the unlagged equation, the result in the text immediately follows.
We should caution here that these parameters may actually represent
parameters of the real value added function, not parameters of the demand
curve. However, since the implications that result would essentially be
the same, for expository convenience we continue in the text to refer to them
as parameters of the demand function. An analogous problem arises with
respect to the parameters of equation (62) below.

37. See Wayne Vroman (1980) for a description of the model and data.
We are grateful to him for generously providing us with these data.
38. As Section III suggests, however, there are situations in which
Increased residual uncertainty would increase the probability of observing
an indexed contract, which is not the empirical result we observe.
39. Some studies, however, find that relative risk aversion exceeds
unity. See, for example, Henry Farber (1978) and Irwin Friend and Marshall
Blume (1975).
40. For example, in 1981 45 percent of all major collective bargaining agreements with OJLA's called for quarterly reviews, 21 percent called
for semi—annual reviews, and 30 percent had annual reviews (see Douglas
LeRoy (1981)).
41. See AFL—CIO (1979).

74

42. COLA's may also be excluded from wages for the purpose of
computing.certain nonwage benefits in some cases (e.g., vacation pay) and
some contracts also permit COLA adjustments to be deferred to pay for
nonwage benefits (e.g., COLA being used to finance improved benefits for
retirees rather than increased pay for existing employees).
43. Our discussion of these two approaches should make it clear why
we consider it equally inappropriate to use the expected COLA increase,
valued at the expected level of inflation over the contract, as a measure
of the generosity of a COLA. This measure, which Hendricks and Kahn inform
us they plan to use in future work, tells us little about the response of
wages to unanticipated inflation.

44. This test may be excessively stringent. To see this note that
more generous COLA provisions are, ceteris paribus, those with frequent
reviews, reviews in the first year, large wage increases for given CPI
increases, a short number of months until the first review, minimum
guaranteed COLA increases, and no maximum permissable increase (cap). If
a variable, in theory, should increase generosity, we test if it has
influenced each of the above in a way that increases, or does not affect,
the COLA. A weaker test would allow some of the provisions to move in
"opposite directions" as long as the net effect is to make the COLA more
generous. This would require us, however, to reduce the COLA formula to a
single number and, as we have argued in the text, we do not believe that
this is a wise strategy.

45. We are grateful to John Carlson of Purdue for providing the
unpublished data for the most recent years to us.
46. The Livingston Series could not be used here since the underlying
survey is conducted every six months and we required quarterly expectations.
47. Producer price indices for many of the industries were not
collected prior to 1973. 1978 was chosen as the end date because most of
the contracts in the sample commenced at that date or later.
48. Of course, since only 1 of 11 UI coefficients is statistically
significant, and that at less than the .05 level, this may reflect only a
spurious correlation.
49. In any case, we did not receive the micro data in a form that
would allow us to use the approaches of either Hendricks and Kahn (1982)
or Card (1981).

75

APPENDIX A

The first order condition for maximization of

(Al)

d=
dw

—
p

peEV'

= 0

<=>

is

U' = XNEV'
e

Eq. (Al) is the condition for efficient sharing of inflation risks, and it
implies that the workers and the firm have identical marginal rates of

substitution between different realization of p. Differentiating eq. (Al)

totally w.r.t. p,

d(w/p) =
dp

e L

— N d(w/p) +
dp

!
XPdPJ

Multiplying by p and noting that the last term in the brackets vanishes
due to eq. (8) in the text,

1—

(A2)

-----

(c—i) =

XNEVtaf

Eq. (8) implies that

(A3)

(q+fi)--h

which together with eq. (7) becomes

(A4)

gf =

p(l—p8)

— bhx —

-'

—1

(c—lj

76

where

0

1. —

due to eq. (8). Substituting eqs. (A3) and (A4) inta

(A2),

(A5)

— wN

—(c—l) =
XNEVU[A±WN

which shows that A is the elasticity of real value—added w.r.t. p.
Dividing by eq. (Al) and rearranging,

EV"A

ii+wN

(A6)

SEV'— EV"

e pe

To derive results about how c is related to the extent of residual
uncertainty, we make the following assumptions:

where c > 0,

f(N,X,e1) =

Nxe1

g(Q,,e2) =

Q1/nae

h(p,e3) =

e3

V(/p) =

(lR)

> 0

/)1R

Equation (A6) becomes

RwN
=

1

+ AR_+

S+RwNEir
e
Approximate

and

expansion around

= ETr.

/Eir

e

by the first three terms in a Taylor series
Accordingly

77

—R—1

e

Eu

1

..

E1T
\'

..—R—1
—
(R+l)R2 (ru—ir)

E[ir

e

..—R—1

—R

E Err

e

e

=

—R—1

—Rf

(it—if

+

+

+ (R+1)(R+2)(if+wN)22

+

which increases in 4V .

2

1

—R(R+1)rt

The result in the text follows.

(ri—if)

78

APPENDIX B

The real amount I a worker is willing to pay in order to have his
wage indexed is defined by

w
EU(—) =

p p

1J(E

I),.

pP

where w is the constant wage if there is no wage indexation, and w, as
previously defined, is the wage with wage indexation. An approximate value

for I is given by

V

pp p p

1

+1,
2

where I and 12 are the risk premium a worker is willing to pay in order
to obtain a certain real wage instead of w/p and vip, respectively.
That is,

(B1

(B2)

V

EU( =
p

'p'

—

— I ).
U(E
1
'p p

EU(—) = U(E

!

—

Approximate U(w/p) by the first three terms of a Taylor series
expansion around p =

79

E(U(w) + U'()

EU(S)

p p

p

- ]2 + U'(w) d2(w/p)

+
dp

(B3)

=

d(w/p)
dp

dp2

U() + [U"(2(c-1)2 + U'(2

d2(w/p)

dp2

where c is evaluated at p = p.
—

Approximate U(E

pp

I

I

expansion around EwIp —

1

)

by the first two terms of a Taylor series

= w,

and then w/p by the first three terms

of a Taylor series expansion around p =

U(E

pp

—

I

1

)

U() +

+

u6) +

(B4)

=

U() + U'()[

pp

—

d(2/p)

dp 'pP

d2(w/p)1

—

+ —1 d2(w/p)
dp2

-22 -

dp
In view of eq. (Bi) one therefore obtairth from eqs. (B3) and (B4)

U'2(e-1)22

-

>

I

where S is evaluated at w/p =

()2] -

-

80

Since the unindexed wage is constant, a similar derivation based on
eq. (B2) leads to

'1 Sw,
-2

12 —

and consequently,

IE-E--+Sw
pp pp

2p

Similarly, the real amount J the firm is willing to pay in order to
index the wages is defined by

¶
E

—
V(—) = EV(E
e pp

p,e

where

p

is the profit if there is no indexation, and ,

as previously

defined, is the profit with indexation. An approximate value

for J is

given by

J
where

and

——
iT

E !_

p,e

p

E

p,e p

1

+j

2

are the risk premiums the firm is willing to pay in

order to eliminate inflation uncertainty with indexed and unindexed wages,

respectively. That is,

81

(B5)

—
E V() = EV(E
e pp J1)
p,e p
iT

iT

(B6)

E V(—) = EV(E —s) — J 2)
e pp
p

p,e

Approximating V(it/p) by the first three terms of a Taylor series

expansion around p =

p,e p
+

(B7)

d(rrfp

E (V(ir) + V'(ff)

E V(!i)

dp

p,e

(p—)
p=p

!{V'1G)[I
I1 2 + V'() d2(it/P)}(_)2)
dp
dp

= EVG)
e

2

E{V"G)(GN)A - N(c-1)]2

+

-

-2

d2(it/p)i

(ir)p

}2

dp2

where c is evaluated at p = p.
Approximating V(EiT/p — J1)
expansion around Err/p —

=,

by the first two terms of a Taylor series

and then it/p by the first three terms of

a Taylor series expansIon around p =

! —j
EV(E
1
e pp

EV(,t)
+ E[V'(rr)(E
e
e
pp

EV(w) + EV'(ir){E[ir

+

—

2

e

+

1

d2(rt/p)
2

dp

(B8)

d(it/p)1

dp

—

'p=p

= EV() + EV'(w)[
2
e
e

d2(it/p)

dp2

—

—

J1 —

it)]

82

Together with eq. (B5), eqs. (B7) and (B8) yield

-

E(V"[( +

J1EV'

WN)A -

N(c-1)]2}2

CV[G + WN)A — wN(c—1)]2)/EV';

—

ri. A similar derivation based on

where Vt and V" are evaluated at
eq. (B6) leads to

—

4,

EV"[

+ wN)A + wN]2/EV',

*

and consequently,

pe — pe

—

NC

CVtt[(ir + N)A +

E ri/p + NE w/p = E it /p + E w /p; thus the total real amount
p n
p,en
p
p,e
the N workers and the firm are willing to pay in order to have the wage

Note that

indexed is approximately

SNc(1—) — Ncc
=

wNcc{(1—)(S

E{V"[(ir

+ N)A +

— wNEVt/EV') —

E[Vtt(n + wN)A]/EV'}

which, by use of (12) in the text, may be written as

wN

— wNEV"/EVt).

83

APPENDIX C

Normalizing the utility functions such that U'(l) =

=

(Ci)

—S 1—S

vi

1

it

WIy.

+p

1—s

—

(C2)

_•+ p

e1

i—s —s

it—sW

Wi Y

1—s_i—s
p1 p

—XpN E

p1,e2

1,

—s

—s

AN(E

Pp p2

p1

=

are

the first order condition for maximization of
—s

V'(l)

TV2 y

E

p1

= 0
p

= 0

i—si—s

P1 P

and multiplying

Multiplying (Cl) by w and taking the expectation over

(C2) by y and taking the expectation over p1,
i—s

Wi

(C3)

I,, I %

--

vi Y

E (—i)

p1,e1

pl,p P1P
1—s

vi y

\!.i
— "I.'
—

vr;/

p1,p,e2
L'

—s

—s

it1 W1

= AN( E

+p E_(—-z-)

pip1
t.

i—s

1—s

p1

+p

11 Wy

p1,p

—S
2 W1)'
1—s__i—s

p

Dividing (C3) by (C4) and rearranging,

()
pP

—s

—s

i—s

it1 W
E

p ,u1 i—S

- 1+A
Substituting y = Dp

=

W1y
i—s_i—s

112

E

P1 P

i p1

and it1

and

it2

from

eqs. (31) and (32)

84

E A(1—s) E
(A1 Cv1 - w1p'N)
p
p1,e1
D

1—S _A(1—S)
E
p

E

p1,e2

w1p'

(p
Ct1v2 — w1p11N)w1p1'
1

Since e1 and e2 are identically distributed,

E (
=

—s
—

Cv1

E(p
p1,e1 1

w1p1'N)

—1

W•P1

—S

CtPAD

which implies that t'D' =

1

—

>D=

w1p11N)
_—A
tp

w1p11

85

APPENDIX

D

Sources of Variables

Var fable

Name

vi

Variable Description

Source

3—year average of the quit
rate

U.S.. Bur.eau of Labor Statistics
(BLS), Employment and Earnings,

Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1979.

v2

number of unions in the
ipdustry

•

U.S. BLS, Drectory of National
Unions and Employee Associations,
1979, Washington, D.C., Gov't.
Printing Office, 1980, Bulletin
No. 1750.

v3

percentage of unionized
workers in the industry

v4

3—year average of the profit
rate

U.S. Federal Trade Commission,
Quarterly Financial Report for
Manufacturing Corporations, 1972—
1977, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

v5

percentage of workers covered
by multiemployer agreements
in the industry

U.S. BLS, Characteristics of Major
Collective Bargaining Agreernencs,
January 1, 1978, Washington, D.C.:
GPO, 1980, Bulletin No. 2065.

v6

percentage of income due to
wage earnings of the union
member

v7

mean age of union members

v8

percentage of union members
who are married

v9

percentage of union members
who are .white

vlO

percentage of union members
who are male

vii

percentage of union members
residing in SMSA's

Authors' calculations from the
May 1978 Current Population
Survey data file.

86

Variable
Name

v12

v13

UI

Source

Variable Description
mean schooling level of union
members

Authors' calculations from the
May 1978 Current Population

mean number of children in
married union memberst
families

Survey data file.

quarterly data on consumer
price index

U.S. BLS, Monthly Labor Review,
1972—1977, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

average UI net replacement
rate = average weekly UI
benefit/average weekly net
(after tax) loss of income
by laid—off unemployed
workers in the industry

Authors' calculations from the
Urban Institute's unemployment
insurance microsimulation data
file. See Wayne Vroman, "A
Simulation Model of Unemployment
Insurance," National Commission
on Unemployment Compensation,
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1980,
Compendium, for further details.
U.S. BLS, Monthly Labor Review,
Washirigton, D.C.: GPO, January
(1975, 1978 and 1981. Bulletin
No. 1868.

fraction of workers covered
by a COLA
fraction of contracts with
COLA provisions

J

3—year average of the layoff
rate
Zi

1=contract has COLA,
O=no COLA

Z2

frequency of COLA review after
1=monthly,
first year:
3—semi—annual,
2=quarterly,
4=annual

Z3

1=COLA review in first year,
O=no review

Z4

Unpublished data from BLS file
of contract provisions in major
collective bargaining agreements
COLA formula — number of cents (agreements covering 1,000
for each point increase in the workers or more).
CP I

Z5

Z6

U.S. BLS, Employment and Earnings,
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1981.

COLA formula — estimated percentage point increase in the
wages, for each percentage
point increase in the CPI.
logarithm of months until
first COLA review

87

Variable
Name

Variable Description

Source

Z7

logarithm of contract duration (in months)

Z8

1=minimum COLA increase
guarantee, O=no minimum

Z9

1=maximum COLA increase or
cap, O=no cap

Z1O

COLA formula — number of
cents per each point
increase in the CPI, 0=
no COLA

zll

COLA formula — estimated percentage point increase in
wages for each percentage
point increase in the CPI,
O=no COLA

Xl

number of employees covered
by the contract

X2

industry quit rate

U.S. BLS, Employment and Earnings,
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1981.

X3

8—firm concentration ratio

U.S. BLS, Concentration Ratios in
Manufacturing, 1972, Washington,

Unpublislted data from BLS file
of contract provisions in major
collective bargaining agreements
(agreements covering 1,000
workers or more).

D.C.: GPO.
TI.

in

a

C J1.C L1.i.pLLLeLLL
the industry

U•C•

TI

lIT C'

facturers,

tLLLLL1

Vey Ui. LtLU

1977, Washington, D.C.:

GPO.

X5

percentage of production
workers unionized in the
industry (3 digit)

Freeman, R.B. and J.L. Medoff,
"New Estimates of Private Sector
Unionism in the United States,"
Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, January 1979.

X6

number of different unions
representing workers in the
industry

U.S. BLS, Directory of National
Unions and Employee Associations,
1979, Washington, D.C.: GPO,
Bulletin No. 1750.

X7

import/total sales in the
industry

Import data from U.S. Important
SIC—Based Products, U.S. Dept. of
Commerce publication FT 210, 1977).
Total sales data from 1977 Census
of Manufacturing Industries, U.S.
BLS, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

88

Variable
Name

Variable Description

Source

X9

mean rate of expected infla—
tion 6 months prior to date
of contract

X1O

coefficient of variation of
forecasters expected infla—
tion rate

Livingston survey data as pub—
lished in John Carlson, "A
Study of Price Forecasts,"
Annals of Economic and Social
Measurement, March 1977 (private
correspondence from Carlson for
later years).

X14

average UI net replacement
rate in the industry

See .UI variable source in
Section VII.

X15

mean family income

X16

mean age

X17

percentage married

X18

percentage white

X19

percentage male

X20

percentage residing in SMSA's

X21

mean schooling

X22

percentage craftsmen

X23

mean number of children

X24

percentage residing in the
south

X25

share of total family income
due to wages of union member
quarterly data on consumer
price index
quarterly data on producer
price index

Author's calculations from the
May 1978 Current Population
Survey data file.

US. BLS, Monthly Labor Review,
j 1972—1977, Washington, D.C.:
j

)

GPO.

89

REFERENCES

AFL—CIO. Comparative Survey of Major Collective Bargaining Agreements,
March 1979 (Washington, D.C., December 1979).
.
Comparative Survey of Major Collective Bargaining Agreements,
September 1974 (Washington, D.C., May 1975).

Costas Azariadis. "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibrium,"
Journal of Political Economy, 1975, 83—202.
.
"Escalator Clauses and the Allocation of Cyclical Risks," Journal
of Economic Theory, June 1978.

Martin B. Baily. "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand," Review of
Economic Studies, 1974, 37—50.

"On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment," Econometrica, July
1977, 1043—1063.

——————.

Robert J. Barro. "Long—Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 1977, 305—316.
Olivier Blanchard. "Wage Indexing Rules and the Behavior of the Economy,"
Journal of Political Economy, 1979, 798—815.
Frank Brechling. "Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance" in Sherwin Rosen, ed.,
Studies in Labor Markets (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press,
1982).

David Card. "Cost—of—Living Escalators in Major Union Contracts" (mimeograph,
Princeton University, March 1982).

—

. "Wage Indexation in Labor Contracts and the Measurement of Escalation
Elasticities" (mimeograph, Princeton University, October 1981).

John Carlson. "A Study of Price Forecasts," Annals of Economic and Social
Measurement, March 1977.
Gary Chamberlain. "Analysis of Covariance With Qualitative Data," Review of
Economic Studies, April 1980.
Alan Carter. Theory of Wages and Employment (Homewood, Iii., 1959).
Leif Danziger. "Risk Sharing in Labor Contracts," European Economic Review,
14, 1980, 323—340.

—————.

"Partial

Wage Indexation With Real Shocks," Economic Letters

(forthcoming)..

James Dertouzos and John Pencavel. "Wage and Employment Determination Under
Trade Unionism: The International Typographical Union," Journal of
Political Economy, 1981.

90

H. M. Douty. Cost—of--Living Escalator Clauses and Inflation (Washington,
D.C.: Council on Wage and Price Stability, 1981).

David Estenson. "Relative Price Variability and Indexed Labor Agreements,"
Industrial Relations, Winter 1981.

Henry Farber. "Individual Preferences and Union Wage Determination: The
Case of the United Mine Workers," Journal of Political Economy,
October 1978.

Determination of Negotiated Wage Changes: A Reference Wage
Approach" (mimeograph, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
September 1981).
Martin Feldstein. "Temporary Layoffs in a Theory of Unemployment," Journal
of Political Economy, October 1976.

"Inflation

and the Stock Market," American Economic Review,
December 1980, 839—847.
.

William Feilner. "Prices and Wages Under Bilateral Monopoly," Quarterl_y
Journal of Economics, August 1974.
Stanley Fisher. "Long—Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy:
A Comment," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1977, 317—324. (1977a)
of Monetary
"Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability," Journal
Economics, Supplement 1977. (1977b)
.

Irwin Friend and Marshall Blume. "The Demand for Risky Assets," American
Economic Review, December 1975.
Wallace Hendricks and Lawrence Kahn. "Determinants and Effects of Cost—of—
Living Allowance Coverage in U.S. Collective Bargaining Agreements,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review (forthcoming).
Donald Gordon. "A Neoclassical Theory of Keynsian Unemployment," Economic
Inquiry, December 1974, 431—459.

Jo Anna Gray. "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of
Monetary Economics, April 1976.

—

. "On

Indexation and Contract Length," Journal of Political Economy,
February 1978.

Hershel Grossman. "Risk Shifting, Layoffs, and Seniority," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1977, 661—686.
Lawrence Kahn. "Wage Indexation and Wage Inflation in the U.S." (mimeo,
May 1981).
-

Bruce

"Bargaining Theory, Inflation and Cyclical Strike Activity
E. Kaufman.
In Manufacturing," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 1981.

91

Marvin Kosters. "Wage and Price Behavior: Prospects and Policies" in
William Feliner, ed., Contemporary Economic Problems, 1977
(Washington, D.C., 1977).
Aif red Marshall. Reply to the Royal Commission on the Repression of Trade
and Industry (1886) in Official Papers by Alfred Marshall (London, 1926).

Martin Mauro. "Strikes As a Result of Imperfect Information," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, July 1982.
James Medoff. "Layoffs and Alternatives Under Trade Unions in U.S. Manufacturing," American Economic Review, June 1979.

Daniel Mitchell. "Union Wage Determination: Policy Implications and Outlook,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1978—3.
.

Unions, Wages and Inflation (Washington, D.C., 1980).

Yair Mundlak. "On the Pooling of Time—Series and Cross—Section Data,"
Econometrica, January 1978.
Richard W. Parks. "Inflation and Relative Price Variability," Journal of
Political Economy, 86, February 1978, pp. 79—96.
John Pencavel. "The Empirical Performance of a Model of Trade Union
Behavior" (mimeograph, 1981).

Martin Prachowny. "Wage Indexation: Social Benefits and Private Incentives,"
Journal of Labor Research, Spring 1981.
Steven Shavell. "Sharing Risks of Deferred Payments," Journal of Political
Economy, 84, 161—168.

Victor Sheifer. "Cost—of—Living Adjustments: Keeping Up With Inflation,"
Monthly Labor Review, June 1979.
Eytan Sheshinski and Yoram Weiss. "Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment,"
Review of Economic Studies, April 1977, 287—303.

Jan Svejnar. "Bargaining Power, Fear of Disagreement and Wage Settlements:
Theory and Empirical Evidence From U.S. Industry" (mimeo, Cornell
University, June 1982).
James Tobin. "Stabilization Policy Ten Years After," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1980—1.
Wayne Vroman. "A Simulation Model of Unemployment Insurance," National
Conimission on Unemployment Compensation, Compendium (Washington, D.C.,
G.P.O., 1980).

—————. "Escalator

Clauses and Price—Wage Feedback in the U.S. Economy"
(mimeo, Urban Institute, 1982).

