                      NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FACTOR TRADE AND GOODS TRADE




                          Lars E.O. Svensson



                        Working Paper No. 999



                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge Mk 02138

                             October 1982




The   research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in   International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper /1999
                                                  October 1982




                     Factor Trade and Goods Trade



                               ABSTRACT



     Previous work by Dixit and Woodland on the effect of inter—country

factor endowment differences on goods trade is extended to include

simultaneous factor trade and goods trade. The goods trade pattern with

factor trade is compared to that without factor trade. It is for instance

shown that goods trade and factor trade may be substitutes or complements,

depending upon whether traded and nontraded factors are "cooperative" or

"non—cooperative." The asymmetry between the effects of differences in

endowments of traded and differences in endowments of nontraded factors is

emphasized.




                                  Lars E. 0. Svensson
                                  National Bureau of Economic Research
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                   (617) 868—3900

                                  and

                                  Institute for International
                                    Economic Studies
                                  University of Stockholm
                                  S—106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
                                   (08) — 163075
                                                      Revised September 1982



                       FACTOR TRADE AND GOODS TRADE*




                           by Lars E. 0.   Svensson

      National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, and
Institute for International Economic Studies, University of Stockholm


      1.    Introduction

           The standard factor proportions theory of international

      trade examines how intercountry differences in factor propor-

      tions determine the pattern of international trade, in the

      extreme situation when all goods are internationally mobile but

      all factors of production are trapped behind national borders.

      For the classic 2 x 2 x 2 Heckscher—Ohljn—Saniuelson model, the

      relation between factor endowments and goods trade is summarized

      in the Heckscher—Ohlin Theorem: Under some conditions a country

      exports the good that is intensive in the use of its abundant

      factor. The theory has now been much developed beyond this

      simplest case, and several generalizations of the Heckscher—

      Ohlin—Theorem to an arbitrary number of goods and factors have

     been presented.1 A recent very elegant treatment is due to

     Dixit and Woodland (1982).

           In the real world there is, however, international movement

      not only of goods but also of some factors of production, for

      instance migration of workers and professionals as well as foreign

     direct investment. Although there exists a literature on

     various aspects of factor mobility and the pattern of tra.le,2
                          2



there does not to my knowledge exist a more systematic and general

analysis of how intercountry differences in factor endoments de-

termine trade in both goods and factors, and in particular how

the pattern of trade in goods is modified when there is trade

in factors compared to when there is not. The purpose of this

paper is to provide such an analysis, by exteixling the Dixit

and Woodland (1982) analysis to include trade in factors.

     We shall hence deal with trade in both goods and factors.

With regard to trade in factors, we shall assume that factor

owners are not internationally mobile but remain in their home

countries, repatriate the income from the factors they employ

abroad, and consume this income in the home country.

     It is well known that if trade in goods results in factor

price equalization across countries, factor trade is in a sense

redundant and would simply create a continuum of different trade

patterns at the same goods and factor prices. We shall avoid such

trivial examples of trade in factors, and instead deal with

situations where goods trade does not equalize factor prices

in the absence of factor trade.

     In general, in competitive non—distorted situations trade

between countries depends on differences in preferences, techno-

logy and factor endowments. To isolate the effect of factor

endowments, Dixit and Woodland (1982) consider a

world consisting of two countries, called the home and the foreign

country, which initially are identical with respect to preferences,

technology and factor endowments. The countries will have the same

autarky equilibrium, assuming that it is unique. If trade in goods
                          3


is opened up between the two countries, it is clear that the

trade equilibrium will be one of zero trade, where goods and

factors are priced as in the autarky equilibrium. Then a

marginal change is made in the factor endowments of the home

country, so as to create a situation with intercountry differ-

ences in factor endowments. At unchanged prices there will

then be excess demand or supply of goods, prices will adjust,

and a new trade equilibrium will be established with non—zero

trade in goods between the countries. Now, if, before the change

in home country endowments, trade both in goods and in some

factors is opened up, the initial equilibrium will be the same

with zero trade in goods and factors. The change in home country

endowments will however then result in a different equilibrium with

generally non—zero trade in both goods and factors. With this method

we can examine how the change in endowments determines these

trade patterns with and without trade in factors.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly

presents Dixit and Woodlands (1982) model and restates their

generalization of the lleckscher—Ohlin Theorem, for the case with

no international factor mobility. We modify their analysis by

considering compensated factor endowment changes, to be specified

below, which allows us to concentrate on the production side,

and to avoid assumptions of constant returns to scale and

homothetic preferences.

     Section 3 introduces trade in'factors on a general level.

Section 4 compares more closely the goods trade pattern with

and without factor trade and discusses whether fictor trade is

a substitute or a complement to goods trade, nd whether factor
                             4



trade may reverse goods trade. Section 5 deals with gains from

factor trade, arid Section 6 summarizes the results and presents

some concluding remarks.

2.   Factor endowments and goods trade

     In this section we present the model of Dixit and Woodland

(1982) and restate one of their results about the effect on

factor endowments on goods trade in the absence of factor mobility.

Their model and this result will be the starting point for the

subsequent analysis. Our presentation differs somewhat from

that of Dixit and Woodland in that we do not assume constant

returns to scale and homothetic preferences; on the other hand

we consider only compensated factor endowment changes (to be

specified below). We also add a diagranimatic illustration to

their result. The presentation will be brief; for further

discussion we refer to Dixit and Woodland (1982).

     We consider an open economy that produces in + 1 goods,

indexed i =   O,..,m,   all of which are traded. It has a well—

behaved convex technology (not necessarily with constant returns

to scale and not necessarily with no joint production), and uses

n primary factors in fixed supply, indexed j =      1,..,n.   Its

demand for goods is represented by a well—behaved strictly quasi—

concave utility function, not necessarily homothetic. Let good 0

be the numeraire with price p = 1, and let the positive rn—vector

p denote the prices of goods i =    l,..,m,   the non—nuxneraire goods.

Let the non—negative rn—vector v denote the economy's factor

endowments. Assuming competitive conditions, production eff i

ciency, flexible factor prices and full employment of factors,

the equilibrium of the economy can be represented by the budget

constraint
                                 5




(2.1) E(l, p, u) =       G(l,   p, v),


stating that expenditure, given by a standard twice differ-

entiable expenditure function E(l, p, u) of goods prices and

the welfare level u, equals national product, given by a

standard twice differentiable national product function

G(l, p, v). Equation (2.1) expresses the welfare level as an

implicit function u = H(1, p, v) of goods prices and factor

endowments. We define net export of non—numeraire goods as

the difference between output and consumption, which by standard

properties of the expenditure and national product function can

be written as the rn—vector x =          G(l,   p, v) —   E(l,   p, u), where

         = (BG/p1,. .,BG/p)          and c = E    =
y =                                                   (E/pi,..,E/apm)      is

output and consumption, respectively, of non—numeraire goods.

(Derivatives will be denoted by subindices throughout.) Positive

components of x correspond to export, negative to import. Net

export of good 0 is x =                  —   BE/3p,   but by Walras' Law
                                G/p0
we need not explicitly deal with net export of good 0 in the

analysis below. By substituting the welfare level u =               H(l,   p, v)

that solves (2.1), we get the net export function for non—

numeraire goods,


(2.2) x(p, v) =        G(p,   v) —   E(p,    H(p, v)),


where we for convenience suppress the price of the numeraire.

       The assumption of single-valued and differentiable supply

functions,     that   is that the expenditure and national product functions

are   twice   differentiable, is crucial for the analysis that follows. For

the case with constant returns to scale and no joint production,
                                  6



we hence implicitly assume that the number of factors is at least

as large as the number of goods, n > m +

        We next consider a two—country world, with the home country

having a net export function x(p, v) and the foreign country

having the net export function x*(p, v*), where v denotes the

foreign country's factor endowments. (A                     superscript will refer

to the foreign country throughout.) A trade equilibrium, where

goods are internationally traded but factors are not, is given by

the condition that the two countries' net exports sum to zero, i.e.,


(2.3)
             t
         x(p ,   v)
                            t v)
                      + x*(p ,         =   0,

from which condition the trade price vector Pt can be solved.4

Assume now that the two countries have identical preferences

and identical technologies. Hence their net export functions

are identical. Furthermore, assume that their factor endowments

are' identical, i.e. v =         v*.       It is then clear that the trade

price equals the price in autarky for the two countries, and

that there is no trade between them in the trade equilibrium,

i.e. xx*0.
        To find how differences in factor endowments determine the

pattern of trade in goods, we now let factor endowments change by the

n—vector dv in the home country. We say that the home country is

relatively abundant (scarce) in factor j (j =                1,.. ,n)   if and

only if dv. is positive (negative). This change in' endowments

will, at constant trade prices, give rise to a world excess

supply of non—numeraire goods equal to xdv, the post multipli-

cation of the (mxn) matrix x =
                           V                 [x./Bv.J
                                                1   ••
                                                         of endowment effects

on net export at constant prices with the column n—vector dv.
                               7




From the symmetry of the two countries follows that trade

prices will adjust such that each country absorbs half of the

initial excess supply. Hence, the home country's net export

in the new trade equilibrium, dx, will simply be half the

initial excess supply,5


(2.4) dx =    xdv/2

     These results are readily illustrated in the two—good

case (m =   1),   as shown in Fig. 1. The curve through A shows

the home and foreign countries' identical net export function

for the single non—numeraire good, before the endowment change.

The initial zero—trade equilibrium (and autarky equilibrium) is

given by A. The net export function is upward sloping in the

neighbourhood of the zero—trade equilibrium since production

is non—decreasing and consumption non—increasing in the price

of the non—numeraire goods (there is no terms of trade effect

on welfare with zero trade and hence only a pure substitution
                         1
effect   on consumption)."

     The change in factor endowments in the home country shifts

its net export curve horizontally, giving rise to a world excess

supply of goods AB at the initial prices (assumed positive in

the figure). The trade price adjusts to point C where the two

countries' net exports are of equal size but of opposite signs.

Then they have each absorbed half of the initial excess supply.

The equilibrium net export of the home country after the change in

endowments is CE, half the initial world excess supply at

constant prices AB. We also note that the change in the trade

price AC is half the change in the price if the home country had

been in autarky, AD.7
                              7a




                          Fig.      1




                      p
                                                 x(p, v) = x*(p, v*)

                                                        x(p, V + dv)
              p
                  t



                          D             I




                                                           x,x*
dx* =   —dx           o            dx=xVdv/2   xVdv
                              8



     Let us next examine the initial excess supply xdv more

closely. Differentiating (2.1) and (2.2) at constart prices,

gives8


(2.5) Vxdv=G dv-Cwdv.
                  Y



Here the (mxm) matrix         =   [2G/ap.v.)   =   [y./v.)   is the

matrix of Rybczynski derivatives, that is the endowment effects on

output at contant prices. The (column) rn—vector             is the vector

of income derivatives [C./Y) of the Marshallian demand functions

[C.(p, Y)] for the goods (where Y denotes income). The expression

wdv denotes the inner product E.w.dv. of factor prices and the
                                    33   3

change in factor endowments. The first term in (2.5) is the

Rybczynski effect on production, the second term is the effect

on consumption of the change in income due to the change in

endowments. Let us consider what we call compensated changes in

the factor endowments, that is changes which fulfill wdv = 0

and hence have no direct effect on the income of the home country.

This means that we in a sense restrict the countries to be of the

same size, in spite of having different factor endowments. There

will hence be no income effects on consumption, and we need not

assume homotheticity.9 Then the effect on consumption in (2.5) is

zero, anclthe initial excess supply is simply equal to the Ryb—

czynski effect. Since net export equals half the initial excess

supply, we have the final result


(2.6) dx =   G        dv/2.
                 pv

For compensated factor endowment changes, net export is simply

half the Rybczynski effect on production.
                           9



      One way to interpret this result, in line with Dixit and

Norman (1980), is to take the elements of the Rybczynski matrix

C     to represent generalized factor intensities: Good i is said
 pv
to be intensive (non—intensive) in its use of factor j if and

only if 2G/ap.av. is positive (negative). With this

interpretation of the Rybczynski matrix, we may interpret (2.6)

as expressing that the home country tends to export goods that

are intensive in abundant factors. In this sense, (2.6) is a

generalization of the Heckscher—Ohlin Theorem. Put differently,

this definition of intensities is the one required for us to be

able to say that a country exports goods that are intensive in

its abundant factors.

      The definition is consistent with the standard 2 x 2 x 2

Heckscher—Ohlin model, since the Rybczynski effect on the capital

intensive good (defined by cost share, capital/labor ratio, or

autarky wage/rental ratio) is positive (negative) for capital

(labor) increases.

      The appropriate definition of factor intensities in a

general model is a somewhat controversial issue in international

trade theory. Clearly, the Rybczynski derivatives are in general

not in a one—to—one relation to intensities measured as, say,

cost shares in production, but depend not only on elasticities

of substitution (as in the sector specific factors model) but

on the specification of the full general equilibrium of the

model. Different definition of factor intensities are further

discussed in Dixit and Norman (1980), Ethier (l982a,b), Jones

and Neary (1982), and Jones and Scheinkmann (l977).10
                          10




3.   Factor trade and goods trade

     In the previous section we restated the case when there is

international trade in goods but not in factors. In this section

we shall extend the Dixit and Woodland model to allow trade

between the two countries in some factors, and examine how

differences in factor endowments in that case determine the

trade pattern for both goods and factors.

     Before introducing trade in factors, let us consider the

two countries' factor prices when there is trade in goods but

not in factors. Suppose there is factor price equalization

between the two countries in the new trade equilibrium, after

the change in the home country's factor endowments. That is,

factor prices are (locally) independent of factor endowments

(for the endowment changes considered), and factor prices depend

only on goods prices. With factor price equalization, it is

well—known that trade in factors is redundant, in the sense

that goods prices, factor prices, consumption, and welfare are

not affected. Only an indeterminacy in the pattern of produc—

tion and trade between countries is created. To avoid such

trivial cases of factor trade, we now explicitly assume that

there is a subset of factors for which there is no (local)

factor price equalization, and hence for which the endowment

effects on factor prices are non—zero.11

     Let us then introduce trade in a subset of the factors

for which there is no factor price equalization. We shall use

the same approach as Kemp (1969), Neary (1980) and Woodland

(1982). It has the advantage of treating goods and traded
                                   11




factors symmetrically. We decompose the factor endowment n—vector

v into two subvectors, v =          (k,   9.), where the non—negative nk

vector k denotes endowments of traded factors, the non—negative

n9.—vector 9. denotes endowments of nontraded factors, and where

n =        + n9..     Let the corresponding factor price vectors be r

and w. We let the non—negative nk—vector k denote traded factors

used in production at home, and let the nk—vector z given by

z =   k   —   k   denote net export of traded factors, the difference

between endowments and domestic use of traded factors. Positive

components correspond to export, negative to import of traded

factors. For convenience we shall henceforth call traded factors

"capitaltt, non—traded factors "labor", and the prices r of traded

factors "rentals".

      For goods prices and rentals given in the world market, the

production side of the home country can be represented by the

modified twice differentiable national product function defined




(3.1) G(p, r, k, 9.) = max {G(p, k, 9.) +          r(k   —   k):   k >   O},

the maximum over the sum of Gross Domestic Product, G(p, k, 9.),

where k is capital used at home, and net factor payments from

abroad,r(k —        k),   the value of the export of capital. Hence the

modified national product function gives Gross National Product

of the country. Henceforth, we shall indeed call G(p, v) the

domestic product function, and G(p, r, v) the national product

function. The optimal stock of capital used at home will be a

function k(p, r, 9.) of goods prices, rentals, and labor endow-

ments that fulfills the first—order condition
                                   12



(3.2) Gk(p, k(p, r, $),           £) = r,

i.e. the marginal value product of capital equals the rental

(we assume an interior solution). We note that capital used

at home is independent of capital endowments, depending instead

on the rentals.

        For the case when there is only one capital good

the production side can be illustrated as in Fig. 2. The curve

showing the value of the marginal (domestic) product of capital

Gk(p, r, k, £) is downward sloping,12 and shows for a given r

the corresponding use of capital at home k(p, r, Z). Net export

of capital, z, is given by the difference between endowments k

and capital used at home, and can be read off leftwards on the

k—axis from the endowment point k.

        An equilibrium for the home country with trade in both goods

and capital can then be represented by the budget constraint

E(p,u) =    G(p, r, v), letting the national product function replace
the domestic product function in (2.1). This gives the welfare

level as an implicit function u = H(p, r, v) of goods prices,

rentals, and factor endowments. Net export of goods and capital

will be given by the functions


          x(p, r, v) =     G(p,   r, v) —   E(p,      H(p, r, v)) and
(3.3)
          z(p,   r, v) =   G(p,   r, v) =   k   —
                                                    k(p,   r, i).


We assume these functions are well defined and differentiable.

If there are constant returns to scale and no joint production,

we hence assume that the number of nontraded factors is at least

as large as the number of traded goods and factors.

        With two countries, a trade equilibrium will be represented

by the world market equilibrium conditions
        1 2a




        Fig. 2
r, Gk




r


                               Gk(p, r, k, i)


                     z<   -J
                                 >k
    0
        k(p, r, 2)        k
                                        13




         x(p
               t
                   ,   r t v)
                         ,
                                 + x(pt  ,   r t v*)
                                               ,
                                                        = 0   and
(3.4)

         z(p
               t
                   ,   r t ,v)        t
                                 +z*(p ,     r t ,v*)   =0,

stating that world net export of goods and capital is zero.

The initial equilibrium, with identical countries and identical

endowments, will of course have zero trade in both goods and

capital and the same goods prices and rentals as if the countries

were in autarky. Consider next the effect on the equilibrium

of a change dv in the endowments of the home country. At

unchanged goods prices and rentals, there will be an excess

supply of goods xdv and of capital zdv. By analogy with the

case with trade in goods only, the symmetry between the countries

inplies that they will each absorb half of this excess supply of

goods and capital. It follows that the remaining half of the

excess supply will be the home country's net export of goods

and capital. Hence its trade in goods and capital will be given

by


         dx =      x dv/2         and
                    V
(35)
        dz   =      zdv/2.

       Let us next examine what determines the initial excess

supply of goods and capital. We first look at the excess supply

of capital, zdv. From (3.3) and (3.5) we get


(3.6) dz =         Gdv/2         = (dk—
                                        kdi)/2,

where the (nKxnL) matrix                 =                denotes the derivatives

of capital used at home with respect to labor endowments, at

constant goods prices and rentals. The interpretation of (3.6)
                              14


is clear. The initial excess demand of capital consists of the

change in capital endowments, dk, minus the change in capital

used at home due to the change in labor endowments, kdL. It

follows that the properties of the labor endowments effect on

capital used at home, k, will be crucial in determining net

export of capital.

     Let us then look behind the initial excess supply of goods,

xdv. Assuming compensated changes in factor endowments, that is

that rdk + wd2, =   0, we first get, by differentiating (3.3) and

substituting in (3.5), in complete analogy with (2.6),


(3.7) dx =   Gdv/2    =
                          Gd2./2
                                   =
                                       (GdZ   +
                                                  Gkkzd2)/2,

where we have used (3.1) and noted that Gk = 0, since output ;=G

will depend on rentals rather than capital endowments. The

      term on the right hand side of (3.7) is the labor Rybczynski

effect, due to the change in labor endowments. The term Gkkd2

on the right hand side is the capital Rybczynski effect, due not

to the change in capital endowments dk, but to the change in

capital used at home kdL.

     From this analysis we draw the following conclusion for the

case when there is trade both in capital and goods: Differences

in capital endowments between the countries have a direct effect

on net export of capital, but no effect at all on net export

of goods. Differences in labor endowments have an indirect

effect on net export of capital due to the effect on capital

used at home. With regard to net export of goods, differences

in labor endowments have a direct labor Rybczynski effect, and

an indirect capital Rybczynski effect, the latter due to the
                              15



effect on capital used at home.

        Hence, at first it seems that the intuitive and easily

interpreted generalization of the Heckscher—Ohlin theorem in

(2.6) for trade in goods only does no longer hold when there is

trade in capital. Differences in capital endowments then do not

at all affect net export of goods, and differences in labor

endowments affect net export of goods in a somewhat complicated

way. It appears that it cannot be said, for instance, that the

home country tends to export goods that are relatively intensive

in the use of its relatively abundant kinds of labor. Thus, the

relation between differences in factor endowments and trade in

goods seem to be considerably weakened if there is trade in some

factors.

        Let us however look further into these matters, still on a

rather general level, to see whether we can balance these somewhat

pessimistic conclusions. Let us treat trade in goods and factors

symmetric, and look at the full generalized Rybczynski matrix

of the national product function G(p, r, v), exploiting (3.6)

and (3.7),


           C
               pk
                    G
                    p2.
                               0   C +Gk
                                      pk
                                    p2.

(3.8)                     =
           C
               rk
                    G
                    r2.
                               I    -k    2.




where I is the (nk x nk) identity matrix. Let us call these

generalized Rybczynski effects total Rybczynski effects. The total

Rybczynski effect Gk on goods of traded factors (capital) is zero,

reflecting that differences in endowments of traded factors do not affect

goods net export. The total Rybczynski effect         on goods of nontraded
                             16


factors (labor) is given by the cumbersome expression C        +    C     k in
                                                         p              pk
terms of direct Rybczynski effects of the domestic product function.

It takes into account the indirect effects via the change in capital

used, k. It is a total Rybczynski effect in the same way as we get

a total Rybczynski effect on net output in a standard Heckscher—

Ohlin model with intermediate inputs. If we are bold and identify

these total Rybczynski effects with total generalized factor

intensities, we can, in complete analogy with the no factor trade

case, indeed interpret (3.7) as expressing that, with factor

trade, a country will export goods that are intensive

(in this total sense) in its abundant nontraded factors.       In


this   sense the Heckscher—Ohlin Theorem still holds. Put

differently, if we like the Heckscher—Ohlen Theorem to hold

with trade in factors, generalized factor intensities have to

be defined in this way.

       The total Rybczynski effect Grk on net output of traded

factors of endowments of traded factors is of course the unit

matrix, since they stand in a one—to—one relation. Equivalently,

traded factor service j is of course intensive in its use of

the endowments of traded factor j, but not in other traded

factors. The total Rybczynski effect        on net output of

traded factors of nontraded factors is given by —k, minus the

effect on traded factors used. This can again be interpreted as in-

dicators of generalized factor intensity, and we may accordingly

again tautologically interpret (3.6) as expressing that a

country will export those factors who are intensive in their

abundant   factor endowments. We shall however refer to the sign
pattern of the (nk x n) matrix k as indicating 'cooperativeness'
                                   17


(akh/. > 0) and 'noncooperativeness' (kh/3. < 0)              between

capital and labor. This will be further discussed In next section.13


4.   The trade pattern with and without factor trade

     Let us compare more closely the trade pattern with and

without factor trade. Let us consider the two goods case (m                1)

for which net export x of the single non—numeraire good 1

is a scalar. With no trade in factors, net export of good 1

is dx =
           (Gkdk
                   +
                       Gd)/2      by (2.6); whereas with trade in

capital, net export of goods and capital is dx =                    +
                                                          (Gkkd2.
              dz = (dk —
Gd2.)/2 and                     k,d2)/2   by (3.7) and (3.6). It follows

that the difference between net export of good 1 with and without

trade in capital is


(4.1) dx — dx =                dz)/2,
                       Gpk(_

that is, the capital Rybczinski effect due to net import —dz of

capital.

     Let us consider the situation when the compensated differ-

ences in factor endowments are such that the home country is

abundant in (all kinds of) capital and scarce in (all kinds of)

labor. Let us also assume that good 1 is intensive in the use

of (all kinds of) capital. Hence


(4.2) dk>0, d<O and Gk>O.

     We now assume that capital and labor are cooperative,14

in the sense that an increase in labor endowments at constant

goods prices and rentals implies an increase in capital used

at home, that is, the matrix k has all entries positive,


(4.3) k > 0.
                            18


     Under these assumptions it follows from (3.6) that when

there is trade in capital, the home country exports capital,

since its endowments of capital are larger, and its use of

capital at home is smaller. Furthermore, from (4.1) we see

that net export of the capital intensive good 1 is smaller

when capital is exported. Hence, under the assumption that

capital and labor are cooperative, we get the intuitive result

that when there is trade in capital, the capital intensive home

country exports those directly and exports less of capital

intensive goods than when capital is not traded,


(4.4) dx<dx and dz>O.

It appears that factor trade and goods trade here are substitutes

in the sense that export of capital intensive goods is replaced

with export of capital, and the goods trade volume might fall.15

     Thus trade in capital may decrease the capital abundant

country's export of capital intensive goods. But can trade in

capital reverse the trade in goods? That is, can it be the

case that a capital intensive country exports capital intensive

goods if capital is not traded, but exports capital and imports

capital intensive goods if capital goods are traded? The answer

is yes, as the following example shows:

     Consider the standard specific—factors model with two

goods and three factors.16 Let good 1 be produced by capital

and labor, and let good 0 be produced by land and labor. Labor

is hence the non—specific factor. Let the home country be

relatively abundant in capital (dk > 0) and relatively scarce in
                                      19


labor (d9 <         0),   whereas the home and foreign countries' endowments

of land are the same.

        If there is trade in goods only, the home country will export

good 1 and import good 0 as illustrated in Fig. 317 The initial zero

trade equilibrium of the home country is at A, where consumption

and production coincide. The increase in capital (dk > 0) increases

output of good 1 (Gk > 0) and decreases output of good 0

(3(C/p)/3k < 0), at constant goods prices. Production shifts
southeast to B. The compensated decrease in labor (d2. <                0)
decreases output of both goods (G > 0, (aCIap)IZ > 0)18 and

shifts the production point southwest to C, back to the budget line

at constant prices through A. Consumption remains at A. Hence,

initial excess supply of the two goods is the vector from A to C,

and net export of the two goods in             the   new trade equilibrium will be

half    that vector. What will the trade pattern be with trade in
capital? The Rybczinski effect of capital on good 1               is   positive,
and capital and labor are cooperative)9 Hence (4.2) and 4.3) hold,
as does (4.4). Capital will be exported, and net export of good 1

will be smaller. But indeed net export of good 1 will be negative.

For, noting in (3.7) that the Rybczinski effect of labor C on good 1

is positive, we realize          that there is an initial negative excess
supply   of good 1, first because the home country has less labor

(Gd2. <       0),   and second, because capital and labor are cooperative,

it   will use less capital (kd2 <          0   and Gkkjdi < 0). Hence, the
net export of capital will shift the production point northwest
from C   to    somewhere west of A. However, the new production
point   will indeed be due west of A, at D, where there is zero
           19a




         Fig. 3
good 0




                 B




                     > good   1
                           20


excess supply of good 0. This can be understood as follows.

The shift from A to D represents the excess supply of goods

at constant goods price and rental, from the change in

endowments. For a constant rental, the labor wage is constant,

and for a constant wage, the land rent in sector 0 is constant.

Hence, since the endowment of land does not change, neither

does output of good 0. The net export vector in the new trade

equilibrium with trade in capital will be half the vector from

A to D, involving neither input nor export of good 0. We summa-

rize our findings as


(4.5) dx<0<dx, dxO>dx, and dz>0.

With trade in capital, the capital abundant country exports capital,

starts importing the capital intensive good it was exporting without

capital trade, and ceases to import the other good. The

goods trade pattern is indeed reversed.

     Suppose now that capital and labor are non—cooperative,

in the sense that (all elements of the matrix) k are negative,


(4.6) k < 0,

that is, more of labor at constant prices and rentals

decreases the use of capital. It follows that a country

abundant in capital and scarce in labor may either export or

import capital, since both endowment and use of capital is ini-

tially larger. Hence, net export of capital intensive goods may be

either larger or smaller with trade in capital. Let us give

an example of an economy where indeed export of capital inten—

sive goods increases with capital trade:
                                 21



     We consider again the specific—factors model mentioned

above, but now the nontraded factor denoted by 2. refers to

the sector 0—specific factor land (rather than the non—specific

labor as in the previous example). Let the hcxne country be

abundant in capital and scarce in land, whereas it has the

same endoment of labor as the foreign country. With no trade

in capital, the home country will export good 1, as shown in

Fig. 4. The increase in capital shifts production from A south-

east to B, at constant goods prices, and the compensated

decrease in land shifts production futher southeast to C, back

to the budget line through A.

    With trade in capital, we first note that capital and land

are non—cooperative, so capital use will indeed increase with

less land. Can the increase in capital use dominate the

increase in capital endoments, and hence lead to an initial

excess demand for capital? Yes, at constant goods prices and

capital rentals, land rents and labor wages are constant, and

factor proportions in the two sectors do not change. Full

employment of labor then requires that the proportional change

in the use of capital k and land 2. fulfill X1k+Ai =                      0,   where

Xi is the share of labor employed in sector i, i =                   0,1.      Since

the compensated endowment changes fulfill                +            =   0,   where
                                                             62.2.

  and 02. are the initial shares of capital and land income in

national product, we can express (3.6) as


(4.7) dz =               —
             [(o2./ek)       (x/X1)](k/2.)   (—d2./2).



We see that a necessary and sufficient condition for capital

to be imported is that the relative labor employment shares
                 21a




             Fig. 4

good 0




         A




             C


                       D




                           good 1
                                 22



(A/A1) exceeds the relative income shares (Ok/Ok), which is

equivalent to the cost share of capital in sector 1 to exceed

the cost share of land in sector 0 (Oki >         Q)20     Under

these conditions, the production point moves further southeast

from C to D. In the new trade equilibrium, net export of goods

will be half the vector from A to D. The capital abundant home

country will import capital, and export more of the capital

intensive good 1 and import more of good 0. In this sense

trade in capital is here complementary to trade in goods.

      Let us also say something about the case when the two

countries' endowments differ only with respect to (the vector of)

the traded capital, but not with respect to the non—traded labor

(dk   0, dY. =   0).     For compensated factor endowment changes

we have rdk =    0,    hence there must be at least two different

capital goods, and the vector dk has both positive and negative

components. It follows from (2.6) that net export of goods without

trade in capital is given by dx =                 whereas with trade
                                        Gkdk/2,
in capital net export of goods by (3.7) is zero, dx =        0.   Net

export of capital by (3.6) will be dz =       dk/2.   In this case,

trade in capital completely replaces trade in goods (there will

also be zero trade in the numeraire good), and trade in capital

is in this sense complementary to trade in goods. The trade

in capital simply offsets the endowment differences, with no

change in production relative to the pre—endowment change

situation. Capital trade is balanced, with simultaneous export

and import of different capital goods. This is a straightforward

example of so called "cross—hauling", recently discussed in a

different context by Jones, Neary and Ruane (1982) •21
                                      23



         When countries differ only with respect to          endowrimt
of   traded factors, we can also say something general about

uncompensated endowment changes. Assume that the endowment

change fulfills rdk > 0, for instance that the home country

has more of all capital goods. Differentiating (3.3) to

express (3.5) and the analogue of (2.5), we get (since Gk = 0)


(4.7)      dx            rdk/2,


where C is the vector of marginal propensities to consume

non—numeraire goods. If all goods are normal, it follows that

the home country will import all goods, and export capital

goods according to dz             dkI2.22

        Let us finally mention the case when the countries differ

only with respect to endowments of nontraded labor (dk =             0,
di      0, wdr =   0).    With no trade in capital, net export of non—

numeraire goods is dx =                     with trade in capital dx =    Gid2.
                                   Gid2,
In the former case it is the labor Rybczynski effects for the

domestic product function ('direct' intensities) that matter,

in the latter the same effects for the national product function

('total' intensities). The difference is dx — dx             G k di due
                                                              pk i
to the change in use of capital, and net export of capital

dz -di is determined by that change only.23



5.      Gains from factor trade

        Are there welfare gains from introducing factor trade in

addition to goods trade? We would expect trade in factors to

improve world overall welfare by improved world production

efficiency, but it does not necessarily follow that cv'ry
                           24



individual country will improve its welfare.24 For it may very

well be the case that factor trade leads to adverse goods terms

of trade effects which may dominate and imply a net welfare

deterioration for a country.25 This is completely in accordance

with the standard Gains from Trade Theorem, which says that for

each country some trade is better than none, but trade in more

commodities (goods and/or factors) is not necessarily better

than trade in fewer.

      In our case, we can however verify that factor trade is

beneficial for both the home and foreign country. The reason

is than here goods prices are the same whether or not there is

trade in goods. This is because of the symmetry between the

two countries. When the net export dz of capital occurs between

the home country and foreign country, production changes by

Gk(_dz) and G*k(dz) in the home and foreign country, respec-

tively. Due to the symmetry between the countries, these

                                         and there is no change
production changes cancel (GPk =   Gk)
in world production and world excess supply, and hence no effect

                   26
on goods prices.

      Since there is zero trade initially, there is no first

order effect on welfare of a change in prices. The effect on

welfare consists of second order effects only. Those can be

separated into a consumption substitution effect, which is the

same with and without capital trade since the change in goods

prices is the s'ne, and a production substitution effect, the

increase in national product. With factor trade, the latter

contains an extra term, corresponding to a standard triangle

in Fig. 2. Let the marginal value productivity schedule Gk
                                    25


be drawn for the post trade prices p + dp
                                          t   t
                                                  ,   and let the   rental
r correspond to the equilibrium post factor trade world rental

(the change from the rental before the endowment change is equal

to half the change in the home country's autarky rental). Then

the shaded triangle in Fig. 2 measures the increase in national

product due to factor trade.27


6.       Summary and   concluding   remarks

         We first considered the case with goods trade but no factor

trade, by restating one of Dixit and Woodland's (1982) results. Con-

sidering compensated factor endowment differences only, we saw

that net export of goods is half the Rybczynski effect on produc—

tion of the endowment change, since it is half the initial

excess supply of goods. By the controversial identification of

Rybczynski effects with generalized factor intensities, this

result can be interpreted as saying that a country exports goods

intensive in its abundant factors, and hence as a generaliza'-

tion of the Heckscher—Ohlin Theorem to many goods and factors.

In any case, whether or not this definition of intensity is

accepted, there is a rather clearcut effect on endowments on

trade.

         When we introduced factor trade in addition to goods trade,

we found that differences in endowments of traded factors have

a direct effect on net export of factors, but no effect whatsoever

on net export of goods. Differences in endowments of nontraded

factors have an indirect effect on trade in factors, via their

effect on domestic use of traded factors. Differences in

endowments of nontraded factors have a direct Rybczynski cffcc't
                            26



on net export of goods. In addition, they have an indirect

effect via the effect on use of traded factors and the

traded factors Rybczynski effect. Hence, the relation between

goods trade and differences in factor endowment is weakened by

the existence of factor trade. In particular, the effect of

endowments of nontraded factors on the use of traded factors,

that is whether traded and nontraded factors are "cooperative"

or "noncooperative", is of crucial importance. In general, with

factor trade it cannot be said that a country exports goods that

are intensive in the use of abundant factors. Nor can it be

said that a country exports goods that are intensive in the

use of abundant nontraded factors. It all depends on the

cooperative/non—cooperative properties of traded and nontraded

factors. Nevertheless, as we have seen the different effects

on net export of goods are still transparent.

      Although the relation between differences in factor

endowments and goods trade is weakened with factor trade, we

however realize that the relation between differences in factor

use aiil goods trade is the same as when there is no factor

trade. That is, a country will export goods that are intensive

in the use of factors that are intensively used in the country.

In this sense, we can say that the Heckscher—Ohlin theorem

generalizes to a situation with factor trade, if it is inter-

preted as referring to differences in factor use rather than

endowments owned. Since, however, use of traded factors is

endogenously determined, there is of course no causal relation

between goods trade and differences in factor use. For empirical
                              27


work, it seems that domestic factor use rather than total
endowments of factors owned should be used in tests of the

Heckscher—Ohlin theorem when there is factor trade. This is

probably exactly what most empirical work has been doing. But,

as we have seen, no causal relationship is tested this way.

         These somewhat pessimistic conclusions could be somewhat

modified by the observation that with factor trade, net export

of goods and factors will be half of the total Rybczynski

effects (taking into account the endogenous change in use of

traded    factors) on both goods and traded factors of the endow-
ment differences. If these total effects are identified with
intensities, we could say that a country   exports goods that

are 'total—intensive' in abundant nontraded factors. But the

relation between the total Rybczynski effects and the direct

ones depend on the cooperativeness between traded and nontraded

factors.

     When explicitly comparing the goods trade pattern with and

without factor trade, we found that if capital and labor are

cooperative, and capital is traded, a capital abundant country

would export capital directly, and export less capital intensive

goods than when capital is not traded. Hence, factor trade and

goods trade are then in a sense substitutes, as in Mundell (1957).

In a specific example, we could even show that capital export

might make a country import capital intensive goods, and hence

reverse the goods trade.

     If    capital and labor are non—cooperative, we could show
that a capital abundant and labor scarce country might import
capital and increase its export of capital intensive goods.       In
                               28




that   case goods trade and factor trade are complementary, as in
Narkusen   (1981).28
       We also showed that in our case there are unambiguous gains

for both countries from introducing factor trade, since no adverse

goods price changes result.

       Let us finally comment on Dixit and Woodland's (1982) method

of local analysis around the zero trade equilibrium, together with

our assumption of compensated endowment differences. There are

some obvious advantages: The results are easily derived with

straightforward calcusus, and they are transparent and easily

interpreted. There is no need to assume either constant returns

to scale and no joint production, or homotheticity of preferences.

Also, the results are exact in the sense of giving explicit

expressions, rather than the correlations that   one   otherwise gets

(see Deardorff (1980, 1982), Dixit and Norman (1980), Woodland

(1981) and Ethier (l982a, b)).

        The disadvantages of the method are equally obvious: The

  results strictly apply only within a neighbourhood of the zero

 trade equilibrium, and, in our case, for factor endowment differences

 that are compensated. The single—valuedness and differentiability

 assumption on supply implicitly restricts the number of goods

 and traded factors not to exceed the number of nontraded factors

  (when "all" factors are included, such that there are constant

 returns to scale).

        It seems rather likely that under the assumptions of constant

 returns to scale, no joint production, and homothetic preferences,

 most results would hold globally, although their deriv.ition may

 be less transparent and straightforward. This is one area for

 future research.
                               29



Footnotes

*    Several people have contributed very helpful comments to this
paper. F especially would like to thank Alan Deardorff, Avinash

Dixit, Elhanan Helpman, Bill Ethier, Harry Flam, Gene Grossman,

Henrik Horn, Ron Jones, Paul Krugman, Peter Neary, Torsten Persson,

Assaf Razin and Alan Woodland. The usual caveat applies, of course.

A much different version with a different title was presented to

the Workshop on Production and Trade in a World with Inter-

nationally   Mobile Factors of Production, financed by the   Bank of

Sweden   Tercentenary   Foundation and held at the lIES, August 4—15,

1980, and to a Tel—Aviv University Department of Economics

Seminar. A previous version with the same title was presented

to the Workshop in International Economics, August 9—13, 1982,

organized by the Stockholm School of Economics and the lIES.

Partial support from the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation

and the Torsten and Ragnar SUderberg Foundation is gratefully

acknowledged.



1.    For a recent survey, see Ethier (1982b).



2. See, for example, Mundell (1957), Chipman (1971), Jones and

Ruffin (1975), Ferguson (1978), Jones (1980), Neary (1980),

Markusen (1981) and Jones and Neary (1982).



3.    If there are constant returns to scale but joint production, the

number of factors must be at least as large as the number of

'activities'.



4. We assume that autarky and trade equilibria are unique.
                                            30



5. Dixit and Woodland (1982), assuming constant returns to scale

and homothetic preferences, and that the foreign country is k times

larger than the home country, get the result dx =                xdv[kI(l     +   k)J.


6. The (in x      in)   matrix         of the price derivatives of the net export

function, x ,       is   negative definite in the neighborhood of the autarky
           p
equilibria.



7. By differentiatirg X(Pa, v) = 0 we get the autarky price change

dPa =   x'    xdv. By differentiating (2.3) we get the change in the

trade price dpt =         x1 xdv/2 = dPa/2, where we have used x = x.
It follows that the net export in the new trade equilibria is dx =

xdpt    +   xdv   =     xdv/2,         by substituting dpt, which proves (2.4).



8. We have x dv =             G     dv — (E /E )E du. But E /E       CY and
                  v               pv       Pu u u            Pu u
E du G Vdv = wdv.
 U


9.   Note that differentiating (2.1) gives the income equivalent welfare

effect Edu = xdp          +   wdv.        The first term is the terms of trade effect,

which is zero with initial zero trade. By assuming that the second

term, the direct effect on welfare of the endowment change, is also

zero, we have no (first order) welfare effect at all.



10. The definition of intensities by Rybczynski derivatives can lead

to some apparent paradoxes, which however may be interpreted as

emphasizing the general equilibrium nature of the definition. Con-

sider the model in Gruhen and Corden (1970), where three goods,

wool, grain and textiles, are produced with three factors, land,
                                    31



 labor and capital. Wool and grain use land and labor, and thc

land/labor ratio is higher for wool than for grain. Textiles use

labor and capital. At constant goods prices, an increase in

capital withdraws labor from wool and grain production (at constant

factor prices). Production of land intensive wool then increases,

and it appears that wool is capital intensive although no capital

is actually used in its production.           Production of labor intensive

grain goes down. Suppose capital is injected until the economy

is specialized in wool and textile production: Further increases

in the capital stock now decreases wool production (at increased

wages), and it appears that wool is now capital non—intensive.

(I owe this point to Paul Krugman.)

     Dixit and Woodland (1982) define net export of good i to be

intensive in factor j if and only if x.(p, v)/3v. > 0, hence

including also in general the consumption response in the defini-

tion. Dixit and Norman (1980) motivate their definition of gene-

ralized factor intensities by referring to the Stolper—Samuelson

derivatives w./Dp. which are identical to the Rybczinski derivatives



    Note that if (2.6) is written in terms of relative change as

dx./y. =   E.y..(dv./v.),   I =   l,..,m,   where -y..=v..(y./ av.)/y.

is the Rybczynski elasticity of good i with respect to factor j,

these Rybczynski elasticities can be used as indices of generalized

factor intensities. Since they are unit—free, they make possible

statement such that good i is more intensive in the use of factor j

than good g is in. factor h. Diewert (1974) introduced the notion

of an 'elasticity of intensity' via the Rybczynski/Stolper—Samuclson
                                       32



 elasticities. In the 'even' case with constant returns to scale,

 no joint production, and as many goods as factors, the matrix of

 Rybczynski elasticities is the inverse of the matrix of cost shares.

        Dixit and Woodland (1982), assuming constant returns to scale,

homothetic preferences and non—restricted factor endowment changes,


                                            13 6.)y./v.,
 derives the relation 3x./v. = (y.            —            where 0. is the
                       1           3            313               3

 share of factor j in national income. In their phraseology, the

 excess supply of good i will he intensive in its use of factor j,

 and therefore good i will be exported when the endowment of factor j

 increases, if the Rybczynski elasticity y.. exceeds the income

 share 6.. They note that for arbitrary factor endowment changes

the relation between y.. and 0.. is important. The production
                              13       1]

effect has to be strong enough to overcome the effect on demand

of the additional factor income before an excess supply can emerge.



11. With no trade in factors the change in home and foreign factor

prices from the initial zero trade equilibrium is dw =            G dpt + C dv
                                                                  VP      vV
and dL.*       G* dpt. The difference is dw dw* =          G   dv, where we
                 VP                                         vv
use G      =         .   Assuming no factor price equalization for some
                VP
factors is then equivalent to assuming that endowments influence

prices of those factors.


12. The (nKxnk) matrix of second order derivatives with respect

to capital Gkk =
                         {a2G/D1h k.} is negative semidefinite since
the revenue function by convexity of the technology is concave

in capital. We assume that it is negative definite and invertible,

which is a necessary condition for the capital—used—at—home ftinction

k(p, r, Z) to be differentiable. For the case with only one capital

good, Gkk is a negative scalar, and the value or marginal product

of capital is decreasing in capital.
                                    33




13. We note that we could extend Dixit and Woodlands (1982) model

with trade in goods but not in factors, to include initial endowments

of goods. Let the home country's goods endowments be given as the

non—negative (m+1)—vector (c, cii), where u0 is the endowments of the

numeraire good, and the rn—vector u is the endowments of non—numeraire

goods. Net export of numeraire goods would be given by            (p, v, ,

=C      (p, v) — E (p, H (p, v, ,        )) + w.   Assuming compensating factor

and goods endowment differences between the home and foreign countries,

wdv +      + pdci   0, net export in an equilibrium with trade in goods

only would be given by dx =    (G        dv + dw)/2. That is, net trade in

goods is half the Rybezynski effect            dv plus half the goods endowment

difference dci. In particular, endowment differences in one good has no

effect on trade in other goods. This is analogous to our result that

endowment differences in traded factors have no effect on trade in

goods. Indeed, we may of course interpret our traded factors as one

kind of traded goods in Dixit and Woodland's model, and our non—traded

factors as their factors, to get a complete analogy between our case

with some traded factors and the goods—endowment augmented Dixit and

Woodland model. (Our total Rybczynski effects                 r]T (T denotes

transpose) would be identified with the Rybczynski effect             above, etc.)

 (I owe this point to Elhanen Helpman.)



 14. According to Elhanan Helprnan, this is the terminology used in Hebrew.

 The definition of cooperation is different from the usual definition of

 complementarity/substitUta'UtY via the conditional input demand functions.

 Any established English terminology covering this case is iinknwn to me
 (technical complementarity?). Jones and Scheinkman (977) dLfinc friendship!
                            34



between a good i and a factor j as meaning )w./)p.            0, that is in

terms of the elements of the matrix G       .   In   Ruffin (1981) friend—
                                     VP
ship between factors is defined in terms of the effect on the price

of factor h of a change in the quantity of factor j, that is in our

case in terms of the elements of the matrix of derivatives
                                                         —l
                  In our case, we have k = — Gkk              Gk,. Hence our
[Brh/2] = Gk..
definition of cooperation in terms of the elements of             is not

exactly equal to Ruffin's definition of friendship, except for the

case of one capital good (nk =    1),   when Gkk is a negative scale.



15. We note that there may not be an unambiguous measure of the

volume of goods trade when there are more than two commodities

(good and/or factors) traded, or when the goods trade is not

balanced.



16. Caves (1971) discusses the specific factor model with factor

mobility. See also Jones and Neary (1982).



17. The diagraniniatic illustration was suggested by Ron Jones.



18. We note that the Rybczynski derivative with respect to the

non—specific factor labor is positive for both goods in the specific

factors model. Hence both goods are intensive in the use

of labor, according to the Dixit and Norman (1980) way of defining

generalized factor intensities.



19. In the specific—factors model, an increase in the endowments

of the non—specific factor (labor) increases the price of both

specific factors (capital and land),at. constant endmcnts of the
                                35



latter. With capital being the only traded factor, this means that

capital and labor are cooperative (cf. footnote 13)



20. We have Oh/Ok =    {[C/(1     eL)]X}/{[OklI(l
                                                    —




21.    in the goods—endowment augmented Dixit and Woodland model referred

to in footnote 13, compensated differences between countries in goods

endowments only would simply result in offsetting trade of these goods

at unchanged prices.



22.    I owe this observation to Alan Woodland.



23. Jones and Neary (1982, Sect. 4) have independently noted that

mobility   and goods trade may be both complements and substitutes with

the sector—specific model, and that trade may be reversed by factor

mobility. They give the following example: "Suppose the home country

has   a larger [non—specific] labor force and that this causes it   to

export the first commodity in a two—commodity setting. In free trade

the wage rate at home will be lower and the returns to both types of

specific   capital will be higher than abroad. Whether subsequent inter-
national capital   mobility would reduce or expand commodity trade depends

upon which type of capital is mobile. If type-i capital is mobile, the

flow into the home country serves to expand commodity trade, whereas if

type—2 capital is mobile, home exports of commodity 1 will fall, instead.

Indeed, in the latter case the pattern of commodity trade could get

reversed with the flow of type—2 capital into the home country. Of

course if labor is internationally mobile instead, an outward flow of
                                    36




labor from the home country would restore relative endowment balance

between countries and all [commodity] trade would vanish." (Footnotes

eeted.)

24. We discuss the countries' aggregate welfare only, and do not

consider the welfare distribution between various groups, different

factor owners, say, within a country.



25. Cf. Bhagwati (1982).


26. Alternatively we know that the change in goods trade prices

due to the endowment change is half the change in autarky goods

prices, regardless of whether there is both goods and factor trade

or factor trade only.



27. With no factor trade, the welfare gain from the price change

dp
     t                         tT (— E)dp t /2 +
         is proportional to (dp )
                                                     tT Gdp t /2
                                                   (dp   )         (super-

script T denotes transpose) .       The first term is the consumption

substitution effect, the second the production substitution effect.

Both are positive since E   is negative definite and G   positive
                         pp                           pp
definite. If then trade in capital is introduced, there is no

additional first—order change in goods prices. (There is a second

order change, but that will give a third —order change in the con-

sumption substitution term above and can safely be disregarded.)

The additional increase in national product is (dr)TGrdr/2,

where dr is the change in rentals from the level of home rentals

with no factor trade and goods trade to the world market level
                               37




of rentals with both factor trade and goods trade, and rr '

evaluated at the goods prices Pt + dpt.   It can be shown that rr

 kr =   — Gkk,   hence the term is indeed the shaded triangle in Fig. 2.




28. Markusen (1981) argues that when the basis for trade is

something other than differences in relative factor endowments,

factor trade and goods trade tend to be complements, and that

these are substitutes only for factor proportions models. As

we have seen factor trade and goods trade can be complements also

in factor proportion models.
                           38




References



Bhagwhati J. (1982), Import competition and international factor

mobilities: some issues, paper presented to the lEA Conference

 on Structural Adjustments in Trade Dependent Advanced Economics,

 Stockholm, August 2—6.



Chipman J.S. (1971), International trade with capital mobility:

 a substitution theorem, chapt. 10 in J. Bhagwhati, R.W. Jones,

 R.A. Mundell and J. Vanek, eds., Trade, balance of payment and

 growth, Amsterdam: North—Holland.



Deardorff A.V. (1980), The general validity of the law of com-

parative advantage, Journal of Political Economy 88, 941—957.



Deardorff A.V. (1982), The general validity of the Heckscher—

 Ohlin Theorem, American Economic Review 72, 683—694.



Diewert W.E. (1974), Applications of duality theory, chapi. 3 in

M.D. Intriligator and D.A. Kendrick, eds., Frontiers of quanti-

 tative economics, Vol. II, Amsterdam: North—Holland.



Dixit A.K. and V. Norman (1980), Theory of international trade,

Cambridge, Nisbet and Cambridge U.P.
                           39




Dixit A.K. and A.D. Woodland (1982), The relationship between

factor endowments and commodity trade, Journal of International

Economics, forthcoming.



Ethier W.J. (1982a), The general role of factor intensity in

 the theorems of international trade, mimeo.


Ethier W.J. (1982b), Fligher dimensional trade theory, lIES Seminar

Paper No. 218. Also in R.W. Jones and P.B. Kenen, eds., Handbook

of international economics, vol. I, to be published by North—

Holland.



Gruhen F.H. and W.M. Corden (1970), A tariff that worsens the

 terms of trade, chapt. 4 in l.A. McDougall and R.H. Snapes, eds.,

 Studies in international economics, Amsterdam: North—Holland.



Jones RW. (1980), Comparative and absolute advantage,

 Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft und Statistik 3,

 235—260.




Jones R.W. and J.P. Neary (1982), The positive theory of inter-

national trade, chapt. 1 in R.W. Jones and P.B. Kenen, eds.,

Handbook of international economics, vol. I, to be published by

North—Holland.
                           40




Jones R.W., J.P. Neary and Frances P. Ruane (1981), Two—way

 capital flows: Cross—hauling in models of foreign investment,

 mimeO.




Jones R.W. and R. Ruffin (1975), Trade patterns with capital

 mobility, in M. Parkin and A.R. Nobay, eds., Current economic

 problems, Cambridge. Reprinted in abridged form as chapter 13

 in R.W. Jones, International trade: Essays in theory, North—

 Holland, 1979.



Jones R.W. and J.A. Scheinkman (1977), The relevance of the two—

 sector production model in trade theory, Journal of Political

 Economy 85, 909—935.



Kemp M.C. (1969), The pure theory of international trade and

 investments, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.



Narkusen J.R. (1981), Factor movements and commodity trade as

 complements: a survey of some possible cases, mimeo.,

 University of Western Ontario.



Mundell R.A. (1957), International trade and factor mobility,

American Economic Review 47, 321—335.



Neary J.P. (1980), International factor mobility, minimum wage

 rates and factor—price equalization: A synthesis, lIES Stminar

 Paper No. 158.
                           41




Ruff in R.J. (1981), Trade and factor movements with three

 factors and two goods, Economic Letters 7, 177—182.




Woodland A.D. (1981), International trade and resource

 allocation, unpublished manuscript, University of Sidney.




Woodland A.D. (1982), Stability, capital mobility and trade,

 International Economic Review, forthcoming.
