                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   PARTIAL RETIREMENT AND WAGE
                    PROFILES OF OLDER WORKERS



                         Alan L. Gustman

                       Thomas L. Steinmeier


                      Working Paper No. 1000



               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MP 02138


                           October 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                  NBER Working Paper #1000
                                         October 1982




       Partial Retirement and Wage Profiles of Older Workers


                              Abstract


       Older workers are likely to face different wage offers for work

while not retired than for work while partially retired. Conventional

analyses of wage profiles pool all waqe observations without distin-

guishing     among individuals according to retirement status.
       Our   empirical analysis suggests the following conclusions.      1)

Wages for work while not retired and for work while partially retired

are significantly different from one another.           2) wage offers facing

older workers may vary considerably between those who do and do not

face   lower limit constraints requiring full-time work or rinTlo at all
on their main job. 3) Failing to distinguish between wages paid           to

the partially retired and to the not retired causes a sizable

exaggeration of the decline with experience in the wage offer for

work while not retired.




                                  Alan L. Custman
                                  Department of Economics
                                  Dartmouth College
                                  hanover, Nil 03755
                                      (603) 646—2641
                                  Thomas L. Steinmeier
                                  Department of Economics
                                  Texas Tech University
                                  Lubbock, TX 79409
                                     (806) 742—2203
       This paper will raise and attempt to answer a number of questions

concerning the relation of wage rates for older males to their job

tenure and labor market experience. From past research it is known that

at higher levels of experience the earning profile turns down, with

much of the explanation for the downturn due to a decline in work time.

Somewhat less is known about wage rate profiles, expecially about wage

rate profiles for older workers. Recently, researchers have focused

on this subject, studying wages for older workers directly (Carliner,

1982) or as a by—product of a study of retirement behavior (Gordon and

Blinder, 1980).

       There is a potential problem with what we will call the "conventional

approach" to computing wage profiles for older workers. These workers

face at least two simultaneous alternatives. They may work at relatively

high wages while not retired, or they may partially retire,' frequently

receiving a lower wage.2 According to the conventional approach, wage

profiles are computed using the wage for whatever job the individual

currently holds. These wages are then related statistically to tenure on

that job and to overall experience. As a result, the conventional approach

mixes together wage data for continued work while not retired with data

for work while partially retired, using weights that are determined by

the frequency with which these simultaneously avai1.-'i a1tern;t.ives are

chosen.    While the   conventional approach may   he adequate    for rlescrihinr4

the wage path currently traveled by older workers, it is not adequate
for describing the opportunity set they face.
       In section I of the paper, separate wage profiles         are estimated

for   older workers who are not retired and for those who    are     partially
retired.    Tests are   performed to determine whether   these    equations are
                                    2




significantly different from one another. These tests indicate that

there are significant differences n intercept and slope, and there-

fore thatit is improper to use a single profile calculated from

pooled wage data as in the conventional approach. Section II dis-

cusses the implications of these findings for the wage offers facing

older workers -   contrasting   predictions based on the conventionally

calculated wage-tenure profile with those from an opportunity set

consisting of two separate, sirnultaneouly available wage profiles.

It is shown that in some circumstances the conventional approach

provides wage predictions that are quite misleading. Section TIT of

the paper demonstrates that the wage—experience profile, as computed

in the conventional approach from pooled date for the partially and

non-retired, exagerates substantially the downturn in the wage offer

for continued work in the job held while not retired. T major reason is

that the probability of partial retirement is much higher for those

with the highest levels of experience. Therefore, the weight given to

the low wage rates of individuals who are partially retired rises with

experience. In that section, selectivity bias in      the experience   profile

is also discussed. Findings are summarized in the final section and

conclusions are presented.


                       I. Wage Equation Estimates

     The wage equations we estimate are all of the form:


     (1)   2n W = a + bTen + cTen2 + dExp + eExp2 + fx    4-   c
                                            3




where W = The      hourly wage rate (deflated bo 1967 dollars by an          index   of
               usual   hourly   earnings)
    Ton =Yenr; (ii tenure

    Exp = Years        of experience (age        —   years of educ. — 6)
         X     A set of control variables

             = A random error term

The equations are estimated using data from the 1969, 1971, 1973 and

1975 waves of the Retirement History Survey. Only white males who

are not self employed and for whom required data were available in at

least one survey year are included in the sample.4 Individuals in the

sample   were 58 to     63 years old in the initial survey year.

     For     any individual, only the           last wage observed while working

fora particular employer is included. Thus if an individual reported

in an early year of the survey that he was not retired and working full

time, and in a later year that he retired partially on another job, two

observations are included. But if he reported that he worked for the

same employer for all four years, only one (the last) wage rate observation

is included.5

     There is some loss in efficiency from using only one wage observation

for each job. In view of the large sample size avialable to us, this loss

should not be too great. Moreover, the correlation htween year to year

wage observations within the same job is high. For those who are not

retired and are working for the same employer, the correlation is .69.

It is .56 for those who are partially retired in more than one year and

are working for the same employer.6 In addition, the longitudinal

feature of the data is not required to isolate vintage effects, which we
                                   4




do estimate and are discussed below. Accordingly, given the costs of

adjusting for serial correlation       the face of a truncated sample with

a larger number of observations, and the limited benefits to be ex-

pected from such an adjustment over the procedure we do follow, we

chose the alternative procedure of using only the last observation

from each job. Note also that although it would he easier to implement

than the procedure we follow, pooling all, possible wage observations

while ignoring serial correlation would he an inappropriate procedure.

Our major interest is in testing for differences in parameter estimates

among wage equations estimated for those falling in alternative re-

tirement categories. The biases in estimated standard errors created

by serial correlation would seriously undermine the validity of such

tests; while the problems created by the procedure we follow are not

nearly so severe.

     The independent variables included in the vector X in equation

1, a number of which correspond to those used by Gordon arid Blinder

(1980) ,   are as follows:

      (1) A set of four duimny variables defined for broad occupational

categories.

      (2) A dummy variable indicating coverage by a private pension

plan on the current job.

      (3) A dummy variable indicating coverage by a public pension plan

on the current job.

      (4) A variable equal to 10 minus years to mandatory retirement

age, or equal to zero if there is no mandatory retirement.

      (5) A dummy variable indicating a short term health problem.
                                        5



        (6)    A dummy variable   indicating a 1 onq term hr'a.l Hi prob) om.
        (7)    A dummy variable indicaIing that a health pioblem ended the
last job.
        (8)    A dummy variable equaling 1 if    the father grew up outside
of   a farm.

        (9) Years of formal schooling.

      (10)     P. variable equaling 0 if education is <     8, otherwise equal to
ed-8.

      (11) A variable equaling 0 if education is < 12, otherwise equal to

ed—12.

      (12) A dummy variable equaling 1 if ed > 12.

      (13)     A dummy variable equaling 1 if ed > 16.

        Table 1 reports the coefficient estimates for the torture and

experience variables, and some relevant statistics pertaining to the

regressions for those in the main job and not retired at all, for those

who have partially retired, and for both groups pooled.7 Coefficients

of other standardizing variables are reported in the appendix. Using

standard F tests, we find that the tenure variables are. jointly signi-

ficant at the 1% level in all three wage equations.8 The same is true

for the experience variables. The signs of the experience variables

differ between the equation for the not retired and for the partially

retired, but it will be seen below that this change in           sign   does not

mean that wages are positively related to experience in one case, but

negatively related in the other. At high levels of experience, all

three profiles appear to decline as experience increases, but the rates

of decline differ depending on retirement status, and as we shall see,
                                    6




                                                      *
                  Table    1 —   Regression Results


                                                              (3)
                    (1)                   (2)        Pooled Results
                    Not             Partially       (Conventionally
                  Retired            Retired       Estimated Profile)

Coef. of           .096                 -.257                .125
 Exp.            (2.40)             (—1.77)                (3.37)

Coef.   of        —.00112              .00217                .00l58
 Exp.2          (—2.57)              (1.46)               (—3.99)


Coef.   of         .0068                 .0144               .0101
 Ten.            (3.59)              (2.19)                (5.31)



Coef. of          —.000027              -.000124            —.00008
 Ten.2           (—.66)             (—.80)                (1.94)


R2                 .300                  .242                .327
Stand. Error       .4398                 .6516               .4825
No. of Obs.         3955                 696                  4651


Expon. of
                 $2.93              $1.82                 $2.73



Exp.             46.2               49.2                  46.6
 (SD Exp.)       (3.81)             (4.00)                 (3.98)



Ten              18.5               10.3                   17.3
(SD Ten.)       (13.8)             (12.7)                 (14.0)




t-statistics are in parentheses
 differ in an important way.9

         Turn now to the question of entral concern to this paper. Are the

 separate wage equations based on data for those who are not retired and

 for those who are partially retired significantly different from one

 another? The first step in answering this question is to test whether

 the two equations have significantly different intercept terms, con-

 straining the equations to have equal slope coefficients. This test is

performed by adding a dummy variable for partial retirement to the

pooled equation. This dummy is found to he highly significant, indicating

a substantial difference in the intercept terms for the two equations.l0

     The second step tests whether the experience and tenure variables

can be constrained to have the same values for the not retired and for

the partially retired.11 This test involves adding fouradditional

variables to the pooled equation: the four tenure and experience vari-

ables multiplied by a dummy variable indicating partial retirement.

These four variables as a group are found to be significantly different

from zero, indicating that a simple intercept dummy is not sufficient to

capture the differences between the not retired and the partially retired
               12
individuals.


                          II. Tenure Profiles

     The tenure profiles implied by the coefficients in the three wage

equations in Table 1 are pictured in Figure 1. ?lso pictured in the

bottom of that figure is a curve plotting the ratio of the number partially
retired to the total of those not retired and partially retired - the
probability   of partial retirement —   against years of tenure. It can be
          FIGURE 1
                                               Not
                                                 Retired
 2
                                                Pooled
                                                Partially
                                                 Retired
.7
     B"
.5
                                      No. Par Ret
                               No. Par Ret+ No. Not Ret
 0510152025          30   35     40         Tenure
                                              C.
                                        9




seen from that figure that the probability of partial retirement peaks

at very low tenure. This ref1ect the behavior of those who partially

retire outside the job they held while not retired. The probability

of partial retirement is relatively constant at higher levels of tenure,

reflecting the behavior of those who phase into partial retirement in

the same job they held while not retired. This probability does, how-

ever, rise again at very high levels of tenure (not pictured i.n the

figure) ,   levels   at which there are very few observations.

     What are the differences in predicted wages between the wage profile

computed following the conventional approach and the wage profiles which

recognize the existence of simultaneous offers for work while not

retired and work while partially retired? Table 2 presents information

useful for answering this question, while in Figure 1 we illustrate points

pertaining to the information in Table 2. Consider               a worker with


              Table 2: wage Predictions from Alternative
                              Wage Equations


                                        Years of Tenure
     Wage                           0                     18 years
      Equation

     Conventional
                                    (B)                     (ix)
      Approach
                                  $2.38                    $2.78
      (pooled)


     Not                          ([3')                    (A'
      Retired                     $2.62                    $2.94



     Partially                    (B")                     (1½")
      Retired                     $1.94                   $2.41
                                         10




average characteristics for the sample as a whole, which               are very close
in   Va] 110 to average charactcristi s for      the   not   ret i red. I U lie keeps
working    a not   retired,    according to the conventional (pooled)         wage

equation   his earnings,      corresponding to point A in       Figure 1   (at around

18   years of job tenure) ,    would   be equal to $2.78.       In contrast to the
conventional   approach, the differences in wage paid to nonretirees and to

partial retirees may be recognized. The respective predicted wage for an

individual with average characteristics for the not retired, who is in

fact not retired, is $2.94, and corresponds t.o point A' in Figure

Point   A" represents the predicted wage of au incH i1u:i1 wi Hi rnic rage
characteristics of the not_retired,           who is in   fact purtial1v retired.
This predicted wage, equal to $2.41, lies above the wage tenure profile
for   the partially retired, which is drawn holding variables measuring
health, education, father's status and experience at values appropriate
for   the partially   retired group.14 The predicted wages associated with
not   retired and partially retired individuals with similar characteristics

(points A' and A") differ from the predictions from the pooled wage

equation (point A) by 5.8% and -13.3% respectively. The single wage

prediction obtained from the conventional approach for a job which is

newly secured (i.e. with 0 tenure) is $2.38 for our typical individual.

(corresponding to point B). When work while not retired and work while

partially retired are distinguished, the wage offers at zero tenure,

corresponding to points B' and B" in Figure 1, are $2.62 and $1.94 re-

spectively. These differ from the conventional estimates by 10.1% for
                                                                                     15
work while not retired, and -18.5% for work while partially retired.

Thus the conventional approach may underpredict the wage for those who

are not retired and overpredict the wage for those who are partially
                                      11




 retire    hy i zeahie amoimbs.

       Moreover, the conventional approach is simply not appropriate for

 analyzing variation in the relative wages offered for work when partially

 retired and not retired —    variation    that depends on the institutional

 constraints facing the older individual. More specifically, our esti-

 mates suggest that there are three factors affecting the relative wage

 offers between work when not retired and work when partially retired:

 a) A lower wage is paid to those who are partially retired than to those

 not retired, even if they partially retire on their main job and hence

do not lose their accumulated tenure; b) those who face a lower limit

constraint on hours of work on the main job must forego accumulated

tenure to partially retire, reducing the wage commensurately; c) when one

changes jobs, either because partial retirement is not available on the

main   job or hccaise age of mandalory retirement ha; been reached, the
new job may differ from the old one in characteri 5t1C5 that bear a relati en
to the wage offer — e.g., pension coverage, years to mandatory retirement
and occupation.'6 The conventional approach picks up the combined effects

of these three factors without distinguishing among them For example,

continuing   with the   data in Table 2, if an individual can partially retire

in the main job, the dominant set of offers -       that   is the best single

offers —   are $2.94 for work when not retired and $2.41 For work when

partially retired, a 22% difference in the wage for work when not retired

and when partially retired. If the individual must change jobs in order

to partially retire, the dominant offers are $2.94 and $1.94, a 52% dif-

ference in the wage. Here, to partially retire the individual must leave

the main job.17 Clearly, the difference in wage offers for work when

partially retired and when not retired varies siibntantiai 1 y depending on
                                    12




the institutional constraints facing the worker. Yet the conventional

approach cannot be used to descrile the effects on the wage offer set of

these different constraints.

     The best available structural analysis of retirement behavior, that

of Gordon and Blinder (1980) ,   relies   on the conventional approach to

analyzing the wage equation. Their analysis ignores the role of the wage

differential between work when not retired and when partially retired,

assuming instead that all workers face, at a moment in time, a single

dominant wage offer. In particular, they assume that all workers are

free, in the absence of mandatory retirement, to phase into retirement by

reducing hours on the main job from full-time work to zero. The con-

sequences of this assumption for parameter estimates in structural retire-

ment models are discussed in a companion piece (Gustman and Steinmeier,

forthcoming). Consequences of adopting an alternative assumption, that

all workers must work full time or not at all on all -jobs, is also

discussed in that paper.'8




                   III. Wa9-Experience PrOfiles

     Figure 2 pictures the three wage—experience profiles derived from

the equations in Table 1. Also pictured in that diagram is a curve

indicating the probability that a wage observation will he for a person

who is partially retired, as a function of labor market experience.

Given the continuous positive relation between that probability and

experience, the fact that the average wage is substantially lower for

those who are partially retired, and the influence of the "significantly"

more negative slope of wage equation for the partially retired, the

experience profile as computed in a pooled regression, which does not
                                                FIGURE 2
 in
 wage
1. 2
1.0
                                                                                               Not Retired
 .9
 .8
                                                                                               Pooled
  7
 .6
 .5
 .4                                                                                        Partially Retired
                                                                                                 No. Par Ret
                                                                                         No. Par Ret + No. Not Ret
 .3
 .2
 .1
  38    39   40   41   42   43   44   45   46     47       48   49   50   51   52   53    54       Experience
                                         14




distinguish between those who are and arc not partially retired, will

exhibit a slope that over—states the decline in the wage paid for

continued      full   time work in the main job with increasing experience.

For the 'pooled" sample,        the mean experience is 46.6 years. Plus or
minus two standard deviations (of four years) it              ranges from 38.6 to

54.6 years. According to the pooled results, from 39 to 55 years of

experience the wage declines from $3.02 to $2.08, or 31% over the 16

year period.'9 The wage rate decline over the same period for those

who nre not     roti.rerI   (from $2.95 to    $2.58)   i about.

       Those    results suggest that the measured dcc i no of the 'ago for
older workers with increasing experience implied by a conventional estimate
of the wage equation may overstate the decline with increasing experience
in   the wage offer for work while not retired by as much as 60 percent.

This finding should be of considerable interest to those studying the productivity

wage profile relation, depreciation of human capital contracts and related topics.

      To the standard analysis of wage profiles, the 'cJectiv.ity bias

one worries about results from the fact that there are no wage observa-

tions for those who are fully retired. If, however, the analysis

distinguishes between partial retirement and nonretirement, then current

wage observations for the not retired equation are not available either

for those who are currently retired or for those who are partially

retired. The analogous situation holds for observations of wages when

partially retired.

      The experience profile examined above has not been corrected for

the effect of selectivity bias. A full correction required the estima-

tion of a complete structural model, explaining the probabilities of
                                        15




nonretirement, partial retirement, and ful.l retirement. Such a model should

deal    explicitly with the role of fower limit constraints on hours of work

affecting those in a majority of main jobs. Tn an earlier study using

these    same data grouped into categories, we took a less complete approach

to test for selectivity bias. Using retirement equations with outcome cate-

gori      that clinti eguished   between those who were nn reti red     ann   those }ir
were    parti ally   retired, we found that correction factors analogous to

the    Mill's ratio were   significant, but did     not have a sizable influence

either in wage equations for work on the main job or for work while

partially retired. Carliner (1982) ,          using the Parses data for older
workers and distinguishing only between those who were not retired and

those who were, came to a similar conclusion.2'

        Construction of a more complete structural model for purposes of

refining the estimates of selectivity bias          is a task that   would take

us beyond the scope of this paper. However, we can use the longitudinal

nature of the wage data to examine one aspect of the selectivity problem,

whether those individuals with wage observations in various categories

in later years of the survey had wage residuals while not retired in

earlier survey years that were higher or lower than average.22

Table 3 reports on residuals from the wage equations For           those who
are   not retired and for those who are either partially or not retired

(the   pooled wage equation) .     Since,    given their standard deciat: ions

the    residuals are not significantly different       from zero, the discussion

that   follows is mainly speculative.

       Consider the wage equation for the not retired group. Pt a rela-

tively low level of experience, say below 37 years, the sample is probably
                                            16




                                          Table 3


                         Average Wage Residuals Two Years Earlier
                                  by Level of Experience*


Experience
in Current
   Year           Wage Eq. for Not Retired              Pooled Wage   tion
                    Two        No.                     Two     No.
                   years       of     Cumulative      years     of     Cumulative
                  earlier      Obs.     effect       earlier   Obs.      effect

   38—39            .015                               .030
                               113       .010                  117        .020
                   (.55)                              (.55)

   40—41            .013                               .013
                               200       .015                  219        .021
                   (.43)                              (.48)

   42—43            .029                               .020
                               461       .030                  505        .027
                   (.43)                              (.44)

   44—45            .022                               .011
                              649        .034                  725        .025
                   (.40)                              (.41)

   46—47           —.006                              —. 018
                               723       .019                  834        .005
                   (.38)                              (.39)

   48—49            .018                               .008
                              636        .025                  762        .009
                   (.37)                              (.39)

   50—51            .016                              —.018              — .006
                               406       .027                  546
                   (.36)                              (.36)

   52—53           — .052                             — .054
                               165      —.017                  233       —.040
                   (.40)                              (.39)

   54—55           — .023                             —.094
                                65      —.026                   o5       —.089
                   (.36)                              (.46)




   *
    Standard deviations for the residuals at a given experience level are

       in parentheses.
                                         17




 young   enough   that   almost everyone is st.i 1 1 working   liii 1.   t imc', and
 selection   is not yet a problem. Now look at the group with 38 to 39
years of experience. According to the table, two years earlier this

group had average wages that were 1.5% greater than would be have been

predicted from the wage equation. Evidence cited earlier (see page 3)

suggests that perhaps two-thirds of this residual persists from one

observation to the next, so that the group still has wages that are

1.0% greater than the average for everyone, including the individuals

who have partially or completely retired in the meantima. In other

words, the experience curve drawn in Figure 2 would he about one percent

lower at 38-39 years of experience if the wage equation included observations for

everyone, including those for whom wages were not available.

     For the next group, with 40 to 41 years of experience, we see

that they had a residual two years earlier that was 1.3% relative to

the group that was included in the regression then. We have already

seen, though, that the group two years earlier, with 38 to 39 years

of experience, had wages that were on the average 1.0% higher than

we would have expected to find had the regression included wage for

partially and completely retired individuals. So, for the group with

40 to 41 years of experience, the wage two years previously was about

2.3% (1.0% + 1.3%) above what might have been found had the regression

considered wages for the partially and completely retired. Again, if

two-thirds of the residual persists over time, we would expect that

not retired irivididuals with 40-41 years of experience would have wages

that wore about 1.5% above what would be found had the sample also

included partially and completely retired individuals. This implies
                                    18




that the true experience curve for all individuals probably lies about

1.5% below the curve calculated from a regression based solely on

individuals who are not retired.

     These calculations were continued for greater levels of experience,

and also for the pooled wage equation, with the results being found in

the "cumulative effect" columns of Table 3. These results indicate

that the curves, corrected for selection problems, would probably lie

below the estimated curves for low levels of experience and would rise

above the estimated curves forhigh levels of experience.   rn other

words, the curves, corrected for selectivity problems, would probably

be flatter that the estimated curves, and the correction would be

slightly greater for the pooled wage equation than for the equation

including only the not retired.23



                           V. Conclusions

     Older workers are likely to face at least two wage offers which

they View as competing, pay for work while not retired and pay for work

while partially retired. The conventional approach to the analysis

of wage profiles pools all wage observations without distinguishing

those who are partially retired from those who are not retired. Wage

profiles based on the conventional approach are constructed as if

there were a single wage offer for those with given experience and

tenure, whatever their retirement status.

     Based on our empirical analysis, we reach the following conclusions.

First, the wages for work while not retired and for work while partially

retired are significantly different from one another. Second, the wage
                                   I9




offers   facing older workers may vary considerably with the institu-

tional limitations they face -   i..    ,   between those who do and do not

face lower limit constraints requiring full-time work or none at all

on their main job.

     Third, selectivity bias aside, failing to distinguish between wages

paid to those who are partially retired and those who are not retired

causes the decline in wages with experience to be greatly exaggerated.

At highest levels of experience, the relative number of wage observa-

tions for those who are partially retired and receiving a low wage is

greatest. The resulting bias is so large that the slope in wage

experience profiles as conventionally estimated may overstate the

decline with experience in wage offers for work while not retired by

as much as 60 per cent. In addition, there is some suggestion that

wage profiles which do not correct for selectivity bias may overstate

the degree of decline in the wage with experience, with the correction

for the pooled wage equation being slightly greater than the correction

for the wage equation for the riot retired. Since selectivity bias has

relatively similar effects on the wage profile as conventionally

estimated and on the wage profile for those who are not retired, a

conventionally estimated wage profile, even          corrected for selectivity

bias, may overstate the decline in the slope of the wage-experience

profile.
                                        20


                11'pcndix — Coefficient Estimates for Control
               Variables Standardized for in Computing Table 1*


                                                        (3)
                          (1)            (2)        Pooled Results
                          Not        Partially     (Conventionally
                        Retired       Retired     Estimated Profile)

                           .181          .218             .194
Occupation 1
                         (8.78)       (2.68)            (9.18)

                          —.035         .177             —.0002
Occupation 2
                        (—1.45)       (2.53)            (—.017)

                          —.162        —.082             —.161
Occupation 4                                           (—6. 35)
                        (—6.21)      (—1.07)

Private Pensions
                           .277         .297              .293
                        (15.55)       (3.27)           (15.90)

                           .213         .136              .234
Public Pensions
                         (9.61)       (1.03)           (10.11)

Mandatory Re-              .003         .023              .006
 tirement Horizon        (1.30)       (1.71)            (2.49)

                          —.042        - .167            - .075
Short Term
 Health Problem         (—1.01)      (-1.28)           (—1.84)

Long Term                  .084       -1.04             -1.06
 Health Problem         (—4.51)      (—1.81)           (5.77)

Health Problem            -.060        -.157             -.100
 Ended Last Job         (—1.34)      (1.48)            (—2.40)

                           .101         .138              .107
Nonf arm Father
                         (6.40)       (2.52)            (6.73)

                          —.001         .022             —.019
Years of Ed.                          (0.73)           (—2.23)
                         (—.17)

                           .029         .017              .038
Years of Ed. >8                        (.35)            (2.66)
                         (2.05)

                                       - .038            - .0035
                          —.006
Years of Ed. >12                                        (—.22)
                         (—.37)       (—.63)

                           .0013       —.225             —.027
High School Grad.                                       (—.77)
                          (.04)      (—1.80)

                           .107        —.08               .088
College Grad.                         (—. 37)           (1.51)
                         (1.88)

    *   t-Statistics   are in Parentheses
                                    21

                                 FOOTNOTES




     'In this study, an individual is classified as partial].y retired

if he says that he is.   (For a comparison with other definitions of

partial retirement based on declines in wages or hours of work, see

Gustman and Steinmeier, 1981.)


     2Notice that we refer in this paper only to the wage, not to

compensation. Returns to work, especially for older workers, are in-

fluenced importantly by provisions of both private retirement programs

and by Social Security. They may also be influenced by compensating

differentials for difficulty of work. For a reaevant analysis of pensions,

see Lazear (1982). On Social Security see Blinder, Gordon and Wise

(1980 and 198Z and Burkhauser and Turner (1982).   Quinn (1977) analyzes
nonpecuniary aspects of jobs.

     3mis form of the wage equation, with the wage measured in logs

and quadratic effects of tenure and experience, has been adopted here

to conform with wage equations estimated in the related literature.

     4A11 wages are deflated to 1967 using the index of hourly earnings

from the Economic Report of the President, 1981, Table B-36. Wage

observations which implied an hourly wage above $100 or below 25 per

hour were eliminated from the sample. Most of the latter observations

appear to be the result of an inconsistent response to a question that

asked the individual to report wage per unit of time, and then asked

that, except in the case of an hourly wage, cents be rounded to the

nearest dollar. It appears that in some cases the hourly wage was also

rounded. Accordingly, a response such as 2, meaning $2 per hour, may
                                 22



have been coded as 2 cents per hour.

     5Since only the last wage observed for each employer is included,

truncation of the survey in 1975 and inclusion of all wage observations

for that year mean that the probability of a wage observation being

included in the regression is not strictly reflective of its probability

in the population. In addition, the inclusion of the last wage received

from an employer means that for some individuals who retire partially

on a job previously held while not retired, the wage paid while not

retired at all is undersampled. A comparison of the probabilities of

partial retirement computed directly from the survey with the prob-

abilities of observing a wage for an individual in the sample who is

partially retired suggests that our procedure slighlly understates

the probability of partial retirement, with the degree of understatement

being greater at highest rather than lowest levels of experience.

Analogously, there is relative over—sampling of the wage observations

for those who are not retired and who experience frequent job turnover.

Fewer than 10% of those observed as not retired have more than one

employer during the period of the survey. As a result of the lower

weight given to the partially retired, especially at higher levels of

experience, the wage—experience profile computed from pooled observa-

tions using only a single observation for each job understates, but not

to a significant degree, the decline in the wage profile that would

be calculated from a pooled cross-section profile which included all

wage observations.

     6The correlation between wage residuals in main and partial retire-

inent jobs is .31.
                                       23




              this study, the main job is defined as any job held full—time

    by an individual who reports he is not retired. In our earlier study

     (Gustman and Steinmejer, 1981) , we defined main job as the job held

    full-time at age 55. Of those who are partially retired and for whom

    appropriate data are available, 53% have partiall.y retired on jobs they

    held previously while not retired. However, only 32% of these partially

    retired individuals are in jobs they previously held at age 55.

         Observations for individuals who are partially retired in jobs

    where they are self employed were eliminated from the sample, even if

    the "main job" held by the individual did riot involve self employment.

    On the one hand, this procedure avoids inflating the opportunity wage

    while partially retired by the returns to own capital. On the other

    hand, it disregards some obviously superior opportunities while

    partially retired available to some workers not self employed on their

    main job, causing the return to partial retirement to he understated.

         8When added to the wage equation for those who ar not retired,

a    li.rinar term rc'flecting year of birth has a coefficient   equal. to .01,

indicating    that real wages are higher by about 1%   for   each   year earlier

the    individual is   born. This variable reflects the combined effects of

vintage and year of observation. There is only slight effect on the
coefficients of the experience and tenure variahie; from including a
measure related to year of birth.
         91f the   partially   retired group is divided   accordinq to whether

    or not the individuals had previously considered themselves to be not
    retired at all in their current jobs, significant differences re found
    between the two groups. However, for a considerable number of        partially
                                                        24




retired individuals, it is impossible to ascertain whether or not they

had previously considered themselves not retired in the job. In order

to avoid dropping these observations, we do not distinguish between

various groups of partially retired individuals and instead concentrate

on the differences between partially retired individuals and individuals

who are not retired at all.

     10                                           .
          The estimated coefficient of the dummy variable is -0.19, with
                                           .




a t-statistic of 8.14. This coefficient does not, however, represent

the full effect of partial retirement on the wage. Ps we discuss in

section II below, the actual wage difference between those not retired

and those partially retired will be larger than this coefficient,

reflecting the effects of differences in the characteristics of jobs

held by those in each retirement category. These job related charac-

teristics, reflecting pension coverage, mandatory retirement provisions

and occupations, bear a systematic relation to the wage.

     Oii- e   nu. gilL   in
                         •
                            L   L   rom   .I_t.    L.-....
                                               ie au'jv      e   r                   L
                                                                     .,.11— 4.1.--..1-   1-L.-.
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                  A u1.4-.   .   --   a   .Oi —


veritional      wage equation of a variable measuring hours of work, a

variable which is likely to be correlated with an indicator of whether

the individual is partially or not retired, might help to avoid some of the

bias in the conventional approach. However, Zabalza, Pissarides and

Barton (1980, p. 258) report that such a variable was not significant

in wage equations which they fit in a sample of workers in the U.K.

Clark, Johnson and Sumner (1981) also reported mixed results on the

use of an hours variable. Questions as to whether a different specif-

ication from the ones employed in these studies, or whether other

dimensions of partial retirement, such as lowered difficulty of work
                                     25



  or limLtecl responsibility, could explain t.he negative impact c)f partial

  retirement on the wage remain the ubject for future investigation.

       UTheoretical considerations in addition to those related to the

  effects of minimum hours constraints on the
                                                choices facing older workers
 fail to prescribe identical coefficients on the independent variables

 in the two wage equations. Indeed, while in practice full—time work

 has been the more remunerative, theory does not determine whether the

 hourly wage for part—time work or for full-time work should he highest.

 There are a number of forces on both the supply and demand sides of the

 market which are working in opposite directions.    On the supply side,
 the existence of fixed costs of working leads one to expect a higher

 supply price (higher reservation wage) for jobs that offer the opportunity

 to work only a limited number of hours. In contrast on the supply side,

 some people, especially those who are competing with older workers for

part-time jobs, have a discontinuous marginal cost of time. Most

importantly, time available after school or during the summer has a

low opportunity cost for youth, while for some parents with schoOl age

children, still primarily women, time during school hours may have a

relatively low opportunity cost. On the demand side, fixed hiring,

bookkeeping and start up costs of working to the firm would lead one to

expect a lower wage offer for part—time than for full-time work.     On the

other hand, firms facing demand patterns which are characterized by

clear peaks and valleys (e.g., restaurants and retail establishments)

will find that the hourly productivity of part-time workers, whose

employment can be targeted on peak demand, is relatively high.
                                        26




        '2The F statistic for the significance of these four variables as

a group is 16.31 with (4, 4525) degrees of freedom. The critical

value for a 1% significance test is 3.32

        13By 'average characteristics of the not retired" we mean that

the individual has the average values for the not retired in the health,

education, whether the father worked on a farm arid experience variables.


        '4No   adjustment   is made for occupation, pension coverage or mandatory

retirement variables. These are job related differences which would

differ between those who are partially retired and those who are not, even if

the jobs were held by the same individual. It will be seen below that

the difference in wages between the not retired and the partially retired

varies considerably with the level of experience. The difference in

the average experience between the not retired and partially retired

groups is only three years. But this higher level of experience for

the partially retired group is associated with a reduction in the log

wage of .15, representing 80% of the distance between P." and the wage

profile for the partially retired.


            caveat should be noted. The predicted wage for employment while

not retired but working on a new job is influenced by the wages of those

who are not retired and have low levels of job tenure.        P. significant

proportion of those with low levels of tenure are employed in jobs that

are characterized by high turnover. They have skills that are more

likely to be industry or occupation specific rather than firm specific -

e.g.,    construction workers. Considerations such as these, and dif-

ferences in remaining work life between prime age and older workers,
                                          27



create      doubts that tenure will play similar roles in wage equations for

older and for prime age workers. Thus the wages received by those with

low job tenure may not provide a good basis for predicting the oppor-

tunity wage for a newly separated older worker. This brings up the

issue of availability of jobs, at alternative wages, to older workers,

the determinants of search time until receiving a job offer, and

related         questions which have yet to be answered for older workers who
are job losers hut do not wish to retire.
        '6Gordon and linder (1980, p. 290) discuss the desirability of
older workers changing jobs. One reason they give for a job change,
which      is   not   consistent with the specification of their   model,   is to

reduce hours of work. In evaluating the desirability of such a change,

they note that the wage offer would be reduced on the new job both

as a result of changes in job characteristics (e.g. change in pension

coverage) and because of a loss in job tenure. Given the size of the

loss, they state that on balance, the typical wage loss from a job

transition late in life appears to be quite severe. They find it doubt-

ful, therefore, that many older workers will want to make such trans-

itions voluntary.


       17 implication of work by Borjas (1981) and by Carliner (1981)

is that the wage offer is lowered even further if the job held does

not correspond to longest job. When a dummy          variable   indicating whether

or   not   current occupation corresponds to longest occupation is entered

in our wage equations, it has negative and significant coefficients

(with t-statistics of over 5) in the wage equations for those who are
                                   28



not retired arid in the pooled result, indicatii-iq a decline in the log
wage of about .09 if the individual is employed in an occupation other
than   his longest. The coefficient is —.02 in the   equation for the
partially   retired, with a t—statistic of 0.33. When this    variable   is

entered in the three equations in Table 1, the tenure coefficients all

decline, while the tenure squared coefficients all increase. The fact

that occupation change from longest job is of such importance increases

the potential effect of a lower limit constraint on hours of work on

the wage offers facing a given worker. To understand more fully the

effect of job change on wages, the relation for older workers of wage

offers to reason for job change would have to he analyzed.

       '8For such a model, see for example, Burbidge and Robb (1980).

       '9The wage decline with experience indicated by the   pooled results
would he even steeper if   as in many studies of earnings profiles, we

did not standardize for occupation. Instead, we follow the Gordon

and Blinder specification, which does standardize. is is well known,

earnings profiles covering the full life cycle do not standardize for

occupation when attempting to isolate the returns to education because

some of these returns are realized through choice of occupation. The

goal of wage equations used in retirement studies is to obtain the best

prediction of wage offers, predictions that are enhanced by inclusion

of the occupational variable.


       201t can be seen in Figure 2 that at lower levels of experience

the predicted wage based on the pooled wage equation slightly exceeds

the wage predicted from observations for those who are not retired. In
                                  29




this range there are relatively few observations. The wage—experience

profiles at these extremes are influenced by the curvature of the log

wage profiles, which is constrained to be parabolic.


     21Gordon and Blinder (1980) tested for selectivity bias in the

context of their model of retirement behavior. They found that compared

to coefficients in a linear approximation of the market wage equation

which is not corrected for selectivity bias, for some variables the

correction for selectivity bias turn out to he sizeable. Their tests

and correction make use of a maximum likelihood procedure which estimates

jointly the retirement and wage equations. Accordingly, their correction

is conditional on the specification of their entire model. We have

argued elsewhere (Guotman and Steinxrteier, forthcoming) that this specif-

ication is incorrect because it does not allow for the fact that. most

people are not free to reduce hours of work below full—time on their

main job.

     222\riother type of selectivity bias would result if those who kept

working in later years experienced less deterioration in their wages

than those who left the sample would have experienced. We do not examine

this type of selectivity bias.


     23The correction would at first appear to be particularly great for

the pooled equation at 54 to 55 years of experience. However, the high

negative residual of —.094 represents only 95 observations. Were an

adjustment for selectivity bias done, this observation is expected to

exert an influence on the curvature of the wage equation that reflected

its sample size, which is small compared with the sample sizes for the

other levels of experience.
                                    30




                                REFERENCES



Blinder, Alan S. ,   Gordon, Roger and Wise, Donald, "Reconsidering the

     Work Disincentive Effects of Social Security," National Tax Journal,

     Vol. 33, December, 1980, 431—442.

Blinder, Alan S. ,   Gordon, Roger and Wise, Donald, "Rhetoric and Reality

     In Social Security 1nalysis — A Rejoinder," National Tax Journal,

     Vol. 34, December, 1981. 473—478.

Borjas, George, "Job Mobility arid   Earnings   Over the Life Cycle," Industrial

     and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 34, April 1981, 365—376.

Burbirige, John S. and Robb, A. Leslie, "Pensions and Retirement Behavior."

     Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. i, 1'iiqnt,       1980,   421-437.

Burkhauser, Richard V. and Turner, John, "Can Twenty Five Million

     Nnericans Be Wrong? — A Response to Blinder, Gordon and Wise,"

     National Tax Journal, Vol. 34, December, 1981, 467-472.

Carliner, Geoffrey, "The Wages of Older Men," Journal of Human Resources,

     Vol. 17, Winter 1982, 25—38.

Clark, Robert L. ,   Johnson, Thomas J. and Sumner, Daniel A., "Labor
     Supply of the Elderly in A Family Context," Final Report to the

     Department of Health and Human Services, March, 1981.

Gordon, Robert H. and Blinder, Alan S., "Market Wages, Reservation Wages

     and Retirement," Journal of public Economics, Vol. 14, Oct., 1980, 227-308.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. ,    "Partial    Retirement and the

     Analysis of Retirement Behavior." NBER Working Paper No. 763,

     September, 1981.
                                  31




Gustmnn, Man I. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. , "Minimum hours   Constraints
     and Retirement Behavior," Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.

Lazear, Edward p., "Pensions as Severance Pay," NBER Working Paper No. 944,

     July, 1982.

Quinn, Joseph, "?licroeconomic Deteriiinants of Early Retirement: A Cross

     Sectional View of White Married Men," Journal of Human Resources,

     Vol. 12, Summer, 1977, 41—62.

Zabaiza, A., Pissarides, C., and Barton, M., "Social Security and the

     Choice Between Full-time Work, Part-time Work and Retirement,"

     Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 14, Oct., 1980, 245-276.
