                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        FINANCIAL ASSET RETURNS, DIRECTION-OF-CHANGE FORECASTING,
                         AND VOLATILITY DYNAMICS

                                         Peter F. Christoffersen
                                          Francis X. Diebold

                                          Working Paper 10009
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10009


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




This work is supported by the National Science Foundation, the Guggenheim Foundation, the Wharton
Financial Institutions Center, FCAR, IFM2 and SSHRC. For helpful comments we thank David Bates,
Antulio Bomfim, Michael Brandt, Michel Dacorogna, Graham Elliott, Rene Garcia, Christian Gourieroux,
Clive Granger, Joanna Jasiak, Michael Johannes, Blake LeBaron, Bruce Lehman, Martin Lettau, Nour
Meddahi, Sergei Sarkissian, Frank Schorfheide, Allan Timmermann, Pietro Veronesi, Ken West, Hal White,
Jonathan Wright, and seminar participants at the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve Board, McGill
University, UCSD, Penn, the Third Annual Conference on Financial Econometrics at the University of
Waterloo, the Econometric Society Winter Meetings in Washington DC, the NBER/NSF Time Series Meeting
in Philadelphia, and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Sean Campbell and Clara Vega provided
outstanding research assistance. All inadequacies are ours alone. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Peter F. Christoffersen and Francis X. Diebold. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Financial Asset Returns, Direction-of-Change Forecasting, and Volatility Dynamics
Peter F. Chistoffersen and Francis X. Diebold
NBER Working Paper No. 10009
October 2003
JEL No. G1

                                             ABSTRACT

We consider three sets of phenomena that feature prominently – and separately – in the financial
economics literature: conditional mean dependence (or lack thereof) in asset returns, dependence
(and hence forecastability) in asset return signs, and dependence (and hence forecastability) in asset
return volatilities. We show that they are very much interrelated, and we explore the relationships
in detail. Among other things, we show that: (a) Volatility dependence produces sign dependence,
so long as expected returns are nonzero, so that one should expect sign dependence, given the
overwhelming evidence of volatility dependence; (b) The standard finding of little or no conditional
mean dependence is entirely consistent with a significant degree of sign dependence and volatility
dependence; (c) Sign dependence is not likely to be found via analysis of sign autocorrelations, runs
tests, or traditional market timing tests, because of the special nonlinear nature of sign dependence;
(d) Sign dependence is not likely to be found in very high-frequency (e.g., daily) or very low-
frequency (e.g., annual) returns; instead, it is more likely to be found at intermediate return horizons;
(e) Sign dependence is very much present in actual U.S. equity returns, and its properties match
closely our theoretical predictions; (f) The link between volatility forecastability and sign
forecastability remains intact in conditionally non-Gaussian environments, as for example with time-
varying conditional skewness and/or kurtosis.

Peter F. Christoffersen
McGill University
peter.christoffersen@mcgill.ca

Francis X. Diebold
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fdiebold@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction
        We consider three sets of phenomena that feature prominently – and separately – in the financial
economics literature: conditional mean independence (and hence no forecastability) in asset returns,
dependence (and hence forecastability) in asset return signs, and dependence (and hence forecastability)
in asset return volatilities. We argue that they are very much interrelated, forming a tangled and
intriguing web, a full understanding of which leads to a deeper understanding of the subtleties of financial
market dynamics. Let us introduce them in turn.
        First, consider conditional mean independence, by which we mean that an asset return’s
conditional mean does not vary with the conditioning information set. Asset return forecasting is central
to active asset allocation. Short-run return forecasting, however, is widely viewed as difficult, and
perhaps even impossible. This view stems from both introspection and observation. That is, financial
economic theory suggests that asset returns should not be easily forecast using readily-available
information and forecasting techniques, and a broad interpretation of four decades of empirical work
suggests that the data support the theory (e.g., Fama, 1970, 1991). Consequently, conditional mean
independence is reasonably viewed as a good working approximation to asset return dynamics. We do,
however, emphasize the word “approximation,” as weak conditional mean dependence at very short
horizons is well-known (see for example Lo and MacKinlay, 1999), typically emerging as weak serial
correlation in ultra-high-frequency returns due to microstructure effects. Additionally, many believe that
conditional-mean dependence is also operative at very long horizons (see for example Fama and French,
1988, 1989, and Campbell and Shiller, 1988), perhaps due to time-varying risk premia. This belief is,
however, far from universally held, due to serious statistical complications including possibly spurious
regressions (e.g., Kirby, 1997), data snooping (e.g., Foster, Smith and Whaley, 1997) and small sample
biases (Nelson and Kim, 1993), which may grossly distort standard inference procedures when applied to
long-horizon predictability regressions. However, the possible presence of very short-run or very long-
run mean reversion is of little relevance to this paper, because (1) we focus on return horizons between
one day and one year, and (2) our basic contention, namely that sign dependence exists and is interesting,
would in general only be strengthened by conditional mean dependence.
        Second, consider dependence and hence forecastability of market direction (the return sign).
Profitable trading strategies may result if one is successful at forecasting market direction, quite apart
from whether one is successful at forecasting returns themselves. A well-known and classic example,
discussed routinely even at the MBA textbook level (e.g., Levich, 2001, Chapter 8), involves trading in
speculative markets. If, for example, the Yen/$ exchange rate is expected to increase, reflecting expected
depreciation of the Yen relative to the dollar and hence a negative expected return on the Yen, one would
sell Yen for Dollars, whether in the spot or derivatives markets.1 Positive profits may be made when the
sign forecast is correct.2 This leads Levich, for example, to focus on what he terms useful forecasts,
namely those that predict the direction of price change and hence “...lead to profitable speculative
positions and correct hedging decisions.”
        Interestingly, there is substantial evidence that sign forecasting can often be done with surprising
success. Relevant literature includes Breen, Glosten and Jagannathan (1989), Leitch and Tanner (1991),
Wagner, Shellans and Paul (1992), Pesaran and Timmermann (1995), Kuan and Liu (1995), Larsen and
Wozniak (1995), Womack (1996), Gencay (1998), Leung, Daouk and Chen (1999), Elliott and Ito (1999),
White (2000), Pesaran and Timmermann (2001), and Cheung, Chinn and Pascual (2003).
        Finally, consider dependence and forecastability of asset return volatility. A huge literature
documents the notable dependence, and hence forecastability, of asset return volatility, with important
implications not only for asset allocation, but also for asset pricing and risk management. Note that
strong conditional volatility dependence–in sharp contrast to conditional mean dependence–will not in
general be reduced by market trading; hence the large amount of evidence of conditional volatility
dependence is not at all controversial. Bollerslev, Chou and Kroner (1992) provide a fine review of
evidence in the GARCH tradition, while Ghysels, Harvey and Renault (1996) survey results from
stochastic volatility modeling, Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2003) survey results from realized
volatility modeling, and Franses and van Dijk (2000) survey results from regime-switching volatility
models. Interesting extensions include models of time-variation in higher-ordered conditional moments,
such as the conditional skewness models of Harvey and Siddique (2000) and the conditional kurtosis
model of Hansen (1994). The recent literature also contains intriguing theoretical work explaining the
empirical phenomena, such as Brock and Hommes (1997) and de Fontnouvelle (2000).
        In this paper we characterize in detail the relationships among the three phenomena and three
literatures discussed briefly above: asset return conditional mean independence, sign dependence, and
conditional variance dependence. It is well known that conditional mean independence and conditional
variance dependence are entirely compatible, as occurs for example in a pure GARCH process. However,
much less is known in general about sign dependence, and in particular about the relationship of sign
dependence to conditional mean independence and volatility dependence. Hence we focus throughout on
sign dependence. Among other things, we show that:


        1
          Generalizations to multiple asset classes, such as stock and bond markets, involve basing
allocation strategies on forecasts of the sign of the return spread.
        2
            We say “may” because one must obviously adjust for interest and other costs.

                                                     -2-
        (a) Volatility dependence produces sign dependence, so long as expected returns are nonzero.
                 Hence one should expect sign dependence, given the overwhelming evidence of volatility
                 dependence.
        (b) The standard finding of little or no conditional mean dependence is entirely consistent with a
                 significant degree of sign dependence and volatility dependence.
        (c) Sign dependence is not likely to be found via analysis of sign autocorrelations or other tests
                 (such as runs tests or traditional tests of market timing), because the nature of sign
                 dependence is highly nonlinear.
        (d) Sign dependence is not likely to be found in high-frequency (e.g., daily) or low-frequency
                 (e.g., annual) returns. Instead, it is more likely to appear at intermediate return horizons
                 of two or three months.
        (e) The link between volatility forecastability and sign forecastability remains intact in
                 conditionally non-Gaussian environments, as for example with time-varying conditional
                 skewness and/or kurtosis.
        (f) Sign dependence is very much present in actual U.S. equity returns, and its properties match
                 closely our theoretical predictions.
We derive the theoretical results in a general setting, and we illustrate them using a popular model of
return dynamics.
        We proceed as follows. In Section 2 we build intuition by sketching the main results in simple
contexts, focusing primarily on the conditionally Gaussian case. We discuss the basic framework, we
arrive at the basic result that volatility dynamics produce sign dynamics, and we draw some of its
implications. In Sections 3 and 4 we focus in greater depth on sign dependence, and we provide basic
results on sign realizations, sign forecasts, and the relation between the two, stressing both the
measurement (Section 3) and detection (Section 4) of sign forecastability. In Section 5 we perform a
detailed simulation experiment, which not only illustrates our basic results but also extends them
significantly, by characterizing the nature of sign forecastability as a function of forecast horizon. In
Section 6 we continue to extend our results, allowing for the possibility of unconditional and conditional
skewness and kurtosis. In Section 7 we illustrate our methods and results by forecasting the 1-month-
ahead direction of the S&P 100 index, using the VIX volatility index traded on the CBOE. We conclude
in Section 8, offering concluding remarks and discussing directions for future work.
2. Conditional Mean Dependence, Sign Dependence, and Volatility Dependence: Basic Results
        Here we explore the links between conditional mean dependence, sign dependence, and volatility


                                                        -3-
dependence. We have used the terms repeatedly but thus far not defined them precisely, relying instead
on readers’ intuition, so let us begin with some precise definitions. First, we will say that a return series
       displays conditional mean dependence (conditional mean dynamics, conditional mean
forecastability, conditional mean predictability) if               varies with    . Second, we will say that
       displays sign dependence (sign dynamics, sign forecastability, sign predictability) if the return sign
indicator series              displays conditional mean dependence; that is, if                   varies with
   .3 Finally, we will say that        displays conditional variance dependence (conditional variance
dynamics, conditional variance forecastability, conditional variance predictability, volatility dependence,
volatility dynamics, volatility forecastability, volatility predictability) if                    varies with
   .
          We now proceed to characterize the relationships among sign, volatility dynamics, and
conditional mean dynamics.
2.1 Sign Dynamics Follow from Volatility Dynamics
          Consider the prevalence of volatility dynamics in high-frequency asset returns, and the positive
expected returns earned on risky assets. To take the simplest possible example, which nevertheless
conveys all of the basic points, assume the returns on a generic risky asset are distributed as

                                                                                                               (1)


and therefore display conditional variance dependence but no conditional mean dependence. The
probability of a positive return is


                                                                                                               (2)




where M(C) is the N(0,1) c.d.f. Notice that although the distribution is symmetric around the conditional
mean, and the conditional mean is constant by assumption, the sign of the return is nevertheless
forecastable, because the probability of a positive return is time-varying (and above 0.5, if :>0). As
volatility moves, so too does the probability of a positive return: the higher the volatility, the lower the
probability of a positive return, as illustrated in Figure 1.
          The surprising result that the sign of the return is forecastable even though the conditional mean


          3
              Equivalently,    displays sign dependence if the conditional probability of a positive return,
                  , varies with , because                =                   .

                                                        -4-
is constant hinges interestingly on the interaction of a non-zero mean return and non-constant volatility.
A zero mean would render the sign unforecastable, as would constant volatility; hence the tradition in
financial econometrics of removing unconditional means and working with zero-mean series disguises
sign forecastability. It is interesting to note that the key link between sign forecastability and volatility
dynamics parallels the literature on optimal prediction under asymmetric loss. In sign forecasting,
volatility dynamics interact with a nonzero mean to produce time variation in the probability of a positive
return and hence sign forecastability. In forecasting under asymmetric loss, as in Granger (1969) and
Christoffersen and Diebold (1996, 1997), volatility dynamics similarly produce time variation in the
optimal point forecast of a series with a constant conditional mean.
        Our setup above was intentionally simple, but it is easy to see that the results are maintained
under a number of interesting variations. To take just one example, note that if returns are conditionally
non-Gaussian (e.g., conditionally skewed), the result that volatility forecastability implies sign
forecastability still holds, as we will explore in detail subsequently in Section 6. In the simple case at
hand with all conditional moments constant except the conditional variance, but allowing for a non-
Gaussian conditional density, we have that

                                                                                                                (3)



where       denotes the relevant c.d.f. Hence market direction remains forecastable so long as the mean
return is non-zero and volatility is dynamic.
2.2 Sign Dynamics do not Require Conditional Mean Dynamics
        Forecasting market direction is of interest for active asset allocation, and a substantial body of
evidence suggests that it can be done, as per the references given earlier. Successful directional
forecasting implies that returns must be somehow dependent. When directional forecasting is found
empirically successful, it is tempting to assert that it is driven by (perhaps subtle) nonlinear conditional
mean dependence, which would be missed in standard analyses of (linear) dependence, such as those
based on return autocorrelations. Obviously such assertions are unfounded, as made clear by the above
example of a process displaying both conditional mean independence and sign forecastability.
        The key insight is that although sign dynamics could be due to conditional mean dependence,
they need not be. In particular, we have demonstrated that volatility dynamics produce sign dynamics, so
that one should expect sign dynamics in asset returns, given the overwhelming evidence of volatility
dynamics, even when returns are conditional mean independent. The upshot is that the standard finding
of little or no conditional mean dynamics is entirely consistent with a significant degree of sign dynamics.

                                                      -5-
        Moreover, in a general equilibrium involving risk averse market participants, observed prices will
of course not in general evolve as martingales, which is to say that observed returns may in general
display some conditional mean dynamics, for example over the business cycle.4 Any such conditional
mean dynamics may of course contribute to sign forecastability as well. In our analysis we intentionally
assume the absence of conditional mean dynamics, for at least three reasons. First, as discussed earlier, a
wealth of evidence suggests that conditional mean independence is a reasonable empirical approximation
to asset return dynamics, despite the fact that theory does not require it.5 Second, we want to focus on the
subtle and little-understood connection between sign dynamics and volatility dynamics. Third, we focus
on fairly short horizons, certainly much shorter than the business cycle, ranging from one day to one year.
2.3 An Intriguing Decomposition
        In closing this section, we note that it is interesting to interpret the phenomena at hand through
the decomposition,


                                                                                                              (4)


In the simple models just described (and, to a good approximation, in observed return data), both of the
right-hand-side components of returns display persistent dynamics and hence are forecastable, yet the left-
hand-side variable, returns themselves, are unforecastable. This is an example of a nonlinear “common
feature,” in the terminology of Engle and Kozicki (1993): both signs of returns and absolute returns are
conditional mean dependent and hence forecastable, yet their product is conditional mean independent
and hence unforecastable.
3. Measuring the Strength of Sign Forecastability
        Here we examine a number of questions relevant to the measuring sign forecastability. How, if at
all, does the derivative of a sign forecast with respect to volatility vary as a function of volatility, and in
what volatility region is the derivative largest? What is the correlation between sign forecasts and



        4
         For a discussion of this and of return forecastability more generally, see, Balvers, Cosimano and
McDonald (1990), Ferson and Harvey (1993), Glosten, Jaganathan, and Runkle (1993), Jegadeesh (1990),
Jensen (1978), Mankiw, Romer, and Shapiro (1991), Patelis (1997), Sentana and Wadhwani (1991), and
Sweeney (1986).
        5
         Moreover, recent evidence suggests that to the extent that conditional means and variances
move jointly, they are negatively correlated, which would further increase sign predictability. See Lettau
and Ludvigson (2003) and Brandt and Kang (2003).


                                                       -6-
realizations, and how, if at all, is the correlation related to the volatility of sign forecasts?
3.1 The Responsiveness of Sign Forecasts to Volatility Changes
        Consider an obvious measure of sign probability responsiveness to changes in volatility,


                                                                                                             (5)


where we choose the notation U for “responsiveness.”6 The motivation behind this measure is that in our
simplest setup, we achieve probability forecastability only from volatility dynamics. A key issue is how
much the probability forecast changes when the volatility changes. The U measure captures this. In
general we have


                                                                                                             (6)


where f(C) is the pdf of standardized returns. In the Gaussian case,


                                                                                                             (7)


where       is a N(0,1) density function.
        In Figure 2, we work in a Gaussian situation and plot U as a function of volatility, keeping the
mean at ten percent. Notice that U is always negative (i.e., the probability of a positive return is always
decreasing in the conditional standard deviation). Crucially, however, U is not monotone in the standard
deviation; instead, it achieves an interior optimum at                              This makes sense: for tiny
F, the conditional probability can deviate little from 1, and hence responsiveness is tiny. Similarly, for
huge F, the conditional probability can deviate little from ½, and hence responsiveness is again tiny.
Intermediate values of F, however, can produce greater responsiveness. Interestingly, Figure 2 indicates
that forecastability as measured by U is maximized when F is low (but not too low) relative to :. With an
expected return : of 10 percent,                   implies quite a high conditional information ratio :/         .
The frequency with which we hit that “sweet spot” depends on the volatility of volatility, to which we
shall return.
3.2 The Correlation Between Sign Forecasts and Realizations
        In the previous subsection we considered the issue of responsiveness of probability forecasts of


        6
            This is also known as the “marginal effect” in the binary response literature.

                                                        -7-
return signs to movements in the underlying volatility. If sign forecasts don’t respond much to volatility
movements, then we could not hope for close agreement between sign forecasts and realizations. This
brings up the more general issue of how one might quantify such agreement (or lack thereof); hence in
this subsection we consider aspects of the correlation between sign forecasts and realizations. This
effectively amounts to something of an         measure of sign forecastability.7
        To characterize the correlation between sign forecasts and realizations, first notice that

                                                                                                             (8)

where P is the unconditional probability of a positive return and It+1 is the indicator variable of an ex-post
realized positive return. Second, use the law of iterated expectations to get

                                                                                                             (9)

Hence we have

                                                                                                           (10)

so the covariance between the forecast and the realization is equal to the variance of the forecast.8
Converting to correlation, we can write


                                                                                                           (11)


Notice that the correlation between sign forecasts and realizations depends only on the standard deviation
of the forecast, which of course will depend on the particular return process at hand. In spite of its
generality, the correlation expression furnishes considerable insight. A high standard deviation of the
conditional probability forecast, which could arise from a high variance of the conditional variance, will
increase the forecastability of the return sign.
4. Detecting Sign Forecastability
        Now we examine questions relevant to the detection of sign forecastability. In particular, we
examine the serial correlation structure of sign realizations, and we argue that is it not likely to be useful


        7
            For an interesting discussion of    -type measures in binary regressions, see Estrella (1998).
        8
          Alternatively, and perhaps more intuitively, note that regression of       on         yields a unit
coefficient, by definition of    and      . That is,                                      , which implies that
                              . We thank a referee for this insight.

                                                       -8-
for identifying sign forecastability. We also study the efficacy of runs tests and traditional market timing
tests for the detection of sign forecastability.
4.1 Serial Correlation Coefficients
        Here we consider whether sign forecastability is likely to be detected using the obvious and
standard method: examination of the autocorrelations of the sign sequence. It turns out that the answer is
no, because the nature of sign dependence induced by volatility dependence is highly nonlinear, so that
standard measures of linear dependence are likely small even when sign forecastability is large.
        Consider the first-order autocovariance of the indicator sequence. We can write

                                                                                                          (12)

As before we can use the law of iterated expectations to get

                                                                                                          (13)

Hence

                                                                                                          (14)

Converting now to autocorrelations, we have


                                                                                                          (15)


Although this expression again depends on the particular return process at hand, it is useful in calculating
an upper bound on the autocorrelation. As an intermediate step, consider the correlation between today’s
sign realization and today’s forecast of tomorrow’s sign. We have


                                                                                                          (16)


Substituting (16) into the expression for the autocorrelation of the indicator sequence (15), we get


                                                                                                          (17)


Substituting the expression for the correlation between the ex-ante sign forecast and the ex-post sign-
realization (11), we have


                                                     -9-
                                                                                                                (18)

If all three correlations in (18) are positive and bounded away from one (which is a realistic assumption),
we obtain

                                                                                                                (19)

Intuitively, the optimal time-t forecast, Pt+1|t, has a higher correlation with the time t+1 realization than
anything else observed at time t, including the time t realization itself. The lower the correlation between
today’s sign and today’s forecast of tomorrow’s sign, the lower the autocorrelation in the sign.
Conversely, notice that if the sign forecast were linear in the current realization, then the correlation
between today’s sign and today’s forecast of tomorrow’s sign would be one, and the autocorrelation
would coincide with the correlation between the ex-ante predictor and ex-post realization. Thus it is the
nonlinearity in the dynamic process of the indicator sequence that lowers the autocorrelation relative to
the cross correlation between the ex-ante predictor and the ex-post realization.
4.2 Runs Tests
        Working with a 0-1 sign sequence naturally leads one to consider tests of sign forecastability
based on the number of runs in the sign sequence, and there is a long tradition of doing so in empirical
finance.9 We now consider whether runs tests are likely to be more useful for detecting sign dependence
than the serial correlation coefficients discussed above.
        A run is simply a string of consecutive zeros or ones. Hence the number of runs is the number of
switches from 0 to 1, plus the number of switches from 1 to 0, plus 1,

                                                                                                            (20)

which can be written as

                                                                                                            (21)

where we have used                    Solving the Nruns equation for            and substituting into the
formula for               derived earlier, we obtain an estimator


                                                                                                            (22)



        9
            See, for example, Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997, Chapter 2) for an excellent overview.

                                                      -10-
This expression makes clear that there is no information in the number of runs in a sign sequence that is
not also in the first-order autocorrelation of the sequence. Thus our finding above that sign predictability
is unlikely to be found using autocorrelations of the hit sequence implies that it is also unlikely to be
found using runs tests. In general, tests that rely only on the hit sequence omit important information
about volatility dynamics, which is potentially valuable for detecting sign predictability.
4.3 Market Timing Tests
         Here we discuss some popular market timing tests and their relationship to return sign forecasts,
and we argue that none of them are likely to be useful for capturing sign forecastability when it arises via
volatility dynamics, as we have emphasized.
         The literature on market timing is intimately concerned with signs and sign forecasting. For
example, Hendriksson and Merton (1981) argue that                   can be interpreted as the value of market
timing, where      is the probability of a correctly forecasted negative return and     is the probability of a
correctly forecasted positive return. Breen, Glosten, and Jagannathan (1989) show that in the regression,

                                                                                                            (23)

we have that                 . Hence the absence of Hendriksson-Merton (1981) market timing ability
corresponds to b=0, which is easily tested using standard methods. Cumby and Modest (1987) examine
the closely-related regression,

                                                                                                            (24)

and similarly test the significance of b.
         Note that all of the tests above process        in a particular way:       enters the tests only
through the indicator function                 .10 Hence, for example, a        of 0.5001 is treated
fundamentally differently from a            of 0.4999, whereas a      of 0.9999 is treated no differently from
a       of 0.5001. This is particularly unfortunate because, although volatility dynamics lead to sign
forecastability (i.e., variation in    ), the time-varying         may well never drop below 0.5. Such is
the case, for example, in the leading example of a fixed positive expected return with symmetric
conditional density analyzed earlier (and in the empirical example that we will present shortly), so that the
tests discussed above would have no power to detect sign dependence. Hence the traditional market
timing tests are best viewed as tests for sign dependence arising from variation in expected returns rather


         10
          The same is true for generalizations of the Hendriksson-Merton (1981) test, such as that of
Pesaran and Timmermann (1992).

                                                       -11-
than from variation in volatility (or higher-ordered conditional moments).11
5. Sign Forecasting for Various Data Frequencies and Forecast Horizons
          We have shown that return sign forecastability arises from the interaction of nonzero expected
returns and volatility forecastability. As expected returns approach zero, or as volatility forecastability
approaches zero, sign forecastability approaches zero.12 Hence one does not expect strong sign
forecastability for very high frequency returns such as daily, despite their high volatility forecastability,
because expected daily returns are negligible. Similarly, one does not expect strong sign forecastability
for very low frequency returns such as annual, despite the high expected returns, because annual return
volatility forecastability is negligible. One might therefore conjecture that sign forecastability will be
highest at some intermediate horizon between such very short and very long extremes. In this section, we
evaluate this conjecture.
          When analyzing sign dynamics at various horizons, one is quickly faced with the challenge that
virtually no discrete-time dynamic model with time-varying volatility is closed in distribution under
increasing horizons.13 To circumvent this problem, we work with a continuous-time stochastic volatility
model, in particular the convenient and popular model of Heston (1993). Working in continuous time has
the additional benefit that temporal aggregation and forecasting at increasing horizons are
interchangeable.
5.1 Simulation Design
          The stochastic volatility model parsimoniously captures many of the stylized facts of asset
returns, including skewness, leptokurtosis and volatility persistence, and its conditional density can be
calculated easily at any forecast horizon. For all of these reasons – both substantive and methodological –
it has become a standard benchmark in empirical asset pricing. It has been estimated by Andersen,
Benzoni and Lund (2000), Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997), Benzoni (1999), Chernov, Gallant, Ghysels and
Tauchen (2001), Chernov and Ghysels (2000), Eraker, Johannes, and Polson (2000), Jones (1999), and




          11
               In addition to the papers already mentioned, see Merton (1981), Whitelaw (1997), and Busse
(1999).
          12
          Of course, higher-ordered conditional moment dynamics can also contribute to sign
predictability, as we will discuss in detail subsequently.
          13
          For penetrating insight into the difficulties involved in the temporal aggregation of discrete-
time volatility models, see Meddahi and Renault (2000), Meddahi (2001), Darolles, Gourieroux, and
Jasiak (2001), and Heston and Nandi (2000).

                                                      -12-
Pan (2000), among others.14
         The Heston (1993) stochastic volatility model is



                                                                                                          (25)




where S(t) is the asset price process and F2(t) is the variance process, and where corr(dz1,dz2) = D. The
expected instantaneous rate of return is :, the long run variance is 2, the speed of variance adjustment is
governed by 6, and the volatility of volatility is governed by 0.
         Using Ito’s lemma, the stochastic volatility process can conveniently be written in terms of the
log asset price, x(t), as




                                                                                                          (26)



Notice that although the instantaneous drift is simply a constant, the continuously compounded return has
a slightly time-varying mean from the Ito transformation.
         The probability of an increase in the asset price between time t and t+J, or equivalently, the
probability of a positive return during [t, t+J], can be calculated using the inverse characteristic function
technique.15 In particular,




         14
           We intentionally work with a very simple version of the model, with a single volatility factor,
no volatility jumps, and no volatility long memory. One could of course examine even richer models
with multiple volatility factors and/or volatility jumps as in Alizadeh, Brandt and Diebold (2002), Bates
(2000), Chernov, Gallant, Ghysels and Tauchen (2001), and Duffie, Pan and Singleton (2000), and long
memory in volatility as in Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Ebens (2001) and Andersen, Bollerslev,
Diebold and Labys (2001, 2003).
         15
          As in the Gaussian case, computation of the sign probability requires numerical integration, but
the well-behaved integrand renders the integration straightforward.

                                                     -13-
                                                                                                           (27)



where f(x, F2, J; R) is the characteristic function for horizon J, i=   , Re(C) takes the real part of a
complex number, and the characteristic function is

                                                                                                           (28)



where




                                                                                                           (29)




                                                                                                           (30)




                                                                                                           (31)



and

                                                                                                           (32)



As we have shown, the structure of the Heston model makes certain key calculations tractable, which
explains its popularity. We will now exploit that tractability to illustrate key features of optimal
sign forecasting, including the existence of a nontrivial optimal horizon for sign prediction. Before doing
so, however, we note the apparently little-known fact that the Heston model actually limits the possible
amount of sign predictability. In particular, to ensure that the continuous-time variance process stays

                                                      -14-
strictly positive almost surely in the Heston model, it is necessary to restrict the volatility of volatility
   , such that          . Notice, however, that the restriction also limits the amount of sign predictability
that the Heston model can generate, because it requires the volatility of volatility to be small relative to
the unconditional variance and the conditional variance persistence, whereas sign predictability is greatest
when the volatility of volatility is high, when conditional variance persistence is high, and when the
unconditional variance is low relative to the mean. Other stochastic volatility specifications, although
less tractable mathematically, imply no such limits to sign predictability.16 In this sense, then, it would
seem that our simulation results below on the appearance of sign predictability using the Heston model as
data-generating process are, if anything, conservative relative to those that could be obtained using
alternative models.
        We simulate prices at 5-minute intervals and assume 24-hour trading with 250 trading days per
year. For the purpose of sign prediction, we proceed by discarding the intra-day observations and take
daily to be the highest frequency of interest. We calibrate the parameters to typical values estimated in
the empirical literature. Our benchmark values are              ,      ,           ,          and               ,
which imply a daily mean of about 0.037%, a daily unconditional standard deviation of 0.77%,
unconditional skewness of about -0.1, and unconditional excess kurtosis of about 1. The annualized mean
reversion parameter 6 = 2 implies a daily persistence of about 1-2/250 = .992 in a standard GARCH(1,1)
model. Notice also that the parameters satisfy the             condition.
5.2 Simulation Results
        In Figure 3 we plot the sign forecasts from a typical sample path of the simulated process. We
show daily, weekly, monthly and annual conditional as well as unconditional sign probabilities. As we
move from daily to annual returns, the volatility of the conditional sign probabilities first increases and
then decreases. By (11), this supports our conjecture that sign predictability should increase and then
decrease with horizon. In contrast, the unconditional probability of a positive return increases
monotonically (and at a decreasing rate) with horizon.
        In Figure 4 we focus more directly and thoroughly on our conjecture that sign dynamics will be
most prevalent at intermediate frequencies; examining the correlation between sign forecasts and
realizations as a function of horizon. The correlation is quite low for the highest-frequency returns, then
it increases, and then it tapers off again as we aggregate toward annual returns. The correlation is highest


        16
          The volatility of volatility restriction in the Heston model has been found to be restrictive in
option valuation as well. Circumventing the restriction, Duffie, Pan and Singleton (2000) suggest a
model with correlated jumps in returns and jumps in volatility. Bakshi and Cao (2003) find that the new
model significantly improves on the Heston model when valuating individual equity options.

                                                      -15-
at horizons of approximately 2-3 months (corresponding to 40-60 trading days). Interestingly, then,
despite the fact that sign predictability is driven by volatility predictability, which is highest at very high
frequencies, the interaction between decreasing volatility predictability and increasing expected returns
under temporal aggregation results in maximization of sign predictability at medium horizons.
        In Figure 5 we explore the effects of smaller expected return values. We show the correlation
between the ex ante sign forecast and the ex post sign realization when :=.05 and when :=0, with all
other parameters kept at their benchmark values. As expected, signs are less forecastable at all horizons
for smaller :; the figure provides a precise quantitative characterization. Interestingly, some sign
forecastability remains even when :=0, due to the non-zero leverage effect, D, interacting with the
volatility dynamics.17
        In Figure 6 we explore the effects of lower volatility persistence. We again show the correlation
between sign forecasts and realizations when 6=10 (corresponding to a daily volatility persistence of
about .96) and when 6=5 (corresponding to a daily volatility persistence of about .98), with all other
parameters kept at their benchmark values. As expected, signs are less forecastable at all horizons for
lower volatility persistence, and the figure again provides a precise quantitative characterization.
        In Figure 7 we show another important result, also suggested but not conclusively established by
our earlier analytic work: the simple autocorrelation of the sign realization is relatively small at all
horizons, in contrast to the correlation between the forecasted and realized signs, suggesting that attempts
to detect, model, or forecasts signs by simple linear autoregressive models are not likely to be fruitful. It
appears that the nonlinear volatility dynamics that drive sign dynamics render small the linear
forecastability in signs. In our setup, tomorrow’s sign is linked to tomorrow’s volatility, which is much
more correlated with today’s volatility than with today’s sign.
6. Allowing for Potentially Time-Varying Conditional Skewness and Kurtosis



        17
           It is interesting to note that, even when both drift and leverage are zero, there is a small degree
of sign forecastability as the horizon increases, coming from the Ito term,              in the drift of the log
price process. Meddahi and Renault (2000) find similar leverage effects arising under aggregation even if
the innovations are uncorrelated. By defining dS(t)/S(t) to have a symmetric distribution, an asymmetry
is automatically introduced in the distribution of S(t+J). Alternatively, we could have assumed a stock
price process of




which would have eliminated sign forecastability when :=D= 0.

                                                      -16-
        Thus far we have focused primarily on conditionally Gaussian asset return processes, for which
sign prediction is driven by a time-varying conditional variance interacting with a constant, but nonzero,
conditional mean. We also asserted, however, that the link between volatility forecastability and sign
forecastability remains intact even in conditionally non-Gaussian environments. Here we defend that
assertion by assessing the potential impact of time-varying higher-ordered conditional moments, the
potential importance of which has been suggested for example by Hansen (1994) and Harvey and
Siddique (2000).
        Once the assumption of conditional normality is discarded, one is faced with choosing an
acceptable alternative among countless possibilities. Instead of choosing a particular parametric
distribution, we work with the Gram-Charlier expansion, which can be viewed as an approximation to any
density with nontrivial higher-ordered moments. First define standardized returns as


                                                                                                         (33)




and assume they are approximately distributed according to the pdf


                                                                                                         (34)


where n(x) is the standard normal pdf, Dj is the j-th derivative, and the third and fourth conditional
moments are defined in the usual way as


                                                                                                         (35)




and


                                                                                                         (36)




The conditional c.d.f. of standardized returns is




                                                    -17-
                                                                                                          (37)


Notice that, because
                                                                                                          (38)




we have


                                                                                                          (39)




In general, the probability of a positive return is equivalent to the probability of the standardized return
being bigger than           ; hence the probability of a positive return is




                                                                                                          (40)


which is time-varying for nonzero :, just as it was under conditional normality, so long as one or more of
the second, third and fourth conditional moments are time-varying.
        Importantly, sign forecastability arises even in the absence of conditional variance dynamics, in
which case the probability of a positive return is


                                                                                                          (41)



which is still time-varying for nonzero : so long as either the third or fourth conditional moment is time-
varying. Moreover, even if : is zero, and regardless of whether volatility dynamics are present, sign
forecastability arises so long as conditional skewness dynamics are present. In that case, the probability
of a positive return becomes


                                                     -18-
                                                                                                           (42)



which is time-varying as long as conditional skewness dynamics are present. Notice that a negative
skewness implies that the probability of a positive return is greater than 0.5.
7. Forecasting S&P 100 Market Direction Using VIX Volatility
        We now present a simple empirical example, both to illustrate our ideas and methods and to
provide some preliminary evidence as to their empirical relevance. As we have shown, a key ingredient
in any successful equity sign forecast is a successful volatility forecast, which could be obtained either
from an econometric volatility model (see Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Labys, 2003, for a
comparison of several) or from the marketplace via option-implied volatilities. Here we take the latter
route, forecasting return signs using the VIX index of S&P 100 volatility, which is traded on the Chicago
Board Options Exchange (CBOE), and which is widely viewed as a good indicator of market sentiment
(an “investor fear gauge” in the colorful language of Whaley, 2000). It is calculated as a weighted
average of the implied volatility from eight S&P 100 options (four calls and four puts nearest to the
money), with the observed option quotes interpolated so as to obtain a synthetic volatility from an at-the-
money option with a maturity of exactly thirty days.18
        To match the maturity of the VIX, we forecast signs of 30-day returns. More precisely, let
         be the S&P 100 30-day excess return (relative to the 30-day return on a 3-month Treasury bill),
and define the sign indicator sequence as                          . We want to forecast       , and the
analysis of this paper strongly suggests a model of the form


                                                                                                           (43)




where        denotes a forecast of 30-day excess return volatility and F(C) is a monotone function with a left
limit of zero and a right limit of one. An obvious choice of F(C) is the logistic,


                                                                                                           (44)




        18
             See Whaley (2000) for details of VIX construction.

                                                       -19-
which produces the popular logit model. Finally, for         we insert     .
           Logit models are traditionally estimated by the method of maximum likelihood (ML) under an iid
assumption. However, the 29-day overlap in the daily cumulative 30-day returns introduces dependence,
biasing the traditional ML standard errors. We therefore estimate the logit model using GMM instead.
We use the ML score equation as the orthogonality condition, and we compute standard errors allowing
for autocorrelation using a quadratic kernel with a bandwidth of 29 days.19
           In Figure 8 we plot the daily 30-day VIX volatilities for January 2, 1986 through May 15, 2003,
reported as annualized percentages. Notice the very high VIX during the 1987 crash and the very low
VIX during the mid-1990s bull market. The increase in volatility during the new millennium is also
evident.
           To get a feel for the real-world importance (or lack thereof) of the time-varying market sign
probabilities induced by time-varying market volatility, we can examine directly the probabilities implied
by the estimated logit regression of        on         . Near-constancy of the probabilities would indicate
negligible sign forecastability. We plot the probabilities in Figure 9; their range is strikingly wide, from a
low of 51% during the 1987 crash to a high of 72% during the mid-1990s. In addition, the range of
probabilities matches well the range of the monthly probabilities in the simulated stochastic volatility
model (Figure 3, bottom left panel).20 Finally, note that the traditional market timing tests such as
Hendriksson-Merton (1981) and Pesaran-Timmermann (1992) have no power to detect this strong sign
dependence, because the sign probability never drops below 0.5.
           The responsiveness of the sign probability forecast to changes in the VIX is given by the
marginal effect,      , as defined in Section 3 and plotted in Figure 10. As predicted theoretically, the
marginal effect is always negative, and it is largest (in absolute value) when the level of volatility is
relatively low, as it was in the mid-1990s. We highlight this relationship in Figure 11, in which we
display a scatterplot of      against VIX. The empirical relationship (Figure 11) matches closely the
relevant portion of the theoretical relationship (Figure 2).
8. Concluding Remarks and Directions for Future Research
           Our contribution is two-fold. First, we have shown that, given the widely-accepted statistical
properties of returns, one should not be surprised to find sign forecastability, and that under the realistic



           Under our assumptions, the logit coefficient on 1/VIX is the expected return, :, which we
           19

estimate to be 8.70 with a standard error of 1.93.
           20
         The dynamic patterns are quite different, however, but that is simply because of the different
number of observations and the 29-day overlap in the data.

                                                      -20-
assumption of persistent volatility dynamics, sign forecastability is to be expected even when returns are
conditional mean independent. Hence sign dependence is likely widespread, but it is not necessarily
indicative of time-varying expected returns and should not be interpreted as such.
        Second, we explore a variety of aspects of sign forecastability, analytically, numerically, and
empirically. For example, we show analytically that sign probability forecasts are most sensitive to
changes in volatility when volatility is at an intermediate level, we show in a realistically calibrated
simulation exercise that sign forecastability indeed appears strongest at intermediate horizons of two or
three months, and we show in an empirical analysis that sign dependence is very much present in actual
U.S. equity returns and has properties that match closely our theoretical predictions. In addition, we show
that the nonlinear nature of sign dependence makes it unlikely to be found via traditional approaches such
as analysis of sign autocorrelations, runs tests, or market timing tests.
        As for future work, the obvious next step is to formulate trading strategies based on sign forecasts
(e.g., by trading digital options) and to assess their efficacy in generating positive risk-adjusted excess
returns. Interestingly, the analysis of this paper makes clear that such strategies should be related to
“volatility timing” strategies, such as those of Fleming, Kirby and Ostdiek (2001, 2003) and Johannes,
Polson and Stroud (2002), in which portfolio shares are dynamically adjusted based on forecasts of the
variance-covariance matrix of the underlying assets. Sign/volatility dynamics could also be exploitable in
safety-first problems, as in Roy (1952), Bawa (1978), and Hagigi and Kluger (1987). One could progress
significantly, moreover, by incorporating skewness and kurtosis dynamics, using the methods of El
Babsiri and Zakoian (2001). Such “moment timing” will require evaluation measures more widely
applicable than, for example, simple Sharpe ratios, such as Stutzer’s (2001) portfolio performance index.




                                                     -21-
                                               References

Alizadeh, Sasan, Michael W. Brandt and Francis X. Diebold, 2002, Range-based estimation of stochastic
       volatility models, Journal of Finance 57, 1047-1092.

Andersen, Torben G., Luca Benzoni, and Jesper Lund, 2000, Estimating jump-diffusions for equity
       returns, Manuscript, Kellogg Graduate School of Management.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, and Francis X. Diebold, 2003, Parametric and nonparametric
       volatility measurement, in L.P. Hansen and Y. Ait-Sahalia (eds.), Handbook of Financial
       Econometrics. Amsterdam: North-Holland, forthcoming.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Heiko Ebens, 2001, The distribution of
       realized stock return volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 43-76.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys, 2001, The distribution of
       realized exchange rate volatility, Journal of the American Statistical Association 96, 42-55.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys, 2003, Modeling and
       forecasting realized volatility, Econometrica 71, 579-626.

Bakshi, Gurdip, and Charles Cao (2003), Risk-neutral kurtosis, jumps and option pricing: evidence from
        100 most actively traded firms on the CBOE, Manuscript, University of Maryland.

Bakshi, Gurdip, Charles Cao, and Zhiwu Chen, 1997, Empirical performance of alternative option pricing
        models, Journal of Finance 52, 2003-2049.

Balvers, Ronald J., Thomas F. Cosimano, and Bill McDonald, 1990, Predicting stock returns in an
        efficient market, Journal of Finance 45, 1109-1128.

Bates, David, 2000, Post-‘87 crash fears in the S&P 500 futures option market, Journal of Econometrics
        94, 181-238.

Bawa, Vijay S., 1978, Safety-first, stochastic dominance, and optimal portfolio choice, Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis 13, 255-271.

Benzoni, Luca, 1999, Pricing options under stochastic volatility: an econometric analysis, Manuscript,
       Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota.

Bollerslev, Tim, Ray Y. Chou, and Kenneth F. Kroner, 1992, ARCH modeling in finance: A selective
        review of the theory and empirical evidence, Journal of Econometrics 52, 5-59.

Brandt, Michael W. and Qiang Kang, 2003, On the relationship between the conditional mean and
        volatility of stock returns: a latent var approach, Qiang Kang, Journal of Financial Economics,
        forthcoming.

Breen, William, Lawrence R. Glosten, and Ravi Jagannathan, 1989, Economic significance of predictable
       variations in stock index returns, Journal of Finance 44, 1177-1189.

Brock, William A., and Cars H. Hommes, 1997, A rational route to randomness, Econometrica 65, 1059-
        1095.

Busse, Jeffrey A., 1999, Volatility timing in mutual funds: evidence from daily returns, Review of
        Financial Studies 12, 1009-1041.

Campbell, John, Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of Financial Markets.
      Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1988, Stock prices, earnings and expected dividends, Journal of
      Finance 46, 661-676.

Chernov, Mikhail, A. Ronald Gallant, Eric Ghysels, and George Tauchen, 2001, Alternative models for
       stock price dynamics, Manuscript, University of North Carolina.

Chernov, Mikhail, and Eric Ghysels, 2000, A Study towards a unified approach to the joint estimation of
       objective and risk neutral measures for the purpose of option valuation, Journal of Financial
       Economics 56, 407-458.

Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn, and Antonio G. Pascual, 2003, Empirical exchange rate models of
       the nineties: are any fit to survive?, NBER Working Paper 9393.

Christoffersen, Peter F., and Francis X. Diebold, 1996, Further results on forecasting and model selection
        under asymmetric loss, Journal of Applied Econometrics 11, 561-572.

Christoffersen, Peter F., and Francis X. Diebold, 1997, Optimal prediction under asymmetric loss,
        Econometric Theory 13, 808-817.

Cumby, Robert E., and David M. Modest, 1987, Testing for market timing ability: a framework for
      forecast evaluation, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 169-89.

Darolles, Serge, Christian Gourieroux, and Joanna Jasiak, 2001, Compound autoregressive models,
        Manuscript, York University.

Duffie, Darrell, Jun Pan, and Kenneth Singleton, 2000, Transform analysis and asset pricing for affine
        jump-diffusions, Econometrica 68, 1343-1376.

El Babsiri, Mohamed, and Jean-Michel Zakoian, 2001, Contemporaneous asymmetry in GARCH
       processes, Journal of Econometrics 101, 257-294.

Elliott, Graham, and Takatoshi Ito, 1999, Heterogeneous expectations and tests of efficiency in the
         Yen/Dollar forward foreign exchange market, Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 435-456.

Engle, Robert F., and Sharon Kozicki, 1993, Testing for common features, Journal of Business and
        Economic Statistics 11, 369-380.

Eraker, Bjorn, Michael Johannes, and Nicholas Polson, 2000, The role of jumps in returns and volatility,
        Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Estrella, Arturo, 1998, A new measure of fit for equations with dichotomous dependent variables, Journal
         of Business and Economic Statistics 16, 198-205.
Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work, Journal of
       Finance 25, 383-417.

Fama, Eugene F., 1991, Efficient capital markets: II, Journal of Finance 46, 1575-1617.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock returns, Journal of
       Financial Economics 19, 3-29.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds,
       Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, The risk and predictability of international equity
        returns, Review of Financial Studies 6, 527-566.

Fleming, Jeff, Chris Kirby, and Barbara Ostdiek, 2001, The economic value of volatility timing, Journal
       of Finance 56, 329-352.

Fleming, Jeff, Chris Kirby, and Barbara Ostdiek, 2003, The economic value of volatility timing using
       realized volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 473-509.

Fontnouvelle, Patrick de, 2000, Information dynamics in financial markets, Macroeconomic Dynamics 4,
       139-169.

Foster, Douglass, Tom Smith, and Robert Whaley, 1997, Assessing goodness-of-fit of asset pricing
        models: the distribution of the maximal R2, Journal of Finance 52, 591-607.

Franses, Philip Hans, and Dick van Dijk, 2000, Nonlinear Time Series Models in Empirical Finance.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gencay, Ramazan, 1998, Optimization of technical trading strategies and the profitability in security
       markets, Economics Letters 59, 249-254.

Ghysels, Eric, Andrew Harvey, and Eric Renault, 1996, Stochastic volatility, in G.S. Maddala and C.R.
       Rao (eds.), Statistical Methods in Finance (Handbook of Statistics, Volume 14). Amsterdam:
       North-Holland.

Glosten Lawrence R., Ravi Jaganathan, and David E. Runkle, 1993, On the relation between the expected
        value and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks, Journal of Finance 48,
        1779-1801.

Granger, Clive W.J., 1969, Prediction with a generalized cost of error function, Operational Research
       Quarterly 20, 199-207.

Hagigi, Moshe, and Brian Kluger, 1987, Safety first: an alternative performance measure, Journal of
        Portfolio Management 13, 34-40.

Hansen, Bruce E., 1994, Autoregressive conditional density estimation, International Economic Review
       35, 705-730.

Harvey, Campbell R., and Akhtar Siddique, 2000, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests, Journal of
        Finance 55, 1263-1296.

Harvey, Campbell R., and Robert Whaley, 1992, Market volatility prediction and the efficiency of the
       S&P 100 index option market, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 43-73.

Henriksson, Roy D, and Robert C. Merton, 1981, On market timing and investment performance, II:
       statistical procedures for evaluating forecasting skills, Journal of Business 54, 513-33.

Heston, Steven L., 1993, A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications to
        bond and currency options, Review of Financial Studies 6, 327-343.

Heston, Steven L., and Saikat Nandi, 2000, A closed-form GARCH option valuation model, Review of
        Financial Studies 13, 585-625.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns, Journal of Finance
       45, 881-898.

Jensen, Michael C., 1978, Some anomalous evidence regarding market efficiency, Journal of Financial
        Economics 6, 95-101.

Johannes, Michael, Nicholas Polson and Jon Stroud, 2002, Sequential optimal portfolio performance:
       market and volatility timing, Manuscript, Graduate School of Business, Columbia University.

Jones, Christopher, 1999, The dynamics of stochastic volatility, Manuscript, University of Rochester.

Kirby, Chris, 1997, Measuring the predictable variation in stock and bond returns, Review of Financial
        Studies 10, 579-630.

Kuan, Chung-Ming, and Tung Liu, 1995, Forecasting exchange rates using feed-forward and recurrent
       neural networks, Journal of Applied Econometrics 10, 347-64.

Larsen, Glen A. Jr, and Gregory D. Wozniak, 1995, Market timing can work in the real world, Journal of
        Portfolio Management 21, 74-81.

Leitch, Gordon, and J. Ernest Tanner, 1991, Economic forecast evaluation: profits versus the
        conventional error measures, American Economic Review 81, 580-590.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2003, Measuring and modeling variation in the risk-return
        tradeoff, in Yacine Ait-Shalia and Lars Peter Hansen (eds.), Handbook of Financial
        Econometrics, forthcoming.

Leung, Mark T., Hazem Daouk, and An-Sing Chen, 1999, Forecasting stock indices: a comparison of
       classification and level estimation models, working paper, Indiana University.

Levich, Richard M., 2001, International Financial Markets, Second Edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Lo, Andrew W., and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1999, A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street. Princeton, NJ:
       Princeton University Press.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1991, Stock market forecastability and
        volatility: a statistical appraisal, Review of Economic Studies 58, 455-77.

Meddahi, Nour, 2001, An eigenfunction approach for volatility modeling, Manuscript, University of
      Montreal.

Meddahi, Nour, and Eric Renault, 2000, Temporal aggregation of volatility models, working paper,
      CIRANO.

Merton, Robert C., 1981, On market timing and investment performance, I: an equilibrium theory of
       value for market forecasts, Journal of Business 54, 363-406.

Nelson, Charles and Myung Kim, 1993, Predictable stock returns: the role of small sample bias, Journal
        of Finance 48, 641-661.

Pan, Jun, 2000, Integrated time-series analysis of spot and option prices, Manuscript, Sloan School of
        Management, MIT.

Patelis, Alex D., 1997, Stock return predictability and the role of monetary policy, Journal of Finance 52,
         1951-1972.

Pesaran, Hashem, and Allan G. Timmermann, 1992, A simple non-parametric test of predictive
        performance, Journal of business and economic statistics 10, 461-465.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, and Allan G. Timmermann, 1995, Predictability of stock returns: robustness and
        economic significance, Journal of Finance 50, 1201-1228.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, and Allan G. Timmermann, 2001, How costly is it to ignore breaks when
        forecasting the direction of a time series?, Manuscript, Cambridge University and UCSD.

Roy, A.D. 1952, Safety-first and the holding of assets, Econometrica 20, 431- 449.

Sentana, Enrique, and Sushil Wadhwani, 1991, Semi-parametric estimation and the predictability of stock
       market returns: some lessons from Japan, Review of Economic Studies 58, 547-563.

Stutzer, Michael, 2001, A portfolio performance index and its implications, Manuscript, University of
         Iowa.

Sweeney, Richard J., 1986, Beating the foreign exchange market, Journal of Finance 41, 163-182.

Wagner, Jerry, Steve Shellans, and Richard Paul, 1992, Market timing works where it matters most: in
      the real world, Journal of Portfolio Management 18, 86-90.

Whaley, Robert, 2000, The investor fear gauge, Journal of Portfolio Management 26, 12-27.

White, Halbert, 2000, A reality check for data snooping, Econometrica 68, 1097-1126.

Whitelaw, Robert F., 1997, Time-varying Sharpe ratios and market timing, Manuscript, NYU, Stern
       School of Business.

Womack, Kent L., 1996, Do brokerage analysts’ recommendations have investment value?, Journal of
Finance 51, 137-167.
                                                  Figure 1
                                The Dependence of Sign Probability on Volatility

           9
           8
           7
           6
                                                                           σ = 0 .0 5
           5
Density




           4
           3
           2
                                                                                         σ = 0 .1 5
           1

           0
               -.3        -.2          -.1           .0          .1           .2           .3           .4          .5

                                                              R etu rn

Notes to figure: We show two Gaussian return densities, each with expected return of ten percent. The first
return has a standard deviation of five percent and hence is positive with probability 0.98 (the area to the right of
zero under the more peaked density function). The second return has a standard deviation of fifteen percent and
hence is positive with smaller probability 0.75 (the area to the right of zero under the less peaked density
function).
                                                  Figure 2
                         Responsiveness of Sign Probability to Volatility Movements



             0 .0

             -0 .5

             -1 .0
Derivative




             -1 .5

             -2 .0

             -2 .5

             -3 .0
                                 .1                  .2                  .3                  .4                   .5

                                                   S tandard D eviatio n


Notes to figure: We plot , the derivative of the probability of a positive return with respect to return volatility,
as a function of volatility. We assume Gaussian returns with ten percent expected return.
                                                        Figure 3
                         Time Series of Conditional Sign Probabilities, Various Return Horizons

              .9                                                             .9
                             Daily Returns                                              Weekly Returns


              .8                                                             .8




                                                              Probability
Probability




              .7                                                             .7



              .6                                                             .6



              .5                                                             .5
                   100      200          300   400    500                         100   200          300   400       500
                                  Time                                                        Time


              .9                                                             .9
                           Monthly Returns                                              Annual Returns


              .8                                                             .8
Probability




                                                               Probability




              .7                                                             .7



              .6                                                             .6



              .5                                                             .5
                   100      200          300   400    500                         100   200          300   400       500
                                  Time                                                        Time



  Notes to figure: We simulate asset prices from a stochastic volatility model parameterized as




  with                      . We then calculate, at each of 500 periods, the conditional probability of a positive
  return at daily, weekly, monthly and annual horizons. The horizontal line in each subplot denotes the
  unconditional probability of a positive return, which equals the average conditional probability.
                                                         Figure 4
                                    Correlation Between Sign Forecasts and Realizations
                                        Various Horizons, Benchmark Parameters



                 .1 0


                 .0 8


                 .0 6
Correlation




                 .0 4


                 .0 2


                 .0 0
                                         50                100                150                200                250

                                                      Horizon in Trading D ays


          Notes to figure: We simulate asset prices from a stochastic volatility model parameterized as




          with                       . We then calculate the ex ante conditional probability of a positive return as well as the
          ex post return sign realization at non-overlapping horizons ranging from one to 250 trading days (one year). We
          calculate the sample correlation between the forecast and the realization across a large number of realizations,
          making use of the quasi-analytic results in the text.
                                                  Figure 5
                             Correlation between Sign Forecasts and Realizations
                                    Various Horizons, Small Return Drift

              .1 0


              .0 8


              .0 6                                                     µ = 0.05
Correlation




              .0 4


              .0 2                                                        µ= 0


              .0 0
                                   50               100                150               200                250

                                               Horizon in Trading D ays


Notes to figure: We simulate asset prices from the a stochastic volatility model parameterized as




with                       , with drift of 0.05 (top line) and 0.00 (bottom line). We then calculate the ex ante
conditional probability of a positive return as well as the ex post return sign realization at non-overlapping
horizons ranging from one to 250 trading days (one year). We calculate the sample correlation between the
forecast and the realization across a large number of realizations, making use of the quasi-analytic results in the
text.
                                                   Figure 6
                              Correlation between Sign Forecasts and Realizations
                                Various Horizons, Small Volatility Persistence

              .1 0


              .0 8


              .0 6
Correlation




              .0 4
                                                               κ= 5

              .0 2                                              κ = 10


              .0 0
                                   50                100                150                200                 250

                                                Horizon in Trading D ays


Notes to figure: We simulate asset prices from a stochastic volatility model parameterized as




with                         , and with volatility persistence parameter    (top line) and        (bottom line). We
then calculate the ex ante conditional probability of a positive return as well as the ex post return sign realization
at non-overlapping horizons ranging from one to 250 trading days (one year). We calculate the sample
correlation between the forecast and the realization using a large number of realizations, making use of the quasi-
analytic result in the text.
                                                   Figure 7
                              Correlation between Sign Forecasts and Realizations
                                  and First Autocorrelation of Return Signs
                                  Various Horizons, Benchmark Parameters

              .1 0

                                                                             C orrelation
              .0 8


              .0 6
Correlation




              .0 4
                                                                                Autocorrelation

              .0 2


              .0 0
                                   50                100               150                200               250

                                               Horizon in Trading D ays

Notes to figure: The correlation between sign forecasts and realizations is as in Figure 4. We compute the first
autocorrelation of the sign sequence by simulating asset prices from a stochastic volatility model parameterized as




with                     . We then construct an indicator sequence of return signs for each horizon, and we
calculate the sample autocorrelation from a long simulated sequence of returns, using the quasi-analytic result in
the text.
                                                  Figure 8
                                           S&P 100 Volatility (VIX)

        160



        120
VIX




          80



          40



            0
                 86        88         90         92        94         96        98         00        02

                                                           Y ear


Notes to figure: We show the time series of S&P 100 volatility, as summarized in the VIX volatility index, traded
on the Chicago Board Options Exchange.
                                                       Figure 9
                            Probability of a Positive Thirty-Day Excess S&P 100 Return

              .7 6

              .7 2

              .6 8
Probability




              .6 4

              .6 0

              .5 6

              .5 2

              .4 8
                     86         88        90         92        94        96         98        00        02

                                                               Year

     Notes to figure: We show the time series of conditional probability of a positive thirty-day excess S&P 100
     return, as assessed using a logit model in conjunction with the VIX volatility forecast.
                                                      Figure 10
                           Time Series of Responsiveness of Sign Forecasts to Changes in VIX

                  .0 0 0

                 -.0 0 4

                 -.0 0 8
Responsiveness




                 -.0 1 2

                 -.0 1 6

                 -.0 2 0

                 -.0 2 4
                           86      88       90        92       94         96        98         00        02

                                                               Year


 Notes to figure: We show the time series of the derivative of the conditional probability of a positive return with
 respect to VIX, which provides a measure of the responsiveness of the sign probability to changes in underlying
 volatility conditions.
                                                          Figure 11
                         Scatterplot of Responsiveness of Sign Forecasts to Changes in VIX vs. VIX

                      .0 0 0

                    -.0 0 4

                    -.0 0 8
Responsiveness




                    -.0 1 2

                    -.0 1 6

                    -.0 2 0

                    -.0 2 4
                                 0                    40                   80                   120                  160

                                                                          V IX


            Notes to figure: We show the derivative of the conditional probability of a positive return with respect to VIX,
            graphed against VIX.
