NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDIUM TERM BUSINESS CYCLES
Diego Comin
Mark Gertler
Working Paper 10003
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10003
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003

We appreciate the helpful comments of: Olivier Blanchard, Michele Boldrin, Larry Christiano, Jon Faust,
Jordi Gali, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Gary Hansen, Louise Keely, Tim Kehoe, Per Krusell, David Laibson,
John Leahy, Rodolfo Manuelli, Ed Prescott, Gianluca Violante and seminar participants at Penn State, Boston
University, Boston College, MIT, Wisconsin, Brown, Midwest Macro Conference, NBER Summer Institute,
ITAMFBBVA Conference as well as the NYU junior faculty research group. Financial assistance from the
C.V. Starr Center is greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Diego Comin and Mark Gertler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Medium Term Business Cycles
Diego Comin and Mark Gertler
NBER Working Paper No. 10003
September 2003
JEL No. E3, O3
ABSTRACT
Over the postwar, the U.S., Europe and Japan have experienced what may be thought of as medium
frequency oscillations between persistent periods of robust growth and persistent periods of relative
stagnation. These medium frequency movements, further, appear to bear some relation to the high
frequency volatility of output. That is, periods of stagnation are often associated with significant
recessions, while persistent booms typically are either free of recessions or are interrupted only by
very modest downturns. In this paper we explore the idea of medium term cycles, which we define
as reflecting the sum of the high and medium frequency variation in the data. We develop a
methodology for identifying these kinds of fluctuations and then show that a number of important
macroeconomic time series exhibit significant medium term cycles. The cycles feature strong
procyclical movements in both disembodied and embodied technological change, research &
development, and the efficiency of resource utilization. We then develop a model to explain the
medium term cycle that features both disembodied and embodied endogenous technological change,
along with countercyclical markups and variable factor utilization. The model is able to generate
medium term fluctuations in output, technological change, and resource utilization that resemble the
data, with a non-technological shock as the exogenous disturbance. In particular, the model offers
a unified approach to explaining both high and medium frequency variation in aggregate business
activity.
Diego Comin
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003

Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Over the postwar, many industrialized countries have tended to oscillate between
periods of robust growth versus relative stagnation. The U.S. economy, for example,
experienced sustained high output growth during the early to late 1960s. From the
early 1970s to the early 1980s, however, output growth was low on average. Since
the mid 1990s, there has been for the most part a return to strong growth. The
economies of Europe and Japan have had similar experiences, though the precise
details diﬀer1 . A common feature of these oscillations is that they occur over a longer
time frame than is typically considered in conventional business cycle analysis. Put
diﬀerently, conventional business cycle detrending methods tend to sweep these kind
of oscillations into the trend, thereby removing them from the analysis.
At the same time, these medium frequency oscillations may be intimately related
to the high frequency output fluctuations normally associated with the business cycle.
The long U.S. expansion of the 1960s featured periods of rapid growth and was free
of any significant downturn. Similarly, the high growth period over the past ten years
has been interrupted by only one recession, considered modest by post-war standards.
By contrast, the stagnation of the 1970s and early 1980s featured a number of major
recessions, including the two considered the worst of the post-war. All this raises
the possibility that medium frequency oscillations may to a significant degree be the
product of business cycle disturbances at the high frequency. Put diﬀerently, business
cycles may be more persistent phenomena than our conventional measures suggest.
It follows that we may need to re-examine how we both identify and model economic
fluctuations.
The objective of this paper is twofold: Our first goal is construct an alternative
trend/cycle decomposition that includes in the measure of the cycle both the high
and medium frequency variation in business activity. We refer this combined high and
medium frequency variation as the “medium term business cycle.”2 We then present
evidence based on a variety of postwar U.S. time series data that the medium term
1

See, e.g., Blanchard (1997).
While similar in spirit, our definition diﬀers from Blanchard’s (1997), Caballero and Hammour’s
(1998) and Solow’s (2000), whose notion of the medium term is confined mainly the medium frequency variation in the data. We include both the high and medium frequency variation because
we want to emphasize the interrelation between high and medium frequency fluctuations.
2

1

cycle diﬀers from the conventionally measured cycle in a number of interesting and
important ways. Our second goal is to develop as a first pass a quantitative model
capable of explaining the facts. Here we attempt to capture both high and medium
frequency business cycle dynamics within a unified framework.
In section 2 we present evidence on medium term fluctuations. Roughly, speaking,
we construct measures of medium term cycles by running a much smoother trend
through the data than is typically used in the conventional high frequency analysis.
We show for a number of key variables that the medium term cycle is considerably
more variable and persistent than the conventionally measured cycle. These findings,
further, are statistically significant and not an artifact of a small sample size. In addition, there are a number of interesting patterns. For example, over the medium term
there is a strong co-movement between output and both disembodied and embodied
technological change. Total factor productivity (TFP) moves procyclically over the
medium term while the relative price of capital (a measure of embodied technological
change) moves countercyclically. Research and development (R&D) moves procyclically. The medium term cycle, however, is not only a productivity phenomenon. As
we show, measures of both the eﬃciency and intensity of resource utilization also play
a role.
In section 3, we develop our model. We consider a simple real business cycle model
modified to allow for endogenous productivity, countercyclical markups and variable
factor utilization.3 We incorporate endogenous productivity in order to provide a unified explanation for the co-movements of TFP, the relative price of capital and R&D
over the medium term. Another consideration leading us in this direction is that
many authors have questioned the importance of high frequency technology shocks
based on the view that much of the high frequency variation in the Solow residual
reflects factors such as unmeasured input utilization and imperfect competition as
opposed to true technology shifts. (e.g., Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (1995),
Basu (1996)). Endogenous productivity, however, provides an avenue through which
3

Our modeling approach is similar to Evans, Honkapohja, and Romer (1998) who also develop an
endogenous growth model to study business fluctuations that take place over medium term horizons.
They emphasize how their framework may give rise to sunspot fluctuations in the growth rate. In
addition to diﬀering considerably in detail, our model has a unique steady state growth rate: The
complementarities in our model then work to magnify the eﬀects of business cycle shocks.

2

non-technological shocks that may drive business cycles at the high frequency can generate the strong medium frequency movements in productivity observed in the data.
That is, through this approach, one can capture interesting cyclical variation in both
embodied and disembodied technological change without having to rely exclusively
on exogenous shifts in technology.
To endogenize productivity dynamics, we use a variation of Romer’s (1990) model
of R&D expanding the variety of intermediate goods. We extend the Romer framework to allow for an endogenous rate of adoption of new technologies. Rotemberg
(2004), for example, has argued that in modeling cyclical productivity dynamics, it
is important to take into account the significant lag in the diﬀusion of new technologies.4 In this regard, we are able to calibrate our model to allow for realistic steady
state time lags between the creation and diﬀusion of new technologies. At the same
time, because adoption as well as R&D intensities vary endogenously over the cycle,
the framework can produce the kind of procyclical movement in productivity over the
medium term that we document.5
As with many conventional quantitative macroeconomic models (e.g. Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2005)), countercyclical movements in both price and wage markups provide the main source of fluctuations at
the high frequency. These conventional frameworks typically endogenize markup behavior by introducing nominal rigidities or other types of market frictions. We also
endogenize markup behavior but opt for a very simple mechanism that is meant as
a stand-in for the kind of richer structure that is typically modeled. Thus, within
our framework an exogenous driving force aﬀects the economy initially by generating
countercyclical markup movement. By proceeding with a simple markup structure,
4

Rotemberg uses this fact to argue that technology shocks only aﬀect low frequency movements in
output. He then proceeds to develop a framework with exogenous technological change, where nontechnology shocks drive the high frequency business cycle but have no eﬀect on lower frequencies. Our
approach diﬀers by having feedback between the high and medium frequency variation in cyclical
activity, owing to endogenous productivity. Some support for our approach is that, as we show,
measures of the eﬃcienct and intensity of resource utilization show considerable medium frequency
variation and are thus not simply high frequency phenomena.
5
Comin and Gertler (2004) provide some evidence that adoption rates are procyclical based on
a sample of 22 individual technologies described in Davies (1979) in the UK during the post-war
period.

3

however, we are able to avoid additional complexity and keep the focus on the endogenous productivity propagation mechanism, which is the unique feature of our
framework.
Section 4 presents some model simulations and considers how well the framework
can capture the broad patterns in the data. Overall, our model does a reasonably
good job in characterizing the key features of the medium term cycle. Even with a
non-technological shock as the main driving force, the model captures most of the
cyclical variation in productivity, both at the high and medium frequencies. There
are several caveats that we discuss. For comparison, we also explore how well an
exogenous technology shock model can explain the data. For this kind of framework
to capture movements both embodied and disembodied technological change, it is
necessary to allow for exogenous shocks to the relative price of capital, as well as
exogenous shocks to total factor productivity. This approach has some strengths, but
also some shortcomings, as we discuss. Concluding remarks are in section 5.

2

Measuring the Medium Term Cycle

In this section we develop some facts about medium term business fluctuations. To
detrend the data, we use a band pass filter, which is basically a two-sided moving
average filter, where the moving average depends on the frequencies of the data that
one wishes to isolate. A popular alternative is the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) (1997)
filter. This filter estimates a trend by maximizing a criterion function that penalizes
both deviations of the data from the trend and variation in the trend, depending on
the relative weights on each objective in the criterion function. We opt for the band
pass filter because it allows us to be precise (in frequency domain terms) about how
our measure of the cycle compares with more conventional measures. Our results,
however, do not depend on this choice of filters.
Conventional decompositions of the data with the band pass filter associate the
business cycle with the frequencies between 2 and 32 quarters (e.g., Baxter and King
(1995) and Christiano and Fitzgerald (2001)). This decomposition produces a representation of the cycle that is very similar to the one that the standard HP filter
generates. As we show, however, in each of these cases the trend exhibits considerable
variation about a simple linear trend, reflecting the presence of significant cyclical ac4

tivity at the medium frequencies. Our measure of fluctuations, accordingly, adds back
in this medium frequency variation. We do this, simply put, by applying a filter that
identifies a much smoother trend in the data than does the conventional filter.
In particular, we define the medium term cycle as including frequencies between
2 and 200 quarters. The trend accordingly consists of variation in the data at frequencies of 200 quarters and below. We allow for a very smooth nonlinear trend as
opposed to simply employing a linear trend for several reasons. First, over the sample
period there have been a number of factors, such as demographics, that are likely to
have introduced variation in the data mainly at the very low frequencies. Rather
than try to incorporate all these factors in our model, we instead concentrate mainly
on explaining the high and medium frequency variation in the data. Second, with
a linear trend, estimates of some of the key moments in the data can become very
imprecise. We chose a cutoﬀ for the trend in the frequency domain of 200 quarters
(roughly the sample size) because we found that with this decomposition we obtain,
for the most part, both reasonably smooth trends and estimates of the variability of
the filtered data that have a reasonable degree of precision.
We decompose the medium term cycle as follows: We refer to the frequencies between 2 and 32 quarters (the standard representation of cycles) as the high frequency
component of the medium term cycle and frequencies between 32 and 200 quarters
as the medium frequency component. Two points are worth keeping in mind: First,
it is in general not correct to think of the medium frequency variation in the data as
orthogonal to the high frequency variation. For this reason we focus on understanding the overall fluctuations in the data between frequencies of 2 and 200 quarters and
not simply the medium frequency component. Second, it is important to be careful about the mapping between the frequency domain and the time domain: Even
though our measure of the cycle includes frequencies up to fifty years, as we show, its
representation in the time domain leads to cycles on the order of a decade, reflecting
the distribution of the mass of the filtered data over the frequency domain. For the
conventional business cycle decomposition, as we show, the cycles are much shorter.
We proceed as follows: Because most of our series are non-stationary, we first
convert all the data into growth rates by taking log diﬀerences. We then apply the
band pass filter to the growth rate data, obtaining a measure of trend growth rates
that corresponds to frequencies 200 quarters and below. We then cumulate the trend
5

growth rates to obtain measures of the trends in log levels.6 We also perform several
robustness checks. Because the band pass filter provides only an approximation for
finite series, we “pad” the series by forecasting and backcasting, to minimize biases
that are likely to arise, especially at sample endpoints. In addition, as we discuss, we
also perform a simple Monte Carlo exercise to assess the statistical significance of the
trends we measure.
The data is quarterly from 1948:1 - 2001:2, except noted otherwise. We consider
two sets of variables. The first includes “standard” business cycle series, including:
output, consumption, investment, hours and labor productivity.7 The second includes
“other” variables useful for characterizing the movements in both productivity and
resource utilization over the medium term. These include: total factor productivity
(TFP), the quality adjusted relative price of capital, private R&D, the markup of
price over social marginal cost, and capacity utilization. The series on TFP, the
relative price of capital and private R&D are only available at an annual frequency.8
We measure the markup as the ratio of the marginal product of labor to the
households’ marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure (where the
latter reflects the social marginal cost of labor). To do so, we assume that production
is Cobb-Douglas, and that both the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion and the Frisch
labor supply are unity. As Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2002) note, this total
markup can be decomposed into the product of a price markup (the ratio of the
marginal product of labor to the real wage) and a wage markup (the ratio of the real
6

For series where the growth rate or the log-level are stationary, such as per capita output, we
obtain virtually identical results by filtering the data in log levels (after first removing a linear trend.)
7
Output, hours, and labor productivity are for non-farm business. Consumption includes nondurables and services. Investment is non-residential. We normalize all variables by the working age
population (ages 16-65.)
8
TFP is from the BEA. R&D is non-federally funded R&D expenditures as reported by the
NSF. The relative price of capital is the quality adjusted price of equipment and structures from
Cummins and Violante (2002) (which is in turn based on Gordon (1990)) divided by the BEA price
of non-durable consumption and services. While this series conventionally applied in the literature,
it is the subject of some controversey (e.g Hobijn, 2001). We thus also considered the BEA measure
and found that it exhibits nearly identical cyclical properties to the Gordon series, though it is only
about sixty percent as volatile overall. We return to this latter point in section 4. Finally, another
issue is that the Cummins/Violante series is based on extrapolating the Gordon series after 1983.
We find that the pre-1983 cyclical properties are very similar to those of the whole series, however.

6

wage to the household’s marginal rate of substitution.)9 For capacity utilization we
use the Federal Reserve Board’s measure. Given some limitations of this series, we
also considered an alternative measure of utilization based on the ratio of electricity
usage to the capital stock, and obtained very similar results10 . Finally, we convert all
variables to logs.
Figure 1 plots the medium term cycle for per capita output. The line with circles
gives the percent deviation of per output from trend for the medium term cycle.
The solid line gives the medium term component (i.e., the variation in the data at
frequencies between 32 and 200 quarters.) The diﬀerence between the two lines is the
high frequency component (the variation at frequencies between 2 and 32 quarters).
Put diﬀerently, this diﬀerence is the measure of the cycle in conventional analysis.
Overall, the medium term cycle appears to capture the sustained swings in economic activity that we described in the introduction. There is sustained upward
movement in output relative to trend over the 1960s. Output reverses course in the
1970s through the early 1980s. There is again a sustained upward movement beginning in the mid 1990s. As the figure makes clear, these persistent movements reflect
medium frequency variation in the data that are large relative to the high frequency
variation. In this regard, the medium term cycle appears much larger in overall magnitude than the conventionally measured cycle. The percentage rise in output relative
to trend over the 1960s for example is roughly fourteen percent and is mirrored by
a roughly similar percentage drop during the period of the productivity slowdown.
Another good example involves the period around the 1980-82 recession: The medium
term cycle suggests a much larger and more protracted drop relative to trend, than
does the conventional high frequency measure.
Figure 2 confirms that our measure of trend per capita output grows at a relatively smooth pace. There is a steady modest decline in the trend growth rate over
the post war until the mid 1990s, where it gently reverses course. From a more formal
perspective, the ratio of the standard deviation of output growth at the low frequencies (below 200 quarters) to the standard deviation of output growth at frequencies
9

See also Hall (1997) for an analysis of the cyclical properties of the labor market wedge over the
post-war.
10
In principle the Board series includes varibale labor utilization as well as capital utilization. We
expect that the former, however, may be less important over the medium frequencies.

7

between 2 and 200 quarters is only 0.08. Thus our measure of trend growth is very
smooth relative to the overall variation in the growth rate.
Table 1 next presents a set of formal statistics to confirm the visual impression left
by Figure 1 that the medium term cycle in output is considerably more volatile than
the conventionally measured high frequency cycle.11 It also presents a similar set of
statistics for each of the traditional quarterly business cycle variables. For each variable, the table reports the percent standard deviation over the medium term cycle,
and also the standard deviations of both the high and medium frequency components. Below each number are ninety-five percent confidence intervals.12 As the first
row indicates, the standard deviation of per capita output over the medium term is
roughly twice that of the high frequency component (4.12 versus 2.39). Moreover, the
standard deviation of the medium frequency component (3.25) is large in comparison
to the latter. A similar pattern exists for hours, labor productivity, consumption and
investment. There are a few natural qualifications however: As one might expect a
priori, the ratio of variation over the medium term cycle to variation over the high
frequency is somewhat lower for hours (2.8 to 1.73) and somewhat higher for labor
productivity (2.4 to 1.13).
Importantly, as the last column of the table shows, the medium frequency variation
in each variable is statistically significant. This can be seen by noting that the confidence interval for the standard deviation of each variable lies safely above zero. In
this regard, our measure of the medium term cycle diﬀers in a statistically significant
way from the conventional high frequency measure.
While Table 1 presents standard deviations of quarterly data, Table 2 presents a
similar set of statistics for annual data. It does so for both the standard business cycle
series listed in Table 1 and also the other variables we consider (TFP, the relative
price of capital, R&D, and the markup.) We consider annual data for two reasons.
11

Interestingly, by examining data only from the first half of the sample, it would not be possible
to detect a medium term cycle that is distinct from the high frequency cycle. For the period 1948:11973:1, for example, the two diﬀerent filters yield very similar cycles. Only by examining data from
the full sample does a distinct medium term cycle emerge.
12
To compute confidence intervals we make use of the following: Let σ 2X be the variance of a
T
stochastic process {Xt }t=0 . If Xt is stationary, the sample variance σ
b2X is assymptotically distributed
N (σ 2X , Σ). We compute Σ by truncating the lags in the theoretical expression using the Newey-West
truncation parameter.

8

First, because we are attempting to model fluctuations that are considerably more
persistent than are typically considered, the quantitative framework we develop in the
next section aims at explaining variation in the annual as opposed to the quarterly
data. Second, some of the non-standard series we consider are only available at the
annual frequency.
Two central conclusions emerge from Table 2. First, for the standard business
cycle series, the standard deviations of the annual data are quite similar to those of
the quarterly data: i.e., the message from annual data about the relative importance
of the medium term cycle is virtually the same as from quarterly data. Second,
the “other” variables listed in Table 2 similarly exhibit significantly greater volatility
over the medium term than over the high frequency cycle: In each case the standard
deviation is more than double. For the relative price of capital, the standard deviation
is nearly three times larger than in the high frequency.13
Next, Table 3 reports (again, for the annual data) the first order autocorrelation
of each variable over the medium term and over the high frequency. Interestingly,
for each series the high frequency component shows relatively little persistence. In
this case, for example, annual output being one percentage point above trend in year
t implies that it is likely to be only 0.16 percent above trend in year t + 1.14 Put
diﬀerently, conventional detrending methods yield output fluctuations at the annual
frequency that exhibit low persistence. The same is true for the other series. In sharp
contrast, the medium term cycle exhibits significantly greater persistence for each
series. The first order autocorrelation for output is 0.65, for example, and is similarly
large for the other series.
Table 4 presents statistics on co-movements among the variables, again for both the
standard business cycle series and the non-standard ones. In the first column is the
cross correlation of each annual variable with annual output over the medium term
cycle and in the second column is the same statistic for the conventionally measured
cycle. By and large, the positive co-movements among the standard variables that
13

For the BEA measure of the relative price of capital, the standard deviation is 2.59 for the
medium term, 0.82 for the high frequency and 2.44 for the medium frequency. Thus, while the
overall volatility is lower, the breakdown across frequencies is similar to the Gordon series.
14
This point estimate is slightly smaller than the point estimate for HP-filtered output (around
0.4) but this diﬀerence is not statistically significant.

9

are a hallmark of the conventional business cycle are also a feature of the medium
term cycle. Similarly, the non-standard variables for the most part display a similar
co-movement with output across the diﬀerent frequencies. One notable exception
is the relative price of capital. At the high frequency there is only a relatively weak
negative correlation between annual movements in the relative price of capital (−0.24)
and output. This negative relation is clearly stronger over the medium term cycle
(−0.56).15 In addition, while for R&D the contemporaneous relationship with output
is similarly positive across the diﬀerent measures of the cycle, the lead/lag pattern is
distinct. As we show later (Figure 5) there appears a lead of R&D over output over
the medium term cycle. This pattern is absent at the high frequency.
To fully appreciate the behavior of the productivity-related variables in the medium
term cycle, it is also useful to examine the respective detrended times series. The
the three panels in Figure 5 plots the medium term cycle along with the associated
medium term component for TFP, the relative price of capital and R&D, respectively. The TFP series is clearly procyclical over the medium term, exhibiting about
two thirds of the volatility of output. Interestingly, the medium term cycle in the
relative price of capital is almost the mirror image of that of TFP. To the extent
that declines in the relative price of capital reflect embodied technological change,
the figure suggests that there is a strong positive co-movement of both disembodied
and embodied technological change. The productivity slowdown of the 1970s and
early 1980s, for example, featured a slowdown of both types of technological change.
Conversely, both types of technological change were features of the productivity boom
in the latter part of the 1990s. Finally, as the bottom panel shows, the movement
in R&D over the medium term is highly procyclical. Note the strong inverse relation
with the relative price of capital. This is a significant finding since the R&D data are
measures of the resources spent to develop new manufacturing goods, which should
enhance embodied technological change.
Thus, overall, procyclical movement of disembodied and embodied technological
change and of R&D, particularly at the medium frequencies, appears to be a salient
feature of the medium term cycle. As we noted however, the medium term cycle is
not only a productivity phenomenon as medium frequency movements in the markup
15

For the BEA measure, the cross-correlation over the medium term cycle is −0.46 and over the
high frequency is −0.17, suggesting a very similar cyclical pattern as with the Gordon series.

10

and capacity utilization appear important as well, as Tables 2, 3 and 4 suggest.

3

Model

We now develop a model of medium term business fluctuations. The model is annual
as opposed to quarterly, as we noted earlier, because we are interested in capturing
fluctuations over a longer horizon than is typically studied. To this end, we abstract
from a number of complicating factors that would otherwise might be useful for
understanding quarterly dynamics, such as money and nominal rigidities.
We consider a two-sector version of a reasonably conventional real business cycle
model, modified to allow for, among other things, endogenous productivity and endogenous countercyclical markups.16 Procyclical entry and exit by final goods firms
induces procyclical variation in the degree of competition and, hence, countercyclical
variation in (final goods) price markups, in the spirit of Rotemberg and Woodford
(1995). The precise formulation we use, though, is based on Gali and Zilibotti (1995).
Final goods producers use intermediate goods as inputs, along with capital and
labor. As in Romer (1990), creation of new specialized intermediate goods, stemming
from R&D is the source of technological change. As we noted in the introduction,
we modify the Romer framework to allow for an endogenous rate of adoption of
new technologies, along with endogenous R&D. By doing so, we are able to allow
for empirically reasonable diﬀusion lags but still generate endogenous medium term
swings in productivity. Roughly speaking, endogenous R&D permits disturbances to
have permanent eﬀects on productivity movements, while endogenous adoption rates
accelerate the transition of productivity to the new steady state. Because the model
has two sectors, consumption goods versus capital goods, we are able to distinguish
between embodied and disembodied technological change.
Household’s are conventional, except we allow them a bit of market power in labor
supply in order to motivate a wage markup. We then allow for exogenous variation
in this market power This mechanism combined with the entry/exit mechanism in
the goods market permits the model to generate countercyclical movements in both
price and wage markups that are consistent with the data. As we alluded to earlier,
16

For a recent characterization of the real business cycle framework and its variants, see Rebelo
(2005).

11

this simple structure is meant as a stand-in for a richer model of markup variation.
We first describe final goods firms, and also characterize the entry and exit/markup
mechanism. We next characterize the creation and adoption of new intermediate
goods. Then we turn to households and finally characterize the complete equilibrium.

3.1

Final Goods Output

Final Output Composite
There are two sectors: a capital goods sector (k) and a consumption goods sector,
(c). Within each sector there is a final output composite, Yx,t ; x = k, c. We take the
price of the consumption good composite as the numeraire.
The composite for each sector is a CES aggregate of the output of Nx,t final goods
j
firms, each producing a diﬀerentiated product. Let Yx,t
be the output of final goods
firm j in sector x. Then:
Yx,t

Z
=[

Nx,t

1

j µx,t
(Yx,t
) dj]µx,t

(1)

0

with µx,t > 1. The time-varying parameter µx,t is inversely related to the price elasticity of substitution between the diﬀerentiated goods. In the symmetric equilibrium,
it is the gross markup of price over marginal cost that final goods producers charge.
Individual firms take as given the time paths of Nx,t and µx,t . As we discuss shortly,
the entry/exit process jointly determines these two variables in equilibrium.
Each final goods firm j produces a specialized good using the following inputs:
j
j
j
j
capital services, Ux,t
Kx,t
, where Kx,t
is capital (of firm j in sector x) and Ux,t
is the
j
j
capital utilization rate; labor, Lx,t ; and an intermediate good composite, Mx,t . The
production function is Cobb-Douglas, as follows:
j
j
j α
j γ
Yx,t
= [(Ux,t
Kx,t
) (Ljx,t )1−α ]1−γ [Mx,t
]

(2)

where γ is the intermediate goods share and α is the capital goods share of value
added. Following Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huﬀman (1988), we assume that the
depreciation rate of capital is increasing in the utilization rate, i.e., for each firm the
¡ j ¢
depreciation rate is given by δ Ux,t
, with δ 0 (·) > 0.
Intermediate Goods Composite
12

The intermediate good composite used by firm j, in turn, is the following CES
aggregate of diﬀerentiated intermediate goods, where Ax,t is the total number of
specialized goods in use within each sector17
j
Mx,t

=[

Z

Ax,t

1

j,k ϑ
(Mx,t
) dk]ϑ ,

(3)

0

with ϑ > 1. Within each sector, each producer k is a monopolistic competitor who
has acquired the right to market the respective good via the product development
and adoption process that we describe below. In the symmetric equilibrium, ϑ is the
producer’s gross markup. The CES formulation implies gains from expanding variety.
Thus, as in Romer (1990) and others, creation and adoption of new intermediate
products (i.e., increasing Ax,t ) provides the ultimate source of productivity growth.
Observe that with fixed values of Nx,t and Ax,t , the model dynamics would mimic
those of a (two-sector) real business cycle model. In our framework, however, entry/exit behavior will induce stationary procyclical fluctuations in Nx,t that will induce countercyclical fluctuations in µx,t . In turn, endogenous technology development
and adoption will induce permanent adjustments of Ax,t , inducing long procyclical
swings in both embodied and disembodied productivity.
We now turn to the entry/exit and endogenous productivity mechanisms.

3.2

Entry/Exit and Markups

To characterize the joint determination Nx,t and µx,t , for each sector, we use a simple approach based on Gali and Zilibotti (1995) (GZ) where procyclical competitive
pressures associated with endogenous procyclical net entry induces countercyclical
movements in the markup.18 Within the GZ framework competitive pressures are
increasing in the number of firms in the market. In particular, the elasticity of substitution among final goods is increasing in the number of active firms. Because
the markup varies inversely with the elasticity of substitution, the model implies the
17

Production is “roundabout,” in the respect that specialized intermediate goods are made by
costlessly transforming final consumption goods. See, e.g, Basu (1995).
18
It is also possible to generate countercyclical markups by allowing for money and nominal price
rigidities (see, e.g., the discussion in GGLS). To keep the model tractable, however, we abstract
from money and nominal rigidities.

13

following reduced form relation between the markup and the total number of firms:
µx,t = µ(Nx,t ); µ0 (·) < 0

(4)

As in GZ, we assume that final output firms in sector x must pay a per period
j
operating cost bx Ψt , which the firm takes as given. Let Π(µx,t , Px,t Yx,t
) be firm profits
(which depend the markup and output value) where Px,t is the price of the output
composite in sector x (with Pc,t = 1). Then, for any firm j to be in the market, it
must be the case that profits are not less than operating costs:
j
Π(µx,t , Px,t Yx,t
) ≥ bx Ψt

(5)

In a symmetric competitive equilibrium, equation (5) will hold with equality. This
zero profit condition along with equation (4) will then jointly determine the markup
and the quantity of firms. As we show, in the general equilibrium, entry will vary
procyclically within each sector and the markup, countercyclically.
In order to ensure a balanced growth equilibrium with stationary markups in each
sector, we assume that the time varying component of operating costs, Ψt , drifts
up over time proportionately with the social value of the aggregate capital stock as
follows:
Ψt = PtI Kt

(6)

where PtI is the social price of the capital (i.e., the competitive price) and Kt is
the aggregate capital stock. Note that an individual firm takes Ψt as given, since it
depends only aggregate factors. One possible interpretation of this formulation is that
operating costs are proportionate to the sophistication of the economy, as measured
by the social value of the capital stock. It is important to note that, because Ψt drifts
quite slowly in relative terms, its variation does not significantly aﬀect medium term
dynamics.

3.3

R&D and Adoption

As we discussed earlier, we modify Romer (1990) to allow for two stages: R&D and
adoption. In addition, we distinguish between innovation in the capital goods sector

14

versus the consumption goods sector. Doing so allows us to capture the medium
term variation in the relative price of capital. We first characterize R&D and then
adoption.
R&D (Creation of new intermediate goods).
Innovators within each sector develop new intermediate goods for the production
of final output. They then sell the rights to this good to an adopter who converts the
idea for the new product into an employable input, as we describe in the next section.
We assume a technology for creating new specialized goods that permits a simple
decentralization of the innovation process, as in Romer (1990). We introduce some
modifications, however, that permit us to calibrate the model in a manner that is
reasonably consistent with the data and also that enhance the ability of the model to
generate procyclical movements in R&D activity.
Specifically, each innovator p in sector x, conducts R&D by using the final consumption good composite as input into developing new products. He finances this
activity by obtaining loans from households. Let Sx,t (p) be the total amount of R&D
by innovator p in sector x. Let ϕx,t be a productivity parameter that the innovator
takes as given and let 1−φ the probability that any existing specialized good becomes
obsolete in the subsequent period (whether or not it has been adopted). Then the
innovation technology is given as follows:
p
p
p
Zx,t+1
= ϕx,t Sx,t
+ φZx,t

(7)

where φ is the implied product survival rate. Allowing for a (small) rate of obsolescence of technologies is not only realistic, also gives us flexibility in calibrating the
model to match the balanced growth evidence.
We assume that the technology coeﬃcient ϕx,t depends on aggregate conditions
which are taken as given by individual innovators. In particular, we assume,
ϕx,t = χx Zx,t [Ψρt · Sx,t 1−ρ ]−1

(8)

with 0 < ρ ≤ 1 and where χx is a scale parameter. As in the Romer model, there
is a positive spillover of the aggregate stock of innovations, Zx,t . In addition, we
relax the restriction of a unit elastic response of new technology development to
R&D, by introducing a congestion externality via the factor [Ψρt · Sx,t 1−ρ ]−1 . This
15

congestion eﬀect raises the cost of developing new products as the aggregate level of
R&D intensity increases (since the factor is decreasing in Sx,t ). It is straightforward
to show that in equilibrium the R&D elasticity of new technology creation becomes
ρ under this formulation. We are thus now free to pick this elasticity to match the
evidence. As a way to ensure that the growth rate of new intermediate product is
stationary, we also assume that the congestion eﬀect depends positively on the scaling
factor Ψt . This is tantamount to assuming that, everything else equal the marginal
gain from R&D declines as the economy becomes more sophisticated, as measured by
the aggregate capital stock. .
Let Jx,t be the value of an “unadopted” specialized intermediate good. This is
the price at which an innovator can sell a new product to an adopter. Given the
linearity of the R&D technology (as perceived by the individual product developer)
and given free entry, each new product developer must exactly break even. As a
consequence, the following arbitrage conditions must be satisfied in any equilibrium
with an interior solution for innovation:
−1
(Rt+1+i
φ) · Et Jx,t+1 − 1/ϕx,t = 0,

(9)

The right side of equation (9) is the discounted marginal benefit from developing a
new product, while the left side is the marginal cost.
Equation (9) strongly hints at how the framework generates procyclical R&D.
During a boom, for example, the expected value of a new “unadopted” product,
Et Jx,t+1 , increases. That is, since the profit flow from specialized intermediate goods
rises, the benefit to creating new types of these goods goes up. R&D spending will
increase in response.
Adoption (Conversion of Z to A)
We next characterize how newly developed intermediate goods are adopted over
time (i.e., the process of converting Zx,t to Ax,t ). Our goal is to capture the notion
that adoption takes time on average but allow for adoption intensities to vary procyclically, consistent with the evidence described in Comin and Gertler (2004). In
addition, we would like to characterize the diﬀusion process in a way that minimizes
complications from aggregation. In particular, we would like to avoid having to keep
track for every available technology of the fraction of firms that have and have not
adopted it.
16

These considerations lead us to the following formulation: A competitive set of
“adopters” converts available technologies into use. As we discussed earlier, they
buy the rights to the technology from the original innovator. They then convert the
technology into usable form by employing a costly and potentially time-consuming
process. To fund adoption expenses, they obtain loans from households. Once in
usable form, the adopter is able to manufacture the new product and then sell it to
final goods producers who use it as part of the intermediate goods composite in the
production function (see equations (2) and (3)).
The pace of adoption depends positively on the level of adoption expenditures in
the following simple way: Whether or not an adopter succeeds in making a product
usable in any given period is a random draw with (success) probability λx,t that is
increasing in the amount the adopter spends, Hx,t , (in units of the final consumption
goods composite) If the adopter is not successful, he may try again in the subsequent
period. Thus, under our formulation, there is slow diﬀusion of technologies on average.(as they are slow on average to become usable). The diﬀusion rate, however
varies, positively with the intensity of adoption expenditures. At the same time, aggregation is simple since once a technology is in usable form, all firms may employ
it.
In particular, let Vx,t be the value to an adopter of successfully bringing a new
product into use, i.e., the present value of profits the adopter would receive from
marketing the specialized intermediate good, given by:
−1
Vx,t = Πm,x,t + Rt+1
φEt Vx,t+1

(10)

where Πm,x,t is profits at t in sector x earned on a specialized intermediate input.
Then we may express the value of an “unadopted” product to the adopter as
−1
Jx,t = max −Hx,t + Rt+1
φ[λx,t Vx,t+1 + (1 − λx,t )Jx,t+1 ]
Hx,t

(11)

where λx,t is the following increasing function of adoption expenditures, Hx,t , and a
scaling parameter parameter Γx,t that is exogenous to the adopter:
λx,t = λ(

Ax,t
· Hx,t )
Ψt

17

(12)

with λ0 > 0, λ00 < 0, and where the adopter takes the scaling factor Ax,t /Ψt as given.
We introduce the (slow moving) scaling factor to keep the adoption rate stable along a
balanced-growth path. Otherwise, the pace of adoption could increase without bound
as the economy grows. Our formulation assumes a spillover eﬀect from aggregate
adoption, Ax,t , to individual adoption (i.e. one can learn from the adoption activities
of others) that diminishes as the economy becomes more complex, as measured by
the value of aggregate capital stock Ψt .
In period t the adopter spends Hx,t . With probability λ(Γx,t Hx,t ) he succeeds in
making the product usable in the subsequent period, enabling him to generate a profit
−1
stream worth Rt+1
φVx,t+1 in current value. With probability 1 − λ(Γx,t Hx,t ) he fails
and must start over. At the margin each adopter adjusts conversion expenditures
until the marginal expenditure (one unit of final goods consumption output) equals
the discounted marginal benefit.
1=

Ax,t 0
−1
λ · Rt+1
φ[Vx,t+1 − Jx,t+1 ]
Ψt

(13)

It is now easy to see why adoption expenditures will move procyclically. During
booms, the value of having a marketable product rises relative to one still in the
development phase, i.e., Vx,t+1 rises relative to Jx,t+1 . In this case, Hx,t will increase
since it becomes worth more at the margin to invest in adoption. The reverse, of
courses will happen in downturns.
Overall, the following partial adjustment equation characterizes the adoption rate
by any adopter q:
q
Aqx,t+1 = λx,t φ[Zx,t
− Aqx,t ] + φAqx,t

(14)

The term in brackets is the stock of products at t that the adopter owns but has
not yet converted. He is able to successfully adopt the fraction λx,t (which depends
on his expenditure intensity Hx,t ).19 The business cycle aﬀects this evolution in two
ways. First, the stock of new products created moves procyclically due to procyclical
q
movement in R&D intensity, raising Zx,t
on average across adopters. Second, adoption
expenditures vary procyclically, causing the procyclical variation in adoption rates.
19

Note that the total (per period) investment in adoption undertaken by the q th adopter is Hx,t ·
q
[Zx,t
− Aqx,t ].

18

3.4

Households and Government

Households
Our formulation of the household sector is reasonably standard. One distinctive
feature, however, is that we allow each household to have a bit of market power in
labor supply as a way to motivate a wage markup. As we noted earlier, time variation
in the wage markup will provide the source of exogenous disturbances in our baseline
model.
There are a continuum of households of measure unity. Each household supplies a
diﬀerentiated-type of labor Lht . Labor input Lt is the following CES aggregate of all
the diﬀerent types of household labor
Z 1
1
Lt = [ (Lht ) µw,t dh]µw,t

(15)

0

where µw,t governs the elasticity of substitution across diﬀerent types of labor and
in equilibrium will correspond to a markup of wages over each household’s cost of
supply labor (in perfect analogy to the price markup for each sector µw,t .. Let Wth
be the wage of household h and Wt the wage index. Then cost minimization by firms
implies that each household faces the following demand curve for its labor:
Lht = (

µw,t
Wth − 1−µ
w,t L
)
t
Wt

(16)

with
Z 1
1
Wt = [ (Wth ) 1−µw,t dh]1−µw,t

(17)

0

In addition to supplying labor, each household consumers and saves. We allow for
perfect consumption insurance (implying in our case that all households will consume
the same amount.) A households may save by either accumulating capital or lending
to innovators and adopters. It also has equity claims all monopolistically competitive
firms. It makes one period loans to innovators and adopters and also rents capital
that it has accumulated directly to firms.
Let Ct be consumption. Then the household maximizes the present discounted

19

utility as given by the following expression:
"
¡ h ¢1+ζ #
∞
X
L
Et
β i ln Ct+i − t+i
1+ζ
i=0

(18)

with 0 < β < 1 and ζ > 0. The budget constraint is as follows.
Ct = Wth Lht + Πt + [Dt + Ptk ]Kt − Ptk Kt+1 + Rt Bt − Bt+1 − Tt

(19)

where Πt reflects the profits of monopolistic competitors paid out fully as dividends
to households, Bt is total loans the households makes at t − 1 that are payable at t,
and Tt reflects lump sum taxes. The household’s decision problem is simply to choose
the wage rate, consumption, labor supply, capital and bonds to maximize equation
(18) subject to (19), as well as the labor demand curve (16).
Observe that because a household has some market power, the wage it chooses a
markup µw,t over its marginal rate of substitution between labor and consumption,
(Lht )ζ Ct .
Wth = µw,t · (Lht )ζ Ct

(20)

In the symmetric equilibrium further, all households will charge the same wage
and supply the same amount of labor. In equilibrium, thus, µw,t is the markup of the
wage index over the household marginal rate of substitution.
As way we noted in the introduction, a number of authors have argued that countercyclical in (something like) µw,t provides the main source of high frequency business
fluctuations, though there is considerable disagreement as to what truly underlies the
fluctuations in this variable. As we noted earlier, various labor market frictions that
give rise to wage rigidity can generate countercyclical movements in µw,t. Rather than
adding further to the complexity, however, we simply explore the implications of
exogenous shifts in µw,t keeping in mind that these shifts may reflect labor market
frictions that we have not explicitly modeled..
Government
Finally, government spending is financed with lump-sum taxes:
Gt = Tt .
20

(21)

3.5

Symmetric Equilibrium Conditions

The economy has a symmetric sequence of markets equilibrium. The endogenous
state variables are the aggregate capital stock, Kt , the total stocks of intermediate
goods invented in each sector, Zc,t and Zk,t , and the total stock of intermediate goods
adopted in each sector, Ac,t and Ak,t . The following system of equations characterizes
the equilibrium:
Resource Constraints and Technology
Let Yt denote aggregate net value added output. This quantity equals the sum
over sectors of the value of gross output, Px,t Yx,t , net expenditures on specialized
intermediate goods, (Ax,t )1−ϑ Mx,t and operating costs, ψ x,t :
Yt =

X

x=c,k

[Px,t Yx,t − (Ax,t )1−ϑ Mx,t − ψ x,t ]

(22)

(Recall, Pc,t = 1.) Note that net expenditures on intermediate goods in a sector is
the total produced Mx,t normalized by the per unit cost of producing (Ax,t )ϑ−1 . The
latter reflects the productivity gains from diversity implied by the CES aggregator
(equation (3))
The uses of output, in turn, are divided between consumption, Ct , investment
P
Pk,t Yk,t , government spending Gt , and the total costs of R&D and adoption, x=c,k [Sx,t +
(Zx,t−j − Ax,t )Hx,t ]:
Yt = Ct + Pk,t Yk,t + Gt +

X

x=c,k

[Sx,t + (Zx,t−j − Ax,t )Hx,t ]

(23)

In addition, capital evolves over time according to:
Kt+1 = (1 − δ(Ut )) Kt + Yk,t

(24)

The gross final output composite in each sector, Yx,t , is given by
Yx,t = (Nx,t )µx,t −1 [(

Ut Kt α
) (Lx,t )]1−γ · (Mx,t )γ
Lt

(25)

where the term (Nx,t )µx,t −1 reflects the eﬃciency gains to diversity implied by the
CES aggregator for final goods in each sector.
Factor Markets
21

The labor market in each sector satisfies the requirement that the marginal product of labor equals the product of the (sector-specific) markup and the household’s
marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption:
(1 − α) (1 − γ)

Px,t Yx,t
= µx,t µw,t Lζt Ct
Lx,t

(26)

where aggregate labor input Lt equals the sum of labor input across sectors:
Lt = Lc,t + Lk,t

(27)

Observe that the total markup of the marginal product of labor over the household’s
marginal rate of substitution in each sector corresponds to the product of the price
and wage markups: µx,t µw,t . This latter expression, in turn, corresponds, to the labor
market wedge that we used earlier to compute the time series for the markup.
It is straightforward to show that the capital/labor ratios and the capital utilization rates are uniform across sectors. The equilibrium conditions for the sectoral
allocations of capital, the sectoral utilization rates, and the sectoral allocations of the
intermediate goods are then, respectively:
α(1 − γ)

Px,t Yx,t
= µx,t [Dt + δ(Ut )PtK ]
Kx,t

(28)

Px,t Yx,t
= µx,t δ0 (Ut )PtK Kx,t
Ut

(29)

α(1 − γ)

γ

Px,t Yx,t
M
= µx, t Px,t
Mx,t

(30)

M
is the relative price of the intermediate goods composite in sector x (see
where Px,t
below), and with

Kx,t = (Kt /Lt )Lx,t

(31)

Consumption/Saving
We can express the intertemporal Euler equation as:
−1
Ct−1 = Et {βCt+1
[

22

K
Dt + Pt+1
]}
PtK

(32)

Arbitrage between acquisition of capital and loans to adopters and innovators implies:
K
Dt + Pt+1
]}
(33)
PtK
We now characterize the variation in final goods firms, Nx,t , and in specialized
intermediate goods, Ax,t , beginning with the former:
Entry and Exit
Free entry by final goods producers in each sector yields the following inverse link
between the sector’s markup, µx,t (Nx,t ), and per-firm output, (Nx,t )1−µx,t Yx,t /Nx,t =
(Nx,t )−µx,t Yx,t .
−1
−1
Rt+1 } = Et {βCt+1
[
{Et βCt+1

µx,t (Nx,t ) − 1
(Nx,t )−µx,t Yx,t = bx Ψt
µx,t (Nx,t )

(34)

where the scaling factor, Ψt , drift slowly over time according to equation (6).
Evolution of Productivity
The R&D technology (equations (7) and (8)) implies that in the symmetric equilibrium the gross growth rate of new intermediate products in each sector depends
positively on R&D (scaled relative to the social value of the capital stock), as follows:
Zx,t+1
Sx,t ρ
= χx (
) +φ
Zx,t
Ψt

(35)

Similarly, the optimality condition for adoption along with the adoption technology
(equations (12) and (14)) imply that the gross rate of adoption of new intermediate
goods in equilibrium obeys the following partial adjustment mechanism, where the
rate of adjustment depends positively on adoption expenditures, Hx,t :
Ax,t+1
Ax,t
Zx,t
= λ(
Hx,t )φ[
− 1] + φ
Ax,t
Ψt
Ax,t

(36)

Free entry into research and development (see equations (7),(8) and (9)) implies
that the discounted value of the gain from R&D must equal the total cost
−1
(Rt+1
φ) · Et Jx,t+1 (Zx,t+1 − φZx,t ) = Sx,t

(37)

Similarly, free entry into adoption (see equations (12) and (13)) implies that adoption
expenditures will be increasing in the diﬀerence between the value of an adopted
project Vx,t+1 , versus the value of an unadopted one Jx,t+1 :
23

with Vx,t
good:

Ax,t 0
−1
λ · Rt+1
φ[Vx,t+1 − Jx,t+1 ] = 1
(38)
Ψt
given by the discounted stream of earnings from a specialized intermediate

Px,t Yx,t
−1
] + Rt+1
φEt {Vx,t+1 }
(39)
Ax,t
where the first term in brackets is profits at time t and where the value of an unadopted
technology, Jx,t , obeys:
Vx,t = [µ−1
x,t (1 − 1/ϑ)γ

−1
Jx,t = −Hx,t + Rt+1
φ[Jx,t+1 + λ(Γx,t Hx,t )(Vx,t+1 − Jx,t+1 )]

(40)

Relative Prices and Productivity Dynamics
Finally, we present expressions for the equilibrium relative prices of intermediate
goods and of capital. We also draw the connection of these prices to movements in
both disembodied and embodied technological change.
From the CES aggregator for intermediate goods (equation (3)), the relative price
of the intermediate good composite in the symmetric equilibrium is given by
M
Px,t
= ϑ(Ax,t )1−ϑ

(41)

M
declines as the number of specialized intermediate products, Ax,t ,
Observe that Px,t
increases, since ϑ exceeds unity. Technological progress is thus manifested in falling
prices of intermediate goods.
To see the link between intermediate goods prices and disembodied productivity,
v
consider the expression for net value added output within each sector, Yx,t
(obtained
by netting out materials and overhead costs):

v
α
Yx,t
= θx,t Kx,t
L1−α
x,t

(42)

where θx,t is the Solow residual in sector x and is given by
θx,t = (1 −

γ
µx,t ϑ

µ

−1

)Nx,tx,t (

γ
ψ x,t
γ
1−γ U α −
)
t
M
α
µx,t Px,t
Kx,t
L1−α
x,t

(43)

M
Observe that θx,t increases as Px,t
declines. The strength of the eﬀect, further, depends
positively on the intermediate goods share parameter γ.

24

M
Movements in Px,t
generate variation in θx,t that reflects true technological change.
M
We should expect the influence of Px,t
on θx,t to play out mainly over the medium
and low frequencies, since the force underlying this relationship is the variation of
Ax,t , which, in turn, is a product of the endogenous research and technology adoption
processes. Observe that also underlying the Solow residual are several others factors
that do not reflect true technological change and that are likely to be important at
the high frequency. The capital utilization rate, Ut , enters θx,t because it reflects
µ −1
unmeasured intensity of input usage. The term Nx,tx,t reflects the agglomeration
eﬀect present in the CES composite for final output. The markup µx,t also enters θx,t
µ −1
due to the roundabout input-output nature of production. On balance, Ut , Nx,tx,t ,
and µx,t contribute to procyclical variation in θx,t , particularly at the high frequencies,
M
while Px,t
contributes to procyclical variation mainly at the medium frequencies and
below.
Lastly, we consider the relative price of capital and embodied technological change.
In equilibrium PtK obeys
1−µ

PtK

Nk,t k,t
µk,t
=(
) · ( 1−µc,t ) · PtI
µc,t
Nc,t

(44)

where PtI is the social price of capital (i.e., the price that would arise in competitive
markets), given by
PtI = (

M
Pk,t
Ak,t (1−ϑ)γ
)
= ( M )γ
Ac,t
Pc,t

(45)

Movements in the social price of capital depend on the state of technology in the
capital goods sector relative to the consumption sector, as measured by the ratio of
intermediate goods sector prices. Note that PtI is likely to vary countercyclically over
the medium term because the pace of endogenous technological change in the capital
goods sector relative to the consumption goods sector is likely to vary procyclically: In
particular, R&D and adoption exhibit stronger procyclical variation in the investment
sector as a consequence of the stronger procyclical variation of profitability in this
sector.
M
M
M
As with the eﬀect of Px,t
on θx,t , the impact of Pk,t
/Pc,t
on PtK reflects true technological progress and is also likely to play out over the medium and low frequencies.
25

There are similarly nontechnological influences on PtK that are likely to be particularly relevant at the high frequency. Specifically, PtK depends on the relative markups
in the two sectors and also on the relative number of firms operating in each market
(the latter reflects the relative strength of the agglomeration eﬀect from the CES
aggregators.) Note that the high frequency variation in PtK is also likely to be countercyclical because entry exhibits greater procyclical variation in the capital goods
sector and, conversely, the markup exhibits greater countercyclical variation. Thus,
forces at both the high and medium frequency contribute to countercyclical variation
in PtK over the medium term.

4

Model Simulations

In section we explore the ability of the model to generates medium term cycles. We
solve the model by loglinearizing around the deterministic balanced growth path and
then employing the Anderson-Moore code, which provides numerical solutions for
general first order systems of diﬀerence equations. We first describe the calibration
before turning to some numerical exercises.

4.1

Model Calibration

The calibration we present here is meant as a benchmark. We have found that our
results are robust to reasonable variations around this benchmark. To the extent
possible, we use the restrictions of balanced growth to pin down parameter values.
Otherwise, we look for evidence elsewhere in the literature. There are a total of
eighteen parameters. Ten appear routinely in other studies. The eight others relate
to the R&D and adoption processes and also to the entry/exit mechanism.
We begin with the standard parameters. We set the discount factor β equal to
0.95, to match the steady state share of non-residential investment to output. Based
on steady state evidence we also choose the following number: (the capital share)
α = 0.33; (the materials share) γ = 0.50; (government consumption to output)
G/Y = 0.2; (the depreciation rate) δ = 0.08; and (the steady state utilization rate)
U = 0.8. We set the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply ζ at unity, which
represents an intermediate value for the range of estimates across the micro and macro
26

literature. Similarly, we set the elasticity the change in the depreciation rate with
respect the utilization rate, (δ 00 /δ 0 )U at 0.33, which lies within the range that other
studies suggest.20 Finally, based on evidence in Basu and Fernald (1997), we fix the
steady state gross valued added markup in the consumption goods sector, µc equal
to 1.1 and the corresponding markup for the capital goods sector, µk at 1.2.
We next turn to the “non-standard” parameters. The steady state growth rates
of GDP and the relative price of capital in the model are functions of the growth
rate of new technologies developed in the consumption and capital goods sectors. By
using the balanced growth restrictions and matching the average growth rate of nonfarm business output per working age person (0.024), the average growth rate of the
Gordon quality adjusted price of capital relative to the BEA price of consumption
goods and services (-0.026) and the average share of research expenditures on capital
goods in total GDP (0.002), we can identify the annual survival probability of new
technologies, φ, and the productivity parameters in the technologies for creating new
intermediate goods in each sector, χc and χk . Accordingly, we set: φ = 0.97 (implying
an annual obsolescence rate of three percent), χc = 6.09; and χk = 35.78.
There is no direct evidence on the gross markup ϑ for specialized intermediate
goods. Given the specialized nature of these products, it seems that an appropriate
number would be at the high range of the estimates of markups in the literature for
other types of goods. Accordingly we choose a value of 1.6, but emphasize that our
results are robust to reasonable variations around this number.
There is also no simple way to identify the parameter ρ, the elasticity of new
intermediate goods with respect to R&D, ρ. Griliches (1990) presents some estimates
using the number of new patents as a proxy for technological change. The estimates
are noisy and range from about 0.6 to 1.0, depending on the use of panel versus crosssectional data. Because there is good reason to believe these estimate are biased
downwards, we set ρ equal to 0.9, a value in the upper range.21
20

We set U equal to 0.8 based on the average capacity utilization level in the postwar period as
measured by the Board of Governors. We set (δ 00 /δ 0 )U equal to 1/3. based on the range of values
used in the literature that vary from 0.1 used by King and Rebelo (1999) to unity used by Baxter
and Farr (2001).
21
Using patents to measure technological progress has three important drawbacks. First, though
in the model all of the innovations are symmetric, in reality, they clearly are not. Failure to account
for a upward trend in the quality of new patents will bias downwards Griliches estimates of ρ. (New

27

We now consider the parameters that govern the adoption process. To calibrate
the steady state adoption frequency λ, we use information on diﬀusion lags. Given
that λ is the probability a technology is adopted in any given period, the average time
to adoption for any intermediate good is 1/λ. Mansfield (1989) examines a sample of
embodied technologies and finds a median time to adoption of 8.2 years. Comin and
Gertler (2004) examine a sample of British data that includes both disembodied and
embodied innovations. They find median diﬀusion lags of 9.8 and 12.5 years, respectively. Assuming that the median is not too diﬀerent from the mean, a reasonable
value for λ is 0.1, implying an average time to adoption of ten years later.
Another parameter we need to calibrate is the elasticity of the frequency of adoption with respect to adoption expenditures. Doing so is diﬃcult because we do not
have good measures of adoption expenditures, let alone adoption rates. One partial measure of adoption expenditures we do have is development costs incurred by
manufacturing firms trying that make new capital goods usable (which is a subset of
the overall measure of R&D that we used earlier. A simple regression of the rate of
decline in the relative price of capital (the relevant measure of the adoption rate of
new embodied technologies in the context of our model) on this measure of adoption
costs and a constant yields an elasticity of 0.9. Admittedly, this estimate is crude,
given that we do not control for other determinants of the changes in the relative price
of capital. On the other hand, we think it provides a plausible benchmark value.
We next turn to the entry/exit mechanism. We set the elasticity of the price
markup with respect to the number of firms in each sector (i.e. ∂ log µx,t /∂ log Nx,t ).
By doing so, the overall medium term variation in the number of firms is roughly
consistent with the data. In the data, the percent standard deviation of the number
of firms relative to the standard deviation of the total markup over the medium term
cycle is 0.65. With our parametrization, the model produces a ratio of 0.15. However,
given that the data does not weight firms by size and given that most of the cyclical
patents are likely to be worth more than old patents because the R&D expenses per patent have
been trending up). Second, the productivity literature has long recognized that in recent years firms
are less prone to patent their innovations. This trend will also introduce an additional downwards
bias in the estimate of ρ. Finally, the finite number of workers at the patent oﬃce tends to smooth
out the number of patents granted in a given year generating additional artificial concavity in the
estimation of equation (35).

28

variation is due to smaller firms, the true size-weighted variation in the number of
firms (relative to the markup) is probably closer to 0.15 than 0.65. As a check, we
show that our results are largely unaﬀected by varying the price markup elasticity
over the range from 0.5 to 1.5.
Finally, we fix the autocorrelation of the preference/wage markup shock so that the
model generates an autocorrelation that approximately matches that of the overall
gross markup, µt · µw
t , as measured by Gali, Gertler and Lopez Salido (2002). This
results in a value of 0.6. We then choose a standard of the shock, so that the unconditional variance of the overall gross markup matches the data (for the medium term
cycle.)

4.2

Some Numerical Experiments

To be clear, the exercises that follow are meant simply as a first pass at exploring
whether the mechanisms we emphasize have potential for explaining the data: They
are not formal statistical tests. As we discussed earlier, we treat innovations to
the wage markup, µw
t , stemming from exogenous fluctuations in household labor
market power as the main source of disturbances to the economy. We keep in mind,
though, that this simple mechanism is meant as a short-cut for a richer description
of countercyclical wage markup behavior.22
Ideally, we would like to evaluate the model against moments of the data that
are conditional on a shock to µw
t . There are several diﬃculties with this approach,
however. First, while identified VAR methods may be useful for measuring the near
term eﬀects of shocks to the economy, they usually are very imprecise at measuring the
kind of medium term eﬀects that are the focus of our analysis.23 Second, identification
of orthogonalized movements in µw
t is highly problematic, particularly given that in
practice there is likely a strong endogenous component to this variable.
Rather than attempt to match imprecisely estimated conditional moments, we
instead follow the lead of the traditional real business cycle literature by exploring
how well a single shock presumed to be the principle driving force can explain the
22

As discussed in GGLS (2002), a model with either nominal or real wage rigidities can generate
a countercyclical wage markup.
23
In particular, long run eﬀects of impulse response functions from indentified VARs are measured
much less precisely than are short run eﬀects.

29

unconditional patterns in the data. We view this kind of exercise as a check on the
plausibility of the scenario we oﬀer, as opposed to a clear test against alternatives.
While the RBC literature focused on the ability of technology shocks to account for
the high frequency variation in the data, we instead consider the ability of our model
driven by shocks to µw
t to explain the combined high and medium frequency variation
as well as each of the components. We also explore how well an exogenous technology
shock model can explain medium term fluctuations, as compared to our benchmark
model.
The Baseline Model with Endogenous Productivity
Before confronting the data, we first gain some intuition for the workings of the
model by examining the model impulse responses to a shock to µw
t . In Figure 4, the
solid line in each panel is the response of the respective variable within our full blown
model. The dotted line corresponds to the simple benchmark with neither endogenous
productivity nor endogenous markup variation (though allowing for endogenous factor
utilization). The period length is a year.
The rise in µw
t eﬀectively raises the price of labor, reducing labor demand and
output. Both the initial impact and the impact over time on output is larger in our
full blown model than in the benchmark model. Within the full blown model, the
decline in output leads to a rise in both the consumption and capital goods price
markups (due to a decline in entry within each sector), enhancing the initial drop
in output. Over time, output climbs back to trend, but does not make it back all
the way due to the endogenous permanent decline in productivity, that we describe
shortly. After a decade or so it levels oﬀ at a new steady state. The permanent decline
in output is about one half of the initial decline. In the benchmark model without
endogenous productivity, output simply reverts back to its initial steady state.
Even though the shock is not technological, the rise in µw
t generates a persistent
decline in TFP and labor productivity and a persistent increase in the relative price
of capital. The initial decline in measured TFP and labor productivity results mainly
from variable factor utilization (in conjunction with overhead costs) and the rise in
the price markups.24 Over time, there is a decline in true productivity relative trend.
ψα(θ−1)

Yt A

24

The formal definition of TFP that we adopt is the following: T F Pt = K αk,t
1−α , where ψ
t Lt
is the fraction of the variety externality in the creation of new capital not captured by the linear
aggregation methodology used by the BEA to compute the capital stock. We calibrate ψ to 0.56

30

In particular, the initial contraction in economic activity induces a drop in both
R&D and the rate of technology adoption.25 . The initial decline in R&D slows the
rate of creation of new intermediate products in both the goods and capital sectors,
ultimately leading to a permanent drop relative to trend in total factor productivity
and labor productivity. The slowdown in the adoption rate leads to a near term
decline in disembodied productivity growth. Absent this endogenous slowdown in
technology adoption, the decline in productivity following the drop in R&D would
take much longer, assuming realistic diﬀusion lags.
Similarly, variable price markup behavior accounts for the initial rise in the relative price of capital, while the increase over time is due to a decline in productivity
in the capital goods sector relative to the consumption goods sector. Because investment initially falls proportionately more than output, the capital goods markup
rises relative to the consumption goods markup, leading to a jump in the relative
price of capital. The disproportionate drop in investment also implies that expected
profits in the capital goods sector fall relative to the consumption goods sector. As a
consequence, there is a relatively greater drop in both R&D and technology adoption
in the capital goods sector, leading to a slowdown in the creation and adoption of
specialized intermediate goods, relative the consumption goods sector. This leads to
a permanent increase in the relative price of capital.
We next explore how well the model produces medium term fluctuations. We
do so by comparing moments of artificial data generated by the model economy
(driven by shocks to µw
t ) with the unconditional moments of the actual data. Table 5
reports the standard deviations of the variables for the medium term cycle and also
for the respective high and medium frequency components. For each variable, the
light column is the actual data (including the 95 percent confidence intervals) and
the dark column is the model. As we noted earlier, we normalize the exogenous shock
to match the long run growth rate of TFP implied by the model to the postwar data. In case the
variety externality was completely mismeasured, annual TFP growth would be 1.72 percent instead
of the actual 1.4 percent. In addition, this definition assumes that the BLS measures of TFP do not
correct properly for capacity utilization.
25
We are assuming that that R&D involves the same factor intensities as goods production. It is
thus not as sensitive to wage behavior as in the Schumpeterian models of Aghion and Howitt (1992)
and Aghion and Saint-Paul (1991). Barlevy (2003) shows that if productivity shocks in the final
goods sector are suﬃciently persistent, R&D can be procyclical even in a Schumpeterian model.

31

to µw
t so that the unconditional variance of the total markup over the medium term
generated by the model exactly matches the data (4.35).
Overall, the model does reasonably well. For seven of the nine variables (other
than the markup), the model standard deviations for the medium term are within
the ninety-five percent confidence intervals for the data. For output and hours, the
model closely matches both the overall variation in the data and the breakdown of
the variation between the high and medium frequencies. Even though the exogenous
driving force is not technological, the model captures reasonably well the variation
in TFP over the medium term (2.25 versus 2.39), and does particularly well at the
medium frequencies (1.99 versus 2.01). The model estimate is below the ninety-five
percent confidence interval for TFP at the high frequency, but still is about eighty
percent of the mean in the data. The model is within the confidence interval for
the variation in labor productivity over the medium term cycle and over the medium
frequencies, in particular. It is too low at the high frequency. However, allowing for
unobserved labor eﬀort (which is likely more important at the high than the medium
frequencies) would improve performance on this dimension.
The two variables where the model does less well are the relative price of capital
and R&D. The model generates just over sixty percent of the variability in the relative
price of capital observed in the data (2.71 versus 4.34) and nearly double the volatility
of R&D (14.78 versus 7.65). In each case, however, measurement error in the data
could be a factor. First, error in the quality adjustment for the Gordon relative price
of capital series could be magnifying the measure of volatility. As we noted in section
2, The BEA measure of the relative price of capital, which employs a simpler method
for quality adjustment, has a co-movement with output over the medium term that
is very similar to the Gordon series. However the standard deviation of the BEA
series over the medium term is only 2.59, which is close to the model’s prediction.
Since the quality adjustment in the Gordon series is the subject of some controversy,
a case can be made that the true volatility lies somewhere in between the Gordon and
BEA estimates, implying that the model may not be as far oﬀ on the relative price
of capital as the Gordon numbers might suggest. Second, the discrepancy between
the model and the data regarding R&D volatility may be in part due to the very
imprecise measure of private R&D that is available. This measure, based on the NSF
definition of R&D that basically includes expenditures to create new goods, is just
32

a subset of total private R&D.26 .It is also likely to contain a significant overhead
component, implying that variable R&D input is likely to be more volatile than
measured total input. Another possibility is that we need to take into account public
R&D. Interestingly, the volatility of the aggregate of public and private R&D is about
what our model predicts.
Figure 5 portrays how well the model captures the cyclical co-movements of variables in the data. The top left panel plots the autocorrelation of output over the
medium term cycle, at lags and leads of ten years. The other panels plot the crosscorrelation of a particular variable with output at time t. In each case, the dashed line
represents the data and the solid line, the model. The two dotted lines are ninety-five
percent confidence intervals around the data. For the most the model matches the
co-movements in the data: For eight of the ten variables the model cross-correlations
lie mainly within the respective confidence intervals. The notable exceptions again
are the relative price of capital and R&D. The model does capture both the contemporaneous and lagged co-movement of each of these two variables with output.
However, in each case it implies a smaller lead over output than the data suggests.
In the conclusion we discuss some ways to improve the model’s ability to account for
both the timing and volatility of each of these variables.
Finally, though we do not report the results here, in the working paper version
of this paper we show that all the key features of the model, R&D, endogenous
technology adoption, and entry and exist, are important for explaining the data.
Eliminating any one of these features leads to a significant deterioration in model
performance.
An Exogenous Technology Shock Model.
We now consider how well a conventional exogenous productivity framework can
accounts for the facts. We thus eliminate endogenous productivity and endogenous
markup movements. What is left is an RBC model with variable factor utilization. We
keep this latter feature because it improves the overall model performance, as noted
by King and Rebelo (1999). Because we want the model to be consistent with the
evidence on embodied as well as disembodied technological change, we also introduce
a shock to the production of new capital goods. In particular, we make the creation
of new capital goods a multiple of the level of investment, where the multiple in an
26

See, e.g., Comin (2004) and Comin and Mulani (2005)).

33

exogenous random variable. The inverse of this multiple is then the relative price of
capital in units of consumption goods. Where relevant, we use the same parameter
values as in our baseline model. One exception is that to enhance the ability of the
model to account for hours volatility, we raise the Frisch labor supply elasticity from
unity to two, a value recommended by Cooley and Prescott (1995).
We consider three types of experiments: (i) a shock to TFP; (ii) a shock to the
relative price of capital; and (iii) simultaneous shocks to the relative price of capital.
We begin with an exogenous shock to TFP. We set the auto-correlation of the shock
at 0.88, which is consistent with value that King and Rebelo (1999) use for quarterly
data. This results in a serial correlation of TFP over the medium term cycle generated
by the model of 0.63, which is slightly below the actual number of 0.7, though well
within the ninety-five percent confidence interval. Because the model performance
would deteriorate if we were to use a more persistent process, we stick with the value
proposed by King and Rebelo (1999) We then adjust the standard deviation of the
shock to match the unconditional standard deviation of TFP over the medium term
cycle. Since the measure of TFP in the data is not corrected for utilization, we adjust
the exogenous process for TFP to match the serial correlation and variance of the
model Solow residual (which is similarly not corrected for utilization.)
Table 6 reports the results. Overall, the simple TFP shock model does about as well
at capturing volatility over the medium term cycle as it does the for conventional high
frequency cycle. The model accounts for roughly eighty percent of the volatility of
output. The volatilities of the other variables relative to output are reasonably in line
with the data. The main exception involves hours. As in the typical high frequency
analysis, the model only generates about half the relative volatility of hours that
appears in the data. From our vantage, however, a significant shortcoming of the
TFP shock model is that by construction it cannot account for the cyclical pattern of
embodied technological change, which we have argued is a key feature of the medium
term cycle. We thus next consider a shock to the relative price of capital.
As with the TFP shock, we attempt to feed in an exogenous price that matches
the autocorrelation and standard deviation of the filtered data for the medium term
cycle. Because the relative price of capital is very persistent, to come close to the
autocorrelation in the data it is necessary to feed in a near unit root process.27 (Our
27

Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (2000) also consider a model of how exogenous shocks to

34

numerical simulation procedure requires stationary forcing processes, thus ruling out
a pure unit root shock.) In particular, we set the autocorrelation of the shock, ρ(Pk )
at 0.99. Having a highly persistent process for the relative price of capital is also
plausible on a priori theoretical grounds: That is, it seems reasonable to presume
that embodied technological changes are permanent, implying that a (near) unit root
process with drift is appropriate.28
As the third row of Table 6 shows, the model with a highly persistent shock to the
relative price of capital does not fare well. It has only a minimal impact on output
volatility for two reasons. First, in contrast to a disembodied technology shock which
directly aﬀects the production of all output, this shock only has a direct eﬀect on the
production of new capital goods. Second, because the shock is highly persistent, it
creates little incentive for intertemporal substitution of hours.
We next allow for simultaneous shocks to the two technology variables. We keep
the autocorrelations of each shock unchanged, but adjust the variance of each shock
innovation to match the corresponding unconditional standard deviations of the filtered data.. As the fourth column of Table 6 shows, there is a clear improvement
in model performance, relative to the case with just shocks to the relative price of
capital. Nonetheless, the two shock model explains less of the overall output volatility
than the simple TFP shock case, slightly less than seventy percent as compared to
roughly eighty percent.29 Otherwise, the relative volatilities of the other variables
are largely similar to the pure TFP shock case. One exception is that utilization is
significantly more volatile, due to a direct impact of movements on the relative price
of capital on the incentive to adjust capital utilization.
the relative price of capital might generate business fluctuations. They diﬀer by considering only
equipment prices and also by adding investment adjustment costs, where the latter is chosen so that
the model variance matches the data. Also, they just focus on the high frequency. Finally, they use
a forcing process for the relative price of capital that is much less persistent than our data for the
medium term would suggest is reasonable.
28
A similar argument can be made regarding disembodied technology shocks: However, convention
in this literature quickly evolved into considering statonary processes that are not close to being unit
root. This however complicates the interpretation of what these shocks actually are.
29
Shocks to the relative price of capital aﬀect measured TFP by aﬀecting utilization, which in the
two shock case reduces that size of the embodied technology shock required to match TFP. It is for
this reason that output volatility is lower in the two shock case than in the case with just shocks to
disembodied productivty.

35

The reason the two shock model does not explain more the seventy percent of
the volatility of output involves the highly persistence of the shock to the relative
price of capital, which greatly minimizes intertemporal substitution. To confirm, we
re-did the experiment, reducing ρ(Pk ) from 0.99 to 0.90. As the last column of Table
6 shows, in this case the exogenous technology model exactly matches the volatility
of output. There are some shortcomings, however. The enhanced intertemporal
substitution leads to investment volatility that is far greater than in the data (16.94
versus 9.59).30 On the other hand, hours volatility remains too low relative to the
data (1.88 versus 2.84).
As we noted earlier, however, deviating significantly from a (near) unit root process
for exogenous embodied technological change is not appealing from a theoretical perspective. It is also not appealing from an empirical one. In Table 7 we show the
autocorrelations for TFP and the relative price of capital over the medium term cycle for the diﬀerent cases of the exogenous technology shock that we considered. For
comparison, we also report these autocorrelations for our baseline endogenous productivity model. For all the exogenous technology shock cases, the model autocorrelation
for the relative price of capital is low relative to the data. For the highly persistent
forcing process, ρ(Pk ) = 0.99, it is just the below the lower bound for the ninety-five
percent confidence interval (0.74 versus 0.78)..For the less persistent forcing process,
ρ(Pk ) = 0.90, it moves further away from the target, dropping to 0.70.
By contrast, as column 2 of Table 1 shows, our baseline endogenous productivity
model succeeds at capturing the high degree of persistence in the relative price of
capital at the medium frequencies (0.87 versus 0.91 in the data). It similarly captures
the persistence of TFP (0.75 versus 0.70).

5

Concluding Remarks

We have explored the idea that the post war business cycle should not be associated
with only high frequency variation in output (as generated by the conventional busi30

One way to dampen investment would be to add adjustment costs to investment. It is unclear,
though, how important these costs may be at the annual frequency. Investment adjustments costs
also significantly dampen the response of hours to exogenous productivity shocks (see, e.g., Neville
and Ramey, 2002.).

36

ness cycle filter), but rather should also include the medium frequency oscillations
between periods of robust growth and periods of relative stagnation. We first construct measures of the cycle based on this notion and demonstrate that the resulting
fluctuations are considerably more volatile and persistent than are the usual high
frequency measures. These results suggest that postwar business fluctuations may be
more important phenomena than conventional analysis suggests.
The medium term cycle we have identified features significant procyclical movements in both embodied and disembodied technological change. These facts, among
others, motivated us to approach modeling the medium term cycle by modifying a
reasonably conventional business cycle framework to allow for R&D, technology adoption, and variation in markups. A virtue of our approach is that we are able to fully
endogenize cyclical productivity dynamics, including both embodied and disembodied. In addition, our endogenous productivity mechanism oﬀers an avenue through
which non-technological disturbances at the high frequency can have sustained eﬀects
on productivity over the medium term. As with many recent quantitative macroeconomic frameworks, the volatility of output at the high frequency is associated countercyclical markup variation. However, within in our framework, these high frequency
fluctuations influence the pace of both R&D and adoption, in turn generating subsequent movements in productivity. The net eﬀect is a propagation mechanism that
generates the kind of persistent business cycles that our filter uncovers.
There are, however, several places where the model performance could be improved.
As in the data, the model generates a countercyclical movement in the relative price
of capital over the medium term and procyclical movement in R&D. The model,
however, generates only about sixty percent of the variability in the relative price of
capital that is observed in the data. As we noted, it may be that the conventionally used Gordon series overstates the volatility: The oﬃcial BEA series has similar
cyclical properties over the medium term, but an overall volatility that is in line with
our model estimates. Another possible solution might be to introduce a shock to
the innovation process for the production of new capital goods, in order to add an
independent source of volatility to the relative price of capital. Conversely, the model
R&D variability is about twice what we observe in the data. As we discussed earlier,
here it may important to try to gather improved measures of R&D that are not only
more comprehensive, but can also separate variable from overhead costs.
37

We also show that under certain circumstances, a pure exogenous productivity
framework can explain a good fraction of the variation in the data. To capture the
movements in both embodied and disembodied technological change, it is of course
necessary to have shocks to both total factor productivity and the relative price of
capital. To generate suﬃciently large output and employment fluctuations, however,
it appears necessary to allow for exogenous shocks to the relative price of capital that
are less persistent than the data suggest. Beyond this empirical consideration, as we
noted, there are also good theoretical reasons to believe that movements in embodied
productivity should not be transitory. On the other hand, it is surely worth exploring
exogenous productivity models more thoroughly than we have done in this paper.
Finally, to minimize complexity, we modeled markup variation at the high frequency in a very simple way. By contrast, as we noted in the introduction, recent
quantitative macroeconomic frameworks endogenize markup variation by introducing
money together with nominal price and wage rigidities. It would be straightforward
to enrich our model along this dimension. Doing so would yield a rather diﬀerent
perspective on what’s at stake over the performance of monetary policy. Within
these more conventional frameworks, medium frequency variation is driven mainly by
exogenous shocks. With our endogenous productivity mechanism, however, (large)
high frequency fluctuations can have very persistent eﬀects. To the extent monetary
policy influences this high frequency variation, it will have ramifications for medium
frequency dynamics..

38

References
[1] Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992), “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction”, Econometrica 60, 323-51.
[2] Aghion, P. and G. Saint-Paul (1991),“Uncovering Some Causal Relationships
between Productivity Growth and the Structure of Economic Fluctuations: A
Tentative Survey”, NBER wp #4603.
[3] Barlevy, G. (2003), “On the Timing of Innovation in Schumpeterian Models of
Growth ” Northwestern mimeo.
[4] Basu, S.(1996) “Procyclical Productivity, Increasing Returns or Cyclical Utilization?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3), August, 719-751.
[5] Basu, S. and J. Fernald (1997), “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates
and Implications” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 2. (Apr.), pp.
249-283.
[6] Baxter, M. and R. King (1995), “ Measuring Business Cycles Approximate BandPass Filters for Economic Time Series ” Review of Economics and Statistics
81(4), 575-93.
[7] Baxter, M. and D. Farr (2001), “Variable factor utilization and international
business cycles,” NBER Working Paper # 8392.
[8] Blanchard, O. (1997), “The Medium Run” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 89-158.
[9] Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo 1995, “Capacity Utilization and Returns to Scale,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Bernanke B. and J. Rotemberg,
eds., 67-110.
[10] Caballero R. and M. Hammour (1998), “Jobless Growth: Appropriability, Factor Substitution and Unemployment” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 48 , June, 51-94.

39

[11] Christiano, L. and T. Fitzgerald (1999), “The Band Pass Filter”, NBER wp
#7257.
[12] Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum and C. Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock.to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy
113, 1-44., February.
[13] Cooley, T. and E. Prescott (1995), “ Economic Growth and Business Cycles”
In Frontiers of Business Cycle Analysis, T. Cooley and E. Prescott, editors,
Princeton University Press.
[14] Comin, D. (2004), “ R&D: A Small Contribution to Productivity Growth” Journal of Economic Growth Vol. 9, N. 4 (Dec). pp. 391-421.
[15] Comin, D. and M. Gertler (2004) “Procyclical Speed of Technological Diﬀusion”,
NYU mimeo.
[16] Comin, D. and S. Mulani (2005) “A Theory of Growth and Volatility at the
Aggregate and Firm level.” NYU mimeo.
[17] Cummins, J. and G. Violante (2002), “Investment-Specific Technical Change in
the Unites States (1947-200): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences”,
Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 5, No. 2, (April), 243-284.
[18] Davies, S. (1979) The Diﬀusion of Process Innovations Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
[19] Evans, G., S. Honkapohja and P. Romer (1998):“Growth Cycles”, The American
Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 3. (June), pp. 495-515.
[20] Gali, J. and F. Zilibotti, (1995), “Endogenous Growth and Poverty Traps in a
Cournotian Model,” Annales d”Economie et de Statisque, Vol. 37/38, 197-214.
[21] Gali, J., M. Gertler and D. Lopez-Salido (2002), “Markups, Gaps and the Welfare
Costs of Business Cycles”, NBER wp # 8850.
[22] Gordon, R.J. (1990) The Meaurement of Durable Goods, University of Chicago
Press.
40

[23] Greenwood, J, Z. Hercowitz and G. Huﬀman (1988), “Investment, Capacity Utilization and the Real Business Cycle Model,” American Economic Review 78,
June, 402-417.
[24] Greenwood, J, Z. Hercowitz and P. Krusell (2000), “The Role of InvestmentSpecific Technological Change in the Business Cycle”, European Economic Review, 44, 91-115.
[25] Griliches, Z. (1990), “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 28, No. 4. (Dec.), pp. 1661-1707.
[26] Hall, R. (1997) “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Labor Economics, S223-S250.
[27] Hobijn, Bart (2001), “Is Equipment Price Deflation A Statistical Artifact,” NY
Fed Staﬀ Report 139.
[28] Hodrick, R. J. and E. C. Prescott (1997), Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
29, February, 1-16.
[29] King, R. and S. Rebelo (1999), “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Ed. J. Taylor and M. Woodford, Vol. 1B, p 927-1007.
[30] Mansfield, E. (1989), “Industrial Robots in Japan and the USA” Research Policy,
18 pp. 183-92.
[31] Rebelo, S. (2005), “Real Business Cycle Models, Past, Present and Future,”
NBER working paper #11401.
[32] Romer, P. (1990), “Endogenous Technological Change” The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 98, No. 5, Part 2. S71-S102.
[33] Rotemberg, J. (2003), “ Stochastic Technical Progress, Smooth Trends and
Nearly Distinct Business Cycles,” American Economic Review
[34] Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford (1995), “Dynamic General Equilibrium Models
with Imperfectly Competitive Product Markets.” In Frontiers of Business Cycle
Analysis, T. Cooley and E. Prescott, editors, Princeton University Press.
41

[35] Smets, F. and R. Wouters, (2005), “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles:
A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” mimeo, ECB.
[36] Solow, Robert (2000), “Toward a Macroeconomics of the Medium Run” Journal
of Economic Perspectives

42

Medium Term Component

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15
Medium term Cycle

2000

1999

1997

1996

1994

1993

1991

1990

1988

1987

1985

1984

1982

1981

1979

1978

1976

1975

1973

1972

1970

1969

1967

1966

1964

1963

1961

1960

1958

1957

1955

1954

1952

1951

1949

1948

Figure 1: Non-farm Business Output per person 16-65

0.1

0.05

0

Figure 2: Long Run trend annual growth rate in Non-Farm Business Output per person 16-65
0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

19
48
19
50
19
52
19
54
19
56
19
58
19
60
19
62
19
64
19
66
19
68
19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00

0

Figure 3a: TFP
0.06

0.04

0.02

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

1973

1971

1969

1967

1965

1963

1961

1959

1957

1955

1953

0

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

-0.08

Medium Term Component

Medium Term Cycle

Figure 3b: Relative Price of Capital (Gordon)
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04

1995

1997

1999

1995

1997

1999

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

1973

1971

1969

1967

1965

1963

1961

1959

1957

1955

0
-0.02

1953

0.02

-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
-0.1

Medium Term Cycle

Medium Term Component

Figure 3c: Non-Federally Funded R&D
0.15

0.1

0.05

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

1973

1971

1969

1967

1965

1963

1961

1959

1957

1955

1953

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15

-0.2

Medium Term Cycle

Medium term Component

Figure 4: Impulse response functions for a unit shock to wage markup

Y

L

K

0
−0.2

0

0.2

−0.2

0

−0.4

−0.2

−0.4
−0.6
−0.8
−1

−0.6

−0.4

−0.8

−0.6

−1
0

10

20

−0.8
0

10

20

0

PK

TFP
0.2

10

20

Y/L
0.2

0.6

0

0

0.4

−0.2

−0.2

−0.4

0.2

−0.4

−0.6

−0.6

−0.8

0
0

10

20

0

10

20

λ

S
0

0

−1

−0.5

−2

−1

−3

−1.5
10

20

µw
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

10

20

10

20

U
0.5
0
−0.5

−2

−4
0

0

−1
0

10

20

0

10

20

Figure 5: Cross-correlation with output: model (solid), data (dashed)
and 95 percent confidence bands (dotted)

Output

1

0

−1
−10

1

0

−5

0

5

10

Labor productivity

−5

0

5

10

R&D

5

10

−1
−10

−5

0

5

10

5

10

Mark−up

0

−5

0

5

10

Hours

1

−1
−10

1

0

−5

0

Capacity utilization

0

−5

0

5

10

−1
−10

−5

0

5

10

Consumption

Investment

1

1

0

−1
−10

0

Pk

1

0

−1
−10

−5

0

1

−1
−10

−1
−10

1

0

−1
−10

TFP

1

0

−5

0

5

10

−1
−10

−5

0

5

10

Table 1: Standard Deviations: Quarterly Frequencies
Frequency
Output Per-Capita

Hours

Labor Productivity

Consumption

Investment

Medium Term Cycle
2-200
4.12

High Frequency Component
2-32
2.39

Medium Frequency Component
32-200
3.25

(2.71-5.52)

(1.93-2.85)

(2.41-4.09)

2.8

1.73

2.2

(2.38 -3.62)

(1.49-2.01)

(1.98-2.8)

2.4

1.13

2.07

(1.93-2.87)

(1.03-1.23)

(1.7-2.44)

2.28

0.93

2.2

(1.72-2.84)

(0.87-0.99)

(1.7-2.7)

10.08

4.88

8.64

(2.17-17.99)

(3.04-6.72)

(2.19-15.09)

Table 2: Standard Deviations: Annual Frequencies
Standard Variables
Output Per-Capita
Hours
Labor Productivity
Consumption
Investment

Medium Term Cycle
0-50
3.87

High Frequency Component
0-8
2.2

Medium Frequency Component
8-50
3.15

(3.06-4.67)

(1.91-2.48)

(2.55-3.75)

2.84

1.59

2.33

(2.42-3.26)

(1.44-1.74)

(2.03-2.63)

2.37

1.01

2.11

(2.04-2.7)

(0.96-1.07)

(1.83-2.4)

2.2

0.8

2.01

(1.83-2.57)

(0.73-0.87)

(1.72-2.3)

9.59
(4.5-14.68)

4.5
(3.34-5.66)

8.29
(3.64-12.94)

Other Variables
TFP
Relative Price of
Capital (Gordon)
R&D
Total Markup
Capacity Utilization

2.39

1.25

2.01

(2.07-2.7)

(1.15-1.36)

(1.76-2.25)

4.34
(3.12-5.39)

1.54

4.12

(1.27-1.49)

(3.05-5.14)

7.65

3.4

5.95

(4-8.99)

(2.65-4.13)

(3.64-8.26)

4.35

2.38

3.65

(3.27-5.43)

(2.01-2.74)

(2.74-3.56)

4.26

3.11

2.81

(3.28-5.24)

(2.38-3.84)

(2.3-3.32)

Table 3: First Order Autocorrelations: Annual Frequencies
Standard Variables
Output Per-Capita

Medium Term Cycle
20-50
0.65

High Frequency Component
0-8
0.16

Hours

0.65

0.11

Labor Productivity

0.79

0.19

Consumption

0.84

0.4

Investment

0.76

0.22

Other Variables
TFP

0.7

0.16

Relative Price of
Capital (Gordon)

0.86

0.33

R&D

0.83

0.07

Total Markup

0.66

0.09

Capacity Utilization

0.51

0.19

Table 4: Contemporaneous Correlation with Output: Annual Frequencies
Standard Variables
Hours

Medium Term Cycle
0-50
0.92

High Frequency Component
0-8
0.85

Labor Productivity

0.67

0.77

Consumption

0.75

0.87

Investment

0.67

0.84

Other Variables
TFP

0.8

0.83

Relative Price of
Capital (Gordon)

-0.56

-0.24

R&D

0.31

0.3

Total Markup

-0.82

-0.65

0.67

0.93

Capacity Utilization

Table 5: Model Evaluation: Standard Deviations*
Frequency
Variable
Output

Medium Term Cycle
0-50
Data
Model
3.87

4.11

(3.06-4.67)

TFP

2.39
2.37

2.25

2.84

2.08

R&D

4.34

3.13
2.71

9.59

14.78

2.20

14.19

4.35

2.35

4.26

1.73

1.54
3.40
4.50
0.80

4.35

2.38

0.79

3.11

2.11

2.02

2.33

2.54

4.12

2.57

(3.05-5.14)

9.18

5.95

11.41

(3.64-8.26)

5.97

8.29

12.84

(3.64-12.94)

1.16

2.01

2.00

(1.72-2.3)

2.69

(2.01-2.74)

4.93

1.99

(1.88-2.48)

(0.73-0.87)

(3.27-5.43)

Capacity Utilization

1.59

2.01

(1.83-2.4)

(3.34-5.66)

(1.83-2.57)

Total Markup

0.43

(2.65-4.13)

(4.5-14.68)

Consumption

1.01

3.47

(1.76-2.25)

(1.27-1.49)

(4-8.99)

Investment

0.98

(1.42-1.74)

(3.12-5.39)

7.65

1.25

3.15
(2.55-3.75)

(0.96-1.07)

(2.29-3.09)

Relative Price of
Capital

2.07

(1.15-1.36)

(2.04-2.7)

Hours

2.20

Medium Frequency Component
8-50
Data
Model

(1.91-2.48)

(2.07-2.7)

Labor Productivity

High Frequency Component
0-8
Data
Model

3.65

3.11

(2.74-3.56)

2.29

(2.38-3.84)
(3.28-5.24)
* For tables 5-7, model moments are averages over 1000 simulations of a sample size corresponding to the data.

2.82
(2.3-3.32)

4.28

Table 6: Two-Sector RBC Model: Standard Deviations (0-50)
ρ(Pk )=0.99

ρ(Pk )=0.90

Variable

Data

TFP shock

Pk shock

Both shocks

Pk shock

Both shocks

Output

3.87

3.20

0.53

2.64

2.77

3.86

2.39

1.42

2.39

1.76

2.67

2.22

1.52

2.35

1.45

2.35

1.22

1.12

1.5

1.58

1.88

-

4.34

4.34

4.34

4.34

10.00

2.63

8.48

14.76

16.94

1.84

2.06

2.55

1.07

1.87

2.83

4.26

4.85

5.27

5.74

(3.06-4.67)

TFP

2.39
(2.07-2.7)

Labor Productivity

2.37
(2.04-2.7)

Hours

2.84
(2.29-3.09)

Relative Price of
Capital
Investment

4.34
(3.12-5.39)

9.59
(4.5-14.68)

Consumption

2.20
(1.83-2.57)

Capacity Utilization

4.26
(3.28-5.24)

Table 7: First-Order Autocorrelations (0-50)
Baseline

RBC,

RBC, ρ(Pk )=0.99

RBC, ρ(Pk )=0.90

Variable

Data

Model

TFP shock Pk shock Both shocks Pk shock Both shocks

TFP

0.70

0.75

0.65

0.82

0.71

0.65

0.65

0.87

-

0.74

0.74

0.70

0.70

(0.51-0.89)

Relative price
of capital

0.91
(0.78-1.04)

