DID UNILATERAL DIVORCE LAWS RAISE DIVORCE RATES?
        A RECONCILIATION AND NEW RESULTS

                   Justin Wolfers

                Working Paper 10014
                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DID UNILATERAL DIVORCE LAWS RAISE DIVORCE RATES?
                       A RECONCILIATION AND NEW RESULTS

                                              Justin Wolfers

                                          Working Paper 10014
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10014


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




Thanks to Leora Friedberg and Jon Gruber for sharing their data and for very fruitful discussions. Eric Klotch
provided outstanding research assistance. This paper has also benefited from useful conversations with David
Ellwood, Frank Furstenberg, Caroline Hoxby, Christopher Jencks, Larry Katz, Eric Rasmussen and Betsey
Stevenson, as well as the input of participants in the Harvard Labor Lunch, and seminar participants at
Harvard, Berkeley, Michigan, Stanford and Yale. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Justin Wolfers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation and New Results
Justin Wolfers
NBER Working Paper No. 10014
October 2003
JEL No. J12, J16, J18, I3, J1, K3, C23, D13, D23, N32, R2

                                             ABSTRACT

Application of the Coase Theorem to marital bargaining suggests that shifting from a consent
divorce regime to no-fault unilateral divorce laws should not affect divorce rates. Each iteration of
the empirical literature examining the evolution of divorce rates across US states has yielded
different conclusions about the effects of divorce law liberalization. I show that these results reflect
a failure to jointly consider both the political endogeneity of these divorce laws and the dynamic
response of divorce rates to a shock to the political regime. Taking explicit account of the dynamic
response of divorce rates to the policy shock, I find that liberalized divorce laws caused a discernible
rise in divorce rates for about a decade, but that this increase was substantially reversed over the next
decade. That said, this increase explains very little of the rise in the divorce rate over the past half
century. Both administrative data on the flow of new divorces, and measures of the stock of
divorcees from the census support this conclusion. These results are suggestive of spouses
bargaining within marriage, with an eye to their partner's divorce threat.

Justin Wolfers
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
jwolfers@stanford.edu
Introduction

        The “no-fault revolution” that swept the United States through the 1970s radically altered the
parameters of family law. The new no-fault unilateral divorce laws allowed people to seek a divorce
without the consent of their spouse, a dramatic departure from previous practice. This decade also saw
radical changes in the structure of American families, with divorce rates rising dramatically across the
nation. Are these two trends connected? This question has been argued at length, and each iteration of the
debate has yielded new insights. Peters (1986) argued that divorce rates were unaffected by the change in
legal regime, a finding rebutted by Allen (1992), and subsequently countered by Peters (1992). Parallel
literatures in both sociology and law have also yielded fierce debate.1 Practitioners also seem divided: a
recent survey of members of the Family Law Section of the American Bar Association found that around
two-thirds of respondents do not agree that there is a direct correlation between higher divorce rates and
divorce law liberalization (Gatland (1997)).
        Friedberg (1998) presented a seemingly appealing alternative to earlier studies. Her paper
analyzed comprehensive administrative divorce data in a state-based panel. In response to concerns about
the endogeneity of divorce reform expressed in the Peters-Allen exchange (divorce reform came first to
those states with historically high divorce rates), Friedberg included state and year fixed effects, as well as
state-specific time trends in her specification. Friedberg interprets her results as suggesting that the
adoption of unilateral divorce laws accounts for about one-sixth of the rise in the divorce rate since the
late 1960s, a finding that has since been widely accepted.2
        This paper argues that these conclusions are somewhat misleading. A major difficulty in
difference-in-difference analyses involves separating out pre-existing trends from the dynamic response of
a policy shock. Her approach appears to confound the two. Slight modifications to Friedberg’s
procedures yield more directly interpretable estimates.
        I find that the divorce rate rose sharply following the adoption of unilateral divorce laws, but that
this rise was reversed within about a decade. There is no evidence that this rise in divorce is persistent.
Indeed, some of my results suggest – somewhat puzzlingly - that 15 years after reform, the divorce rate is
lower as a result of the adoption of unilateral divorce.
        The fundamental theoretical issue at stake in this empirical debate is the applicability of the Coase
Theorem to marital relations. Becker (1981) argues that unilateral divorce simply reassigns existing
property rights between spouses. Under the consent divorce regime, both partners must agree to a divorce,

1
  Related contributions in the economics literature include: Gruber (2000), Johnson and Mazingo (2000) and
Mechoulan (2001). In the Law and Economics literature see: Brinig and Buckley (1998), Ellman and Lohr (1998),
and Ellman (2000), and in the sociology literature: Nakonezny, Shull and Rodgers (1995), Glenn (1997), Rodgers,
Nakonezny and Shull (1997), Glenn (1999) and Rogers, Nakonezny and Shull (1999).
2
  See Binner and Dnes (2001), Gruber (2000), Johnson and Mazingo (2000), Rowthorn (1999).


                                                        1
whereas the unilateral regime only requires one spouse to desire a divorce. In Coasian terms, why should a
reassignment of property rights – from the happily married spouse to their partner who would prefer a
divorce – change outcomes? Peters (1986) and Stevenson and Wolfers (2003) discuss plausible reasons
for the failure of the Coase theorem in marital bargaining. In this paper my focus is primarily empirical,
and I seek to evaluate whether divorce rates rose following the passage of unilateral divorce laws.
    In section one I present Friedberg’s results, and show that her estimates are replicable. Working
through a simple example, section two shows that in applications involving interesting dynamics, the
standard difference-in-difference approach may produce misleading results if panel-specific trends are
included as controls. This is a more general problem in differences-in-differences analyses, and one
contribution of this paper is simply to highlight the bias that might result. Imposing minimal structure on
the dynamic response of the divorce rate, I present a well-identified specification that suggests that
divorce rates rose temporarily following the adoption of unilateral divorce laws. These results are not
particularly sensitive to the inclusion of state-specific trends, and there is little evidence of a persistent
impact. Section three finds complementary evidence in census data tracing the evolution of the stock of
ever-divorced people; section four explores the empirical robustness of my findings, and section five turns
to interpretation.


1. Replicating Friedberg (1998)
    Between 1968 and 1988, 29 states changed their legal systems from some variant of consent divorce,
to a unilateral system. Standard accounts of this period of legislative activity suggest that the timing of
these changes was plausibly exogenous (see Jacob, 1988). Thus, state-based panel estimation of the
effects of these changes seems natural. Friedberg collected administrative data on the divorce rate in each
state and year from 1968 to 1988 from Vital Statistics of the United States. The divorce rate is defined as
the annual number of new divorces per thousand people in each state. These data cover virtually every
divorce in the US throughout this period. She estimated:3
Divorce Rates ,t = β Unilaterals ,t + ∑ State fixed effectss + ∑ Time fixed effectst
                                      s                           t
                                                                                                             (1)
                 [+ ∑ States * Timet + ∑ States * Timet2 ] + ε s ,t
                     s                    s


         The variable Unilateral is a dummy, set equal to one when the state has a unilateral divorce
regime, and zero under a consent divorce regime. The coefficient β is interpreted as the average rise in the
divorce rate attributable to the legal change. Much of the earlier debate in this literature focussed on



3
  A range of indicator variables was also included to account for slight breaks in the various state divorce series.
These have no important effect on estimated results, and hence while I include them in the replication in Table 1, for
simplicity, I drop them in all subsequent analysis.


                                                              2
coding these legal changes.4 More precisely, this involved two debates – which reforms are of substantive
interest, and how to appropriately code up the law. On the former, I follow Friedberg in focusing on the
assignment of property rights between spouses (the distinction between unilateral and consent divorce),
while on the latter, I take Friedberg’s coding as a starting point, but show that the main findings are robust
to a range of different coding regimes.
        Equation (1) is estimated using population-weighted least squares. Panel A of Table 1 simply
reprints Friedberg’s results. The specification shown in column one includes state and year fixed effects,
yielding reasonably precisely estimated coefficients suggesting almost no change in the divorce rate. This
finding is consonant with Peters (1986, 1992), who found that when one controls for pre-existing
differences in state divorce propensities, unilateral divorce laws did not affect divorce rates.
        However, Friedberg argues (p.611) that even this may be too restrictive of a specification, and that
“the factors which influence divorce may vary within a state over time, confounding the estimates of the
state effects... Including state-specific trends allows unobserved state divorce propensities to trend linearly
and even quadratically over time and reveals that unilateral divorce raised divorce rates significantly and
strongly.” Of course, these omitted factors bias the estimated effect of unilateral divorce laws only if they
are correlated with divorce laws. Column two shows Friedberg’s preferred specification, which includes
state-specific linear time trends to account for slow-moving social and demographic trends in each state.
This specification changes the point estimate dramatically, suggesting that the divorce rate rose by 0.447.
Comparing this coefficient with an average rate of 4.6 divorces per thousand people per year, this
translates to a rise of a little under 10%. Testing for robustness, Friedberg adds state-specific quadratic
time trends in column 3, finding a similar effect. Thus, she concludes that unilateral divorce caused the
divorce rate to rise significantly. In later tables, she includes leads and lags of the independent variable,
and concludes (p.608) that “the effect of unilateral divorce on divorce behavior was permanent, not
temporary.”
        Panel B of Table 1 shows my attempts to replicate Friedberg’s results. Replication was relatively
simple because Friedberg generously shared her divorce data. In all columns the results are extremely
similar. Remaining differences are in the second decimal place, and presumably reflect revised population
estimates that are used as weights, or differences in computational procedures. Beyond the statistics
shown in Panel B, my regressions also closely replicated detail on state and year effects provided in the
appendices of Friedberg’s paper. This seems to be as close to a complete replication as one can hope for.5




4 In the economics literature see the Peters-Allen exchange; in law and economics, see the dialogue between Brinig
and Buckley and Ellman and Lohr.
5
  On computational procedures, see McCullough and Vinod (1999). Regarding replication, see Dewald et. al.
(1986).


                                                         3
         A worrying feature of the estimates in Table 1 is their sensitivity to the inclusion of state-specific
trends. Friedberg’s interpretation is that these trends reflect omitted variables, and thus their inclusion
remedies an omitted variable bias. However, the omission of these variables should only bias these
coefficients if there is a systematic relationship between the trend in divorce rates and the adoption of
unilateral divorce laws. Certainly such a relationship seems at odds with the purported exogeneity of the
timing of the adoption of these laws. Further, controlling for state time trends raises the coefficient on
Unilateral, a finding that can be reconciled with an omitted variables interpretation only if factors
correlated with a relative fall in divorce propensities led states to adopt unilateral divorce laws. This
seems unlikely; if anything, one might expect factors associated with a rising divorce rate to have
increased the pressure for reform.
         Chart 1 shows the evolution of the average divorce rate across the reform and control states,
respectively.6 Clearly higher divorce rates in reform states have been a feature since at least the mid-
1950s, undermining any inference that these cross-state differences reflect the “no-fault revolution” of the
early 1970s.7 Thus controlling for these pre-existing differences – perhaps through the inclusion of state
fixed effects – seems important (a point made by both Peters (1986) and Friedberg (1998)). The dashed
line shows the evolution of the difference in the divorce rate between reform and control states. This line
allows a coarse comparison of the relative pre-existing trends; if anything, it shows a mildly rising trend in
the divorce rate in treatment states relative to the control states prior to reform, suggesting that adding
controls for pre-existing trends should reduce the Unilateral coefficient.
         The next section reconciles these findings. In the context of a simple example highlighting stock-
flow dynamics, I show that Friedberg’s results are not robust to plausible specifications of the dynamic
effects of changes in divorce laws. Specifically, it appears that her estimates confound pre-existing trends
with the response of the divorce rate to the policy shock. More plausible specifications suggest that the
divorce rate rose for a number of years following divorce law reform; no effect is discernible after a
decade, and there is some evidence of a reversal over the ensuing period.


2. Stock-flow Dynamics and Difference-in-Difference Estimates
    A shift in divorce regimes is likely to have very different short run and long run effects. Immediately
following reform, the divorce rate is likely to rise dramatically as the courts cater to pent-up demand for
the new type of divorce facilitated by this change. Evolving norms, and the slow diffusion of information
about the divorce regime may keep the divorce rate high for a period. This may be further reinforced by
developments in a thicker remarriage market. Eventually this “pent-up demand” will run its course, and

6
  Controls are defined as those states that did not change their divorce laws during Friedberg’s 1968-88 sample.
7
  See Allen (1992) and Johnson and Mazingo (2000) for papers that are identified off cross-state variation in divorce
rates and divorce hazards, respectively.


                                                          4
the flow of divorces will drop back toward its new steady state. Further interesting dynamic patterns may
be evident in the medium run: bad matches may be dissolved earlier, shifting the pattern of divorce across
the life-cycle, differential selection into marriage will change the nature of the “at-risk” population, and so
on. During the transition to the new steady state, it is likely that the corresponding stock variable – the
ever-divorced population – will slowly approach its new level. However, during the transition to this new
steady state, the flow of new divorces will not necessarily bear a simple relation to either its new steady-
state level, or to the ever-divorced population.
    This section shows that standard difference-in-difference estimates confound these stock-flow
dynamics with panel-specific trends, yielding results that are difficult to interpret. A simple example
provides intuition. Suppose that each year α% of couples reassess their relationship and decide whether
or not to divorce, given the current legal regime. Under consent divorce, the c% most incompatible
marriages will dissolve; unilateral divorce laws lead a further ε% to divorce. Further, the stock of ever-
divorced people depreciates at the rate δ, as divorcees die and are replaced by newborns. Chart 2 shows
the resulting adjustment process for a set of plausible parameters (α=20%, c=20%, ε=0.4%, δ=2.5%).
Note that even a very small value of ε yields a large spike in the flow of new divorces. (These dynamics
are analogous to the response of investment to policy shocks that affect the desired capital stock – under a
partial adjustment model.)
        Empirically, my approach will simply trace out the full adjustment path. Note that Friedberg’s
preferred specification includes only the single Unilateral dummy to capture the full adjustment process.
Because the dynamics are not well captured by this single variable, state-specific trends pick up not only
different pre-existing trends across states, but also differences in the evolution of the divorce rate between
reform and control states subsequent to the adoption of unilateral divorce laws. Chart 2 illustrates.
        The bold line shows the hypothetical divorce rate. The fitted time trend is shown in gray.
Friedberg’s equation effectively partials this out, and the residuals are shown as the dashed line. The
Unilateral coefficient compares the average difference between the divorce rate and the trend before and
after the legal change. Thus, her regression compares the line segments titled “Before” and “After”. This
difference is several times larger than the true effect evident in the bold line.
        This critique applies beyond this specific stylized example – any dynamics beyond a discrete
series break are not fully accounted for by the simple Unilateral dummy, leading the state-specific trend
“controls” to partly reflect the dynamic response of the response variable to the policy shock. Thus the
estimated Unilateral dummy reflects the difference between the actual path of divorces and a
systematically biased estimate of its counterfactual. Including state-specific quadratic time trends might
either exacerbate or ameliorate this bias, depending on the specific dynamic response. It is worth noting
that it is not unusual in the labor literature to simply add panel-specific trends in this manner as a “check”.



                                                        5
         These problems are exacerbated when there only a few observations are available before the
policy shock. Friedberg’s sample begins in 1968, while the wave of divorce reform followed fairly
immediately, leaving only a couple of observations with which to identify pre-existing state trends.
         To resolve these problems I extend Friedberg’s sample back to 1956 (so as to allow for a credible
identification of pre-existing state-specific trends),8 and add variables that model the dynamic response of
divorce quite explicitly. I pursue a specification that imposes very little structure on the response
dynamics, including dummy variables for the first two years of the new legal regime, for years three and
four, five and six and so on. Thus, these variables should identify the entire response function allowing
the estimated state-specific time trends to identify pre-existing trends.9
         Table 2 shows my preferred set of estimates, running equation (2) on an unbalanced panel of
divorce rates from 1956-88:
Divorce Rate s,t = ∑ β kUnilateral divorce has been in effect for k periods s,t + ∑ State fixed effects s + ∑ Time fixed effects t
                   k ≥1                                                           s                         t
                 [ + ∑ State s * Time t ] + ε s,t                                                   (2)
                     s
         The first column of Table 2 reports results from a specification including only state and year fixed
effects as controls; the second adds state-specific time trends, and the third also includes quadratic state-
specific time trends. Chart 3 shows the results graphically. All three specifications suggest that the
divorce rates spiked immediately following the adoption of unilateral divorce laws. This effect declines
over the ensuing decade, and the dynamic response is remarkably similar to that shown in the stylized
example discussed above. A decade later, it is difficult to find any effects of divorce reform. Intriguingly,
the estimated coefficients become significantly negative after a little more than a decade in two
specifications. The conclusion that divorce rose noticeably over the decade following reform appears
quite robust. Evidence for a negative effect over the ensuing period is more fragile.
         The fragility of the long-run estimates is a recurring theme throughout my robustness testing. For
example, Chart 4 shows the results of similar regressions when analyzing several alternative taxonomies
of family law regimes. The lack of precision in these estimates cautions against attempts to parse out a
family of estimates corresponding to a more fine-grained coding of family law regimes.
         Reconciling my results with Friedberg’s is fairly simple, and California provides an illustrative
example. The top panel of Chart 5 shows California’s divorce rate after controlling for state and year
fixed effects. The divorce rate clearly spikes following the 1970 reform, returns to its previous level by
about 1980, and then drops to a lower level for the ensuing decade.


8
  Before 1956, the divorce data by state are rather patchy. Appendix A shows that my longer sample does not much
change Friedberg’s estimates. Thus, to the extent that our estimates diverge, differences in identification approaches,
rather than differences in samples are the cause.
9
  Friedberg analyzed the effects in the first two years, although her estimates – reflecting the identification problems
discussed above –suggest that the effects of unilateral divorce laws were smaller in their first two years.


                                                                6
         Friedberg focuses only on the shorter sample: 1968-88 (highlighted in gray). Thus, the
specification including only state and year fixed effects effectively compares the observations for 1968-
1969 with those from 1970 onward. As can be seen, the average level of the divorce rate from 1970-1988
is fairly similar to that in the late 1960s (it is higher for a decade, and then lower for a decade), leading to
the conclusion that the average effect throughout the period was zero. Indeed, recall that the results in
column one of Tables 1 and 2 yielded estimates for the US close to zero.
         Friedberg finds a significant effect of divorce reform only when she adds state-specific trends (as
in columns two and three in Table 1). To see why, note that her regression fits a strongly decreasing trend
to California (the dashed gray line) – despite the fact that the pre-existing trend appears to be – if anything
– slightly increasing. The gray line in the lower panel shows the residual variation identifying Friedberg’s
specification. By subtracting a decreasing trend, Friedberg is led to conclude that the divorce rate rose
dramatically following the adoption of unilateral divorce laws, and that this effect persisted for twenty
years. The thin line shows the residual variation identifying my regression (column two of Table 2). As
one would expect from a casual inspection, there is not much of a pre-existing trend, and thus adding
controls for state-specific trends does not much change my estimates.
         These mis-identified state-specific trends are a ubiquitous problem in Friedberg’s specification,
even when allowing for a longer pre-intervention sample. To provide a point of comparison, I estimated
both my specification and Friedberg’s over the complete 1956-88 sample, controlling for state-specific
time trends. Chart 5 plots my estimate of each state’s time trend against that estimated from Friedberg’s
specification; the 29 states that changed their laws are marked with a cross, while the remaining 21
“control” states are shown with circles. The single Unilateral variable in Friedberg’s specification picks
up a shift in the level of the divorce rates following the reform, but leaves the subsequent downward trend
following the initial post-reform spike in divorces to be picked up by state-specific trends. Thus we see
that her specification systematically estimates a more negative state-specific time trend in reform states. It
is only when measured against this counterfactual of relatively falling divorce rates in reform states, that
Friedberg finds large and persistent effects of divorce laws on the divorce rate.


3. Implications for the Stock of Marriages: Census Data
    Naturally these results on the flow of new divorces have testable implications for data on the stock of
divorcees, and hence I turn to analyzing census data. I start by analyzing a specification suggested by
Gruber (2000), focusing on census data from 1960-1990. Gruber analyzes state-year-age-sex cells,
finding that the proportion of the population that is divorced at a point in time rises by about 1 percentage
point (or 12%) following the adoption of unilateral divorce laws. That is, Gruber ran:
p(Currently Divorced s ,t , a ) = β Unilaterals ,t + ∑ Races ,t , a + ∑ State fixed effectss + ∑∑ Agea * Timet + ε s ,t , a   (3)
                                                   r               s                          a   t




                                                               7
     The first column of Table 3 reprints Gruber’s results.10 As can be seen, the probability of being
divorced on census day rose by around one percentage point following the adoption of unilateral divorce
laws. While I was able to reconstruct these estimates from aggregate data provided to me by Gruber, I
was not able to completely reconstruct these aggregate data from original IPUMS sources.11 That said,
remaining differences are extremely minor, and column two shows the corresponding estimates from my
data yields very similar results.12
     Unfortunately, these data describe those who are divorced at a point in time, while the majority of
divorcees later remarry, and hence their divorces are not measured in these numbers. Indeed, data from
the June 1995 CPS Marital History supplement reveal that of the female population aged 25-50, only 49%
of the ever divorced population are to be found in the currently divorced pool; a further 47% have
remarried, 3% have remarried and are separated, while 1% have remarried and been widowed.
     By exploiting data on the number of times each respondent has been married, I construct a measure of
the ever-divorced population.13 Because remarriage is only identifiable in the 1960-1980 censuses, I
confine my attention to this period. Column three shows that this shorter sample yields similar results.
Presumably this reflects the fact that only South Dakota adopted unilateral divorce laws after the 1970s.
Further, this is consistent with the suggestion from Chart 3 that most of the rise in divorce occurred in the
first eight years following legal reform.
     Column four turns to analyzing the effect of divorce laws on the ever-divorced population. This
broader measure reveals no effects of divorce laws on the ever-divorced population. Further, these results
are about as precisely estimated as Gruber’s.14
     Thus census data suggest that no effect of divorce laws on the ever-divorced population is evident by
1980. By contrast, the flow data suggest that divorce rates rose over a corresponding period. Reconciling
these findings hinges on the greater statistical precision of the flow estimates. The central estimates in
Table 2 suggested that the divorce rate rose by about 0.2-0.3 divorces per thousand people per year, for

10
   For the sake of comparability, I revert to Gruber’s coding of divorce laws when analyzing census data. Results
using Friedberg’s coding are similar.
11
   All of my data are from www.ipums.org. Following Gruber, I analyze data on US-born adults aged 25-50 from the
1960 1% sample, the 1970 Form one state 1% sample, and the 1980 and 1990 5% state samples. While divorce rates
in each age-sex-state of residence-year cell are derived using person weights, regression weights reflect the number
of observations used in constructing each cell, yielding estimates that are representative of the unbalanced microdata,
rather than the US population.
12
   Correspondence with Gruber suggests that these minor differences may reflect different treatment of observations
with certain missing or imputed values, and persons in group quarters.
13
   My measure of the ever-divorced population includes both those currently divorced and those who are married,
separated or widowed, but are on their second (or higher) marriage. Implicitly this measure assumes that those who
have remarried were divorced – rather than widowed – by their first spouse. June 1995 CPS data suggest that this is
largely true: my proxy measure would categorize 26.9% of the female population aged 25-50 as ever divorced. Of
these, 12.9% are currently divorced, 13.5% have been divorced, but are currently married, widowed or separated,
while only 0.3% are widows who remarried (and hence are misclassified as ever divorced).



                                                          8
around a decade. To a first approximation, this suggests that the ever divorced population should have
risen through the 1970s by around 2-3 divorces per thousand people, or 0.2-0.3 percent of the population
in reform states. My estimates in Table 3 yield a 95% confidence interval for this prediction ranging from
–0.5 to +0.6 percent of the population. That is, the administrative divorce data suggest a very precisely
estimated – but small – effect of unilateral divorce laws on divorce rates. The size of this effect is
sufficiently small that it cannot be rejected in census data on the ever-divorced population. Both datasets
suggest that unilateral divorce laws explain only a very small fraction of the dramatic rise in divorce over
the past forty years.


4. Interpretation
       Data on the flow of new divorces suggest that the shift to unilateral divorce had important—albeit
relatively small—effects on the divorce rate over the decade following its adoption, a finding that the
census data do not reject. Beyond that, the temporal pattern shown in Chart 3 presents a puzzle: why is
the divorce rate lower when looking more than a decade after the adoption of unilateral divorce laws? In
this section I explore four possible explanations: the dynamics associated with a shift toward earlier
divorce rather than more divorce, changes in marriage rates, contamination of divorce norms from
treatment states to control states and regression to the mean.
       Dynamics
       The increase in divorces for a decade following reform, and the subsequent decrease, may in fact be
two sides of the same coin: unilateral divorce may have simply led to the earlier dissolution of bad
matches, thereby shifting a number of divorces from the 1980s into the 1970s. Thus extending the data by
a further decade may yield something closer to the true long run effects. For the divorce rate data, I
extend the sample to 1998 using data reported in Vital Statistics. I cannot update data on the ever-
divorced population beyond 1980 because the Census stopped asking about remarriage. However I can
update data on the share of the population currently divorced by pooling observations from the 1998-2000
CPS basic monthly data.
       The first two columns of Table 4 show the results over this longer sample – panel A shows the effects
on the flow data, and the negative coefficients remain a feature even a quarter of a century after the
reform. The census data, shown in panel B, yield complementary results, although for brevity I only show
results from the female sample. The stock of divorcees rose strongly in the decade following reform,
remained at about the same level for the next decade, and reversed somewhat over the ensuing decade.
While the results in Table 3 caution against the assumption that the evolution of the currently divorced
population is representative of the number of divorces, these data are consistent with the finding that

14
     Reading the results in columns three and four together suggests that the share of the population who have divorced


                                                            9
unilateral divorce laws only increased the flow of new divorces for about a decade. Once again estimates
based on census data are sufficiently imprecise that they cannot falsify a wide range of dynamic responses.
    Matching
    The quality and quantity of marriage market matches may change in response to divorce law changes.
Tempering this, even important changes to entry into marriage will only change the stock of existing
marriages very slowly. Even so, one might expect that reduced exit costs would lead to lower quality
matches, which might raise the divorce rate. Against this, the benefits of marriage (tying your spouse to a
contract) are reduced in a no-fault world, and hence the proportion of the population that is married may
decline. This suggests that divorces per thousand people is an inappropriate metric, and analysis should
focus on divorces per thousand married people. Even so, there may be changes at the quality margin that
this quantity adjustment does not address.
    Columns three and four of Table 4 analyze divorces per thousand married people.15 Note that variable
is scaled differently – 68% of the population is married, and hence the dependent variable has a mean of
5.9 rather than 3.9. These results yield an initial increase in divorce that is slightly more pronounced,
while the subsequent decline is somewhat weaker than suggested by columns one and two.
    Contamination
    It seems likely that unilateral divorce laws affect the divorce rate both directly through changing legal
parameters, and indirectly by reducing the stigma associated with divorce. A thicker remarriage market
may further reduce the cost of divorce. Reduced divorce stigma and enhanced remarriage prospects are
unlikely to respect state boundaries. Thus easier access to divorce in reform states may also reduce stigma
in non-reform states, leading the divorce rate to rise, albeit with a lag. Further, it seems likely that
legislative activism in reform states created pressure for more liberal judicial interpretation of ongoing
consent divorce laws in other states (Rodgers et. al. 1999, Glenn 1999). Taking these factors together, it
may be that my control states experienced de facto reform, leading the divorce rate to rise in the control
states relative to that in the true reform states – possibly with a lag.
    In the first column of Table 5 I attempt to control for the shock to local norms, by adding a control for
the proportion of neighboring states with unilateral divorce laws. While a norms-based story suggests that
this variable will have a positive coefficient, it turns out to be statistically significant and negative, a result
that is suggestive of migratory divorce (the administrative flow data reflect the state in which the divorce
is obtained). The estimated effect of a state reforming its own laws is largely unchanged. That said, this




and remarried declined in reform states. This is a rather curious feature of these results.
15
   That is, to create my new independent variable, I divide the divorce rate by the proportion of the adult population
in a state that is currently married. This latter series is calculated by linearly interpolating decadal estimates derived
from IPUMS microdata for 1950-1990 and pooled 1998-2000 CPS microdata.


                                                            10
strategy does not control for contamination effects to the extent that they represent national rather than
local phenomena. I now turn to examining this issue further.
     Regression to the Mean
     While the basic method of this literature has been quasi-experimental – arguing that variation in
unilateral divorce laws is exogenous – a close reading of the reform movement suggests that this is only
partly true. While the timing of these reforms (among reform states) was probably random (Jacob 1988),
states with historically higher divorce rates were more likely to choose to reform their laws (Peters 1992).
This suggests that convergence in divorce norms, or regression to the mean, may explain why divorce
rates rose faster in control states, yielding negative coefficients.
     Table 5 shows three attempts to highlight this issue. Columns three and four involve a simple control
strategy, interacting a measure of the state’s historical divorce propensity (the share of that state’s
population aged 25-50 that reported being ever divorced in the 1950 census), with a linear time trend, and
time fixed effects, respectively. Column three confirms that the divorce rate spiked following reform, but
highlights the fragility of the negative coefficients over the ensuing decade. Column four yields
reasonably precise estimates suggesting no effect of unilateral divorce laws. Column five exploits only
that variation that is clearly quasi-experimental, restricting the sample to reform states; thus the equation is
identified only off the variation in timing of reform across reform states. In none of these cases do the
long run effects of unilateral divorce laws appear to be significantly negative.


5. Suggestive Insights from a Toy Model
     In sum, these results suggest that unilateral divorce laws had a discernible effect on divorce rates for
about a decade. While this strictly falsifies the Coasian prediction, the more interesting question is
whether the theory is “about right”.
     A very simple model provides some insight. A marriage yields a payoff to each spouse, uh to the
husband, and uw to his wife. These payoffs are not known with certainty before marriage, and divorce
arises when the realized payoff falls short of some reservation level of utility, û .16 To fix a very simple
starting point, assume that uh and uw are independent random variables drawn from the F(u), and that the
reservation payoff, û , is the same for all people.
         In 1960, one-fifth of all women had been through a divorce by age 65. Consider a strictly non-
Coasian interpretation of this fact: in the absence of spousal bargaining, divorce only occurs in a consent
regime if it is individually optimal for both partners. Hence the probability that divorce occurs is p(uh< û
and uw< û )=F( û )2. Thus, F( û )=√0.2≈0.45. That is, 45% of the population would prefer to get divorced.


16
 One interpretation is that this reservation utility level represents each person’s outside option on the remarriage
market. Alternatively, û represents the fixed wage contract proposed in Peters (1986).


                                                          11
Thus, shifting to a regime in which divorce occurs upon the unilateral action of either spouse, the divorce
rate is predicted to rise to: 1-(1-F( û ))2≈70%.
           By contrast, the Coasian interpretation is that the 20% divorce rate under the consent divorce law
reflects the efficient rate of marital dissolution, and under ideal bargaining conditions, the same number of
divorces will occur under a unilateral divorce regime. In fact, the central results above are much closer to
this latter prediction. A plausible estimate is that unilateral divorce laws led the probability of the
dissolution of the first marriage to rise by one-quarter of a percentage point.
           Further, these results can be used to make inferences about the costs of bargaining in marriage.
Some structure must be imposed to yield stronger results, and I assume that the payoffs, {uh, uw} are
independent draws from a normal distribution (and by an innocuous normalization, this is the standard
normal distribution). If there are no transaction costs involved in paying off your spouse to grant a
divorce, then a consent regime yields the efficient number of divorces. Consequently divorce occurs if
uh+uw<2 û . Noting that p(uw+uh<2 û )=FN(2 û /√2)=20%, where FN is the cumulative standard normal
distribution, I can infer that û ≈-0.6. Introduce a transaction cost, C, that applies if a spouse has to offer
their partner a side payment to stay married under a unilateral divorce law. Thus, in addition to the
efficient divorces, if 2 û <uh+uw<2 û +C, divorce will also occur.17 That the rate of marital dissolution
rose by a quarter of a percentage point implies:
           FN((2 û +C)/√2)-FN(2 û /√2)=.0025, and hence C=0.0063.
           A more directly interpretable scaling derives from considering a couple in which the husband is
enjoying the average level of marital satisfaction (uh=0), and his wife is indifferent between staying
married and divorcing uw= û . The total marital surplus accruing to this couple is û , suggesting that
bargaining to redistribute these rents (thereby saving the marriage), destroys one percent of this surplus
(C≈100 û ). Another metric derives from considering the number of marriages saved by spousal
bargaining. Assuming that the 20% divorce rate under the consent system reflected the share of marriages
in which divorce was jointly optimal, this implies that a further 27% of the population were in marriages
in which divorce was jointly sub-optimal, but preferred by at least one spouse (in the absence of side
payments). The data indicate that the divorce rate rose by a quarter of a percentage point, suggesting that
spousal bargaining to redistribute rents saved over 99% of these marriages. The transaction cost was
larger than marital rents in the other 1% of these marriages.
           An alternative interpretation turns on the correlation (ρ) between uh and uw. This correlation can
be either positive – as where we enjoy bringing enjoyment to our spouses, or it can be negative – as where
there are different sharing rules in different relationships. Under this interpretation, the measured effect of


17
     This is a simplifying approximation. Actually divorce will occur if 2 û <uh+uw<2 û +C and either uh< û or uw< û .


                                                             12
unilateral divorce laws can yield insight into the correlation of payoffs between spouses. If there is no
marital bargaining, then the probability of a consent divorce is Fρ( û , û ), where Fρ(uh, uw) is the standard
bivariate normal cdf when ρ=corr(uh, uw). Unilateral divorce occurs with probability 1-Fρ(- û ,- û ).
Matching these formulae to data yields two equations in two unknowns ( û and ρ). This alternative
interpretation can explain the data in the absence of marital bargaining if ρ exceeds 0.99.
        Of course, the truth probably lies somewhere between these two extreme assumptions of
independent shocks, or no spousal bargaining. Nonetheless, it bears emphasizing that these findings are
suggestive of either very small transaction costs, or a strongly positive correlation between the marital
satisfaction of spouses. Further insight into this issue can be gained by examining changing distribution
within marriage subsequent to the adoption of unilateral divorce laws. That said, without specifying a
more complete theory of distribution in marriage, these back-of-the-envelope calculations should only be
interpreted as suggestive.


6. Conclusion
    A clear finding from this analysis is that the divorce rate exhibits interesting dynamics in response to a
change in legal regime. As a result, standard difference-in-difference approaches are led to confound pre-
existing trends with the effects of the policy shock. A more plausible specification that takes explicit
account of these dynamics yields new results that appear somewhat more robust.
    The data broadly indicate that divorce law reform led to an immediate spike in the divorce rate that
dissipates over time. After a decade, no effect can be discerned. This basic insight is robust to a range of
alternative interpretations of divorce laws. Further, it is consistent with census data on the ever-divorced
population. More puzzling, certain estimates suggest that the divorce rate declined over the ensuing
period. This eventual decline in the divorce rate is less robust, and a range of alternative specifications
suggests that this decline may be illusory.
    These results do not yield a particularly clear answer to the motivating theoretical question of whether
Coasian bargaining occurs between spouses. It is clear that divorce law has an effect on the divorce rate;
it is less clear that this effect is persistent. The estimated magnitudes suggest either that there is
substantial agreement between spouses as to whether or not to seek a divorce, or that transaction costs are
relatively small, facilitating considerable bargaining over rents.
    I find less equivocal results regarding the motivating policy question: what caused the dramatic rise in
US divorces through the 1970s? Chart 6 maps the aggregate divorce rate against a counterfactual in which
no states adopted unilateral divorce laws. It should be clear that unilateral divorce laws explain very little
of the rise in the aggregate divorce rate.




                                                       13
References

Allen, Douglas A. (1992) “Marriage and Divorce: Comment” American Economic Review, 82(3).
Becker, Gary (1981) A Treatise on the Family, Harvard University Press: Cambridge.
Binner, J.M. and A.W. Dnes (2001) “Marriage, Divorce and Legal Change: New Evidence From England
and Wales”, Economic Inquiry 39(2).
Brinig, Margaret F. (1998) “No-Fault Laws and At-Fault People”, International Review of Law and
Economics 18.
Dewald, William G., Jerry G. Thursby, and Richard G. Anderson (1986) “Replication in Empirical
Economics: The Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Project”, American Economic Review, 76(4).
Ellman, Ira M. and Sharon L. Lohr (1998) “Dissolving the Relationship Between Divorce Laws and
Divorce Rates”, International Review of Law and Economics 18.
Ellman, Ira (2000) “Divorce Rates, Marriage Rates, and the Problematic Persistence of Marital Roles”,
Family Law Quarterly, 34(1).

Friedberg, Leora (1998) “Did Unilateral Divorce Raise Divorce Rates? Evidence from Panel Data”,
American Economic Review, 88(3).
Gatland, Laura (1997) “Putting the Blame on No-Fault”, American Bar Association Journal, v.83.
Glenn, Norval D. (1997) “A Reconsideration of the Effect of No-Fault Divorce on Divorce Rates”,
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 59(4).
Glenn, Norval D. (1999) “Further Discussion of the Effects of No-Fault Divorce on Divorce Rates”,
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 61(3).
Gruber, Jonathan (2000) “Is Making Divorce Easier Bad for Children? The Long Run Implications of
Unilateral Divorce”, NBER Working Paper 7968.
Jacob, Herbert (1988) Silent Revolution: The Transformation of Divorce Law in the United States.
University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Johnson, John H. and Christopher J. Mazingo (2000) “The Economic Consequences of Unilateral Divorce
for Children”, University of Illinois CBA Office of Research Working Paper 00-011.
McCullough, B.D. and H.D. Vinod (1999) “The Numerical Reliability of Econometric Software” Journal
of Economic Literature Vol.XXXVII, June 1999, p.633-665.
Mechoulan, Stephane (2001) “Divorce Laws and the Structure of the American Family”, mimeo
Northwestern University.
Nakonezny, P.A., Shull, R.D. and Rodgers, J.L. (1995) “The Effect of No-Fault Divorce Law on the
Divorce Rate Across the 50 States and its Relation to Income, Education and Religiosity”, Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 57(2).
Peters, H. Elizabeth (1986) “Marriage and Divorce: Informational Constraints and Private Contracting”
American Economic Review 76(3).
Peters, H. Elizabeth (1992) “Marriage and Divorce: Reply” American Economic Review, 82(3).



                                                   14
Rodgers, J.L. P.A. Nakonezny and R.D. Shull (1997) “The Effect of No-Fault Divorce Legislation: A
Response to a Reconsideration” Journal of Marriage and the Family, 59(4).
Rodgers, J.L. P.A. Nakonezny and R.D. Shull (1999) “Did No-Fault Divorce Legislation Matter?
Definitely Yes and Sometimes No” Journal of Marriage and the Family, 61(3).
Rowthorn, Robert (1999) “Marriage and Trust: Some Lessons from Economics” Cambridge Journal of
Economics, 23(5).
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers (2003) “’Til Death Do Us Part: The Effects of Divorce Law on
Suicide, Domestic Violence and Intimate Homicide”, mimeo Stanford GSB.




                                                 15
                                Table 1: Friedberg’s Results
                   Dependent Variable: Annual divorces per thousand people
                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)
                         Basic Specification      State-Specific         State-Specific
                                                      Trends                Trends
                                                      Linear               Quadratic

                                      Panel A: Friedberg (1998)
Unilateral                           0.004                  0.447***                       0.441***
                                    (0.056)                (0.050)                        (0.055)

Year Effects                  Yes, F=89.0***              Yes, F=95.3***              Yes, F=8.9***
State Effects                 Yes, F=217.3***             Yes, F=196.2***            Yes, F=131.1***
State Trend, Linear                 No                    Yes, F=24.7***              Yes, F=9.3***
State Trend, Quadratic              No                          No                    Yes,F=6.5***
Adjusted R2                        0.946                       0.976                      0.982

                                         Panel B: Replication
Unilateral                           0.000                   0.431***                      0.435***
                                    (0.057)                 (0.051)                       (0.055)

Year Effects                  Yes, F=89.3***              Yes, F=95.3***              Yes, F=9.0***
State Effects                 Yes, F=216.5***             Yes, F=191.6***            Yes, F=129.1***
State Trend, Linear                 No                    Yes, F=24.4***              Yes, F=9.3***
State Trend, Quadratic              No                          No                    Yes, F=6.6***
Adjusted R2                        0.946                       0.976                      0.981
Sample: 1968-1988, n=1043 (unbalanced panel).
Estimated using state population weights.
*** **
   , and * respectively denote significant at 1%, 5% and 10% levels. (Standard errors in parentheses)
Sources: Divorce rate data coded by Friedberg (1998) from Vital Statistics. Divorce laws coded from
Friedberg’s Table 1. Population weights downloaded from www.census.gov.




                                               Tables - 1
                Table 2: Dynamic Effects of Adopting Unilateral Divorce Laws
         Dependent variable: Annual divorces per thousand people (Cell mean=3.9)
Specification:              (1)                      (2)                      (3)
                   Basic Specification    State-Specific Linear         State-Specific
                                                  Trends             Quadratic Trends
First 2 years                .27***                  .33***                   .30***
                           (.08)                    (.06)                    (.05)
                                **                       ***
Years 3-4                    .22                     .30                      .29***
                           (.09)                    (.07)                    (.07)
Years 5-6                    .17**                   .28***                   .29***
                           (.09)                    (.08)                    (.08)
Years 7-8                    .18**                   .30***                   .36***
                           (.09)                    (.09)                    (.10)
Years 9-10                 -.10                      .06                      .19
                           (.08)                    (.09)                    (.12)
Years 11-12                -.31***                  -.13                      .07
                           (.08)                    (.10)                    (.15)
Years 13-14                -.45***                  -.24**                    .06
                           (.08)                    (.11)                    (.17)
Year 15                    -.53***                  -.28**                    .27
onwards                    (.08)                    (.12)                    (.21)
Controls
Year FE                 F=144***                  F=53***                  F=70***
                                ***                       ***
State FE                F=233                    F=505                    F=554***
                                                        ***
State*time                  No                    F=49                     F=55***
State*time 2
                            No                       No                    F=16***
Adjusted R2               .9310                    .9732                    .9821
Sample                                  1956-88, n=1631 state-years
*** **
  , and * respectively denote significant at 1%, 5% and 10% levels. (Standard errors in parentheses)
Estimated using state population weights.




                                               Tables - 2
         Table 3: Effects of Unilateral Divorce Laws on the Stock of Divorces – Census Data
Dependent                              p(Currently Divorced)                         p(Ever Divorced)
Variable
                          Gruber’s           Replicating          Replicating            Dependent
                           Results            Gruber               Gruber                variable is
                                           (same sample)       (shorter sample)       “ever divorced”
                                                                                      (shorter sample)
                                           Panel A: Women
Mean of                     11.0%              11.2%                  9.2%                 22.5%
Dependent Var
Unilateral                  .0128***            .0102***             .0104***              .0009
Coefficient                (.0026)             (.0021)              (.0018)               (.0025)

Elasticity                  11.6%                9.1%                11.3%                  0.4%

                                             Panel B: Men
Mean of                     8.2%                8.5%                  6.8%                 19.3%
Dependent Var
Unilateral                  .0095***            .0081***             .0082***              .0004
Coefficient                (.0026)             (.0023)              (.0017)               (.0027)

Elasticity                  11.6%                9.5%                12.1%                  0.2%

Sample                     1960-90             1960-90              1960-80               1960-80
                           n=5304              n=5304               n=3978                n=3978
*** **
  , and * respectively denote significant at 1%, 5% and 10% levels. (Standard errors in parentheses)
Weighted to reflect underlying microdata. Standard errors clustered at state*year level.
All regressions based on IPUMS data from the 1950-90 Censuses: 1960 1% state sample, 1970 Form one
1% state sample, 1980 and 1990 5% state samples. Restricted to US-born population aged 25-50.
Each coefficient is from a separate regression, controlling for race, state of residence dummies, age
dummies, year dummies, and age*year dummy interactions.




                                              Tables - 3
                        Table 4: Long-Run Effects of Unilateral Divorce Laws
Dependent                     Divorce Rate                Divorces per thousand married
variable            (per thousand people per year)               people aged 18 plus
                    1956-88 Sample        1956-98       1956-88 Sample      1956-98 Sample
                        n=1631             Sample           n=1631              n=2102
                                           n=2102
           Panel A: Dependent Variable is Divorce Rate (Administrative flow data)
Cell Mean                  3.9                4.1              5.9                 6.2
Law Change has been in effect for:
First 2 years              .27***             .28***           .43***            .43***
                          (.08)              (.10)            (.12)             (.13)
Years 3-4                  .22**              .23**            .38***            .39***
                          (.09)              (.10)            (.12)             (.13)
                              **                  **              ***
Years 5-6                  .17                .19              .36               .37***
                          (.09)              (.10)            (.12)             (.13)
Years 7-8                  .18**              .20**            .41***            .43***
                          (.09)              (.10)            (.12)             (.13)
Years 9-10                -.10               -.06              .04               .07
                          (.08)              (.10)            (.11)             (.13)
Years 11-12               -.31***            -.27***          -.24**            -.20
                          (.08)              (.09)            (.11)             (.13)
Years 13-14               -.45***            -.39***          -.44***           -.38***
                          (.08)              (.09)            (.11)             (.13)
Years 15-16               -.53***            -.38***          -.48***           -.33***
(Year 15+cols 1,3)        (.08)              (.09)            (.11)             (.13)
                                                  ***
Years 17-18                                  -.47                               -.44***
                                             (.09)                              (.13)
Years 19-20                                  -.61***                            -.65***
                                             (.09)                              (.13)
Years 21-22                                  -.70***                            -.81***
                                             (.10)                              (.13)
                                                  ***
Years 23-24                                  -.62                               -.68***
                                             (.10)                              (.14)
Year 25 plus                                 -.73***                            -.86***
                                             (.10)                              (.14)
     Panel B: Dependent Variable is Share of Population Currently Divorced (Census Data)
                                       Female Sample
Dependent               p(Currently divorced)           p(Currently divorced| Ever married)
variable
                    1960-90 Sample        1960-00       1960-90 Sample      1960-00 Sample
                        n=5304             Sample           n=5304              n=6630
                                           n=6630
Cell Mean                 9.9%              10.2%            12.8%               13.2%
Law Change has been in effect for:
1 to 10 years            .01017***          .01077***       .01049***          .01135***
                        (.00254)           (.00314)        (.00270)           (.00334)
11 to 20 years           .01027***          .01021***       .01104***          .01110***
(11 years+ cols         (.00244)           (.00218)        (.00251)           (.00229)
1,3)
20 years plus                               .00341                             .00342
                                           (.00369)                           (.00418)
Panel A: See notes to Table 2. Panel B: See notes to Table 3.


                                                Tables - 4
                                Table 5: Robustness Testing
                Dependent Variable: Annual divorces per thousand people
                       From        Control for     Control for Control for                          Reform
                      Table 4      Neighbor’s       historical  historical                        states only
                    (column 2)       reforms      divorce rate divorce rate
                                                     * Time     * Time FE
                         (1)             (2)         Trend           (4)                               (5)
                                                        (3)
Law Change has been in effect for:
First 2 years           .28***          .27***         .37***       .15                                .46***
                       (.10)           (.10)          (.09)        (.09)                              (.15)
Years 3-4               .23**           .26***         .36***       .12                                .57***
                       (.10)           (.10)          (.09)        (.10)                              (.19)
Years 5-6               .19**           .24**          .36***       .11                                .66***
                       (.10)           (.10)          (.09)        (.10)                              (.22)
Years 7-8               .20**           .24**          .40***       .17                                .75***
                       (.10)           (.10)          (.09)        (.09)                              (.26)
Years 9-10             -.06            -.03            .18**       -.01                                .54*
                       (.10)           (.10)          (.09)        (.09)                              (.29)
Years 11-12            -.27***         -.23**          .01         -.16                                .34
                       (.09)           (.09)          (.09)        (.09)                              (.32)
Years 13-14            -.39***         -.36***        -.07         -.18                                .20
                       (.09)           (.09)          (.09)        (.09)                              (.35)
Years 15-16            -.38***         -.35***        -.02         -.10                                .17
                       (.09)           (.09)          (.09)        (.09)                              (.39)
Years 17-18            -.47***         -.43***        -.05         -.08                                .02
                       (.09)           (.09)          (.09)        (.09)                              (.42)
Years 19-20            -.61***         -.57***        -.13         -.14                               -.19
                       (.09)           (.09)          (.09)        (.10)                              (.45)
Years 21-22            -.70***         -.67***        -.22**       -.24                               -.35
                       (.10)           (.10)          (.10)        (.10)                              (.48)
Years 23-24            -.62***         -.59***        -.16         -.11                               -.25
                       (.10)           (.10)          (.10)        (.10)                              (.52)
Year 25 plus           -.73***         -.70***        -.20         -.04                               -.26
                       (.10)           (.10)          (.10)        (.10)                              (.56)
Controls
% Unilateral (adjoining states)        -.28***
                                       (.09)
Time*historical divorce ratea                         -.72***
                                                      (.05)
Time FE * historical divorce ratea                                  Yes

Sample                    1956-98           1956-98            1956-98           1956-98            1956-98
                          n=2102            n=2102             n=2102            n=2102             n=1202
                                                                                                   (29 states)
*** **
  , and * respectively denote significant at 1%, 5% and 10% levels. (Standard errors in parentheses)
Estimated using state population weights.
All regressions include state and year fixed effects.
a) The “historical divorce rate” is the share of the population aged 25-50 in each state ever divorced in the
     1950 census. For Alaska and Hawaii, 1960 values are substituted.




                                                Tables - 5
                                                                                                                                        Chart 1

                                                                                    Average Divorce Rate: Reform States and Controls
                                                                  7
                                                                                                                          Reform period
                                                                                                                         (28 states adopted
                                                                                                                          unilateral divorce)
                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                 Reform States
                Divorces per thousand people per year




                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                      Controls
 Divorce Rate




                                                                  4


                                                                  3


                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                   Difference in divorce rates:
                                                                                                                                                                   Reform states less controls
                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                          Friedberg's Sample
                                                                  0
                                                          56

                                                                               58

                                                                                      60

                                                                                             62

                                                                                                    64

                                                                                                           66

                                                                                                                  68

                                                                                                                         70

                                                                                                                                72

                                                                                                                                       74

                                                                                                                                              76

                                                                                                                                                     78

                                                                                                                                                            80

                                                                                                                                                                   82

                                                                                                                                                                          84

                                                                                                                                                                                 86

                                                                                                                                                                                        88

                                                                                                                                                                                               90

                                                                                                                                                                                                      92

                                                                                                                                                                                                             94

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    96

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           98
                                                        19

                                                                             19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                           19

                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                                                                   Year

                                                                                                                                        Chart 2

                                                                                           Dynamic Response of the Divorce Rate
                                                                           5.3                                                                                                                                              0.9
                                                                                 Consent Unilateral Divorce
                                                                                  regime
                                                                                                           Divorce Rate
                                                                                                              (LHS)
                                                                           5.0                                                                                                                                              0.6
                                     Annual divorces per thousand people




                                                                                                  Trendline (LHS)
     Divorce Rate




                                                                           4.7                                                                                                                                              0.3


                                                                                                                                                    After
                                                                           4.4                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                        Divorce Rate less Trend (RHS)


                                                                           4.1                                                                                                                                              -0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.3
                                                                                 Before


                                                                           3.8                                                                                                                                              -0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.6
                                                                                    68

                                                                                    69

                                                                                    70

                                                                                    71

                                                                                    72

                                                                                    73

                                                                                    74

                                                                                    75

                                                                                    76

                                                                                    77

                                                                                    78

                                                                                    79

                                                                                    80

                                                                                    81

                                                                                    82

                                                                                    83

                                                                                    84

                                                                                    85

                                                                                    86

                                                                                    87

                                                                                    88
                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                 19




                                                                                                                                                   Year
Notes: This hypothetical response of the divorce rate is constructed under the following assumptions: each
year 20% of the population assess whether to get divorced, given the current legal regime. Under consent
divorce, the 20% most incompatible matches dissolve; under unilateral divorce, this rises to 20.4%. Each
year 2.5% of the ever-divorced population die, and are replaced by newborns.


                                                                                                                                      Charts – p.1
                                                                                                  Chart 3


                                                             Response of Divorce Rate to Unilateral Divorce Laws
Regression coefficients: Effect on Divorce Rate                            Sensitivity to controlling for pre-existing state trends
                                                  0.6
    Annual divorces per thousand people


                                                  0.4

                                                  0.2

                                                  0.0

                                                  -0.2

                                                  -0.4

                                                  -0.6
                                                         (3-4)     (1-2)      1-2       3-4      5-6      7-8     9-10 11-12 13-14               >=15
                                                                           Years since (until) adoption of Unilateral Divorce Laws
                                                                        State Trends                          95% confidence interval - State Trends
                                                                        No state trends                       Quadratic state trends
                                                          All regressions control for state and year fixed effects. For details, see table 2.




                                                                                                Charts – p.2
                                                                                                                                       Chart 4


                                     Response of Divorce Rate to Divorce Law Reform
                                                                                                     Sensitivity to different coding of family law regime
                                                                                                   0.8        Controlling for state and year fixed effects
                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                   0.2
            Regression coefficients: Effect on divorce rate



                                                                                                  -0.0
                                                                                                  -0.2
                                                                                                  -0.4
                                                          (Annual divorces per thousand people)




                                                                                                  -0.6
                                                                                                  -0.8


                                                                                                         (3-4)   (1-2)     1-2      3-4       5-6   7-8    9-10     11-12 13-14         >=15
                                                                                                  0.8             Also controlling for pre-existing state trends
                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                  -0.0
                                                                                                  -0.2
                                                                                                  -0.4
                                                                                                                    Gruber (2000)                         Ellman and Lohr (1998b)
                                                                                                  -0.6              Johnson and Mazingo (2000)            Brinig and Buckley (1998)
                                                                                                  -0.8              Mechoulan (2002)                      Nakonezny Rodgers & Shull (1995)
                                                                                                                    Ellman and Lohr (1998a)               Friedberg (1998) - 95% interval

                                                                                                         (3-4)   (1-2)    1-2       3-4       5-6   7-8   9-10      11-12     13-14     >=15
                                                               Years since (until) adoption of Unilateral or No-Fault Divorce Laws

Notes: Chart shows regression coefficients from a specification including state and year fixed effects (and
also state-specific linear time trends in bottom panel), estimated over the 1956-88 sample.
a) Friedberg (1998) codes when unilateral divorce laws, with no separation requirements are adopted,
     using mostly secondary sources.
b) Gruber (2000) codes unilateral divorce laws, with no separation requirements, using both primary and
     secondary sources.
c) Johnson and Mazingo (2000) code unilateral divorce laws, citing Friedberg and Brinig as sources.
d) Ellman and Lohr (1998a) code when each state adopted “irretrievable breakdown” as grounds for
     divorce, citing both primary and secondary sources.
e) Ellman and Lohr (1998b) code when each state adopted either “irretrievable breakdown” or
     “incompatibility / separation” as grounds for divorce.
f) Brinig and Buckley (1998) code is the date by which both no-fault grounds for dissolution and no-fault
     grounds for financial settlements have been adopted, citing both legislation and court decisions.
g) Nakonezny, Shull and Rodgers (1995) code the date of the state’s adoption of no-fault grounds for
     either marital dissolution or financial settlements, citing mainly secondary sources.




                                                                                                                                    Charts – p.3
                                                                                      Chart 5



                                                                 California's Divorce Rate
                                                            Divorce rate relative to state and year fixed effects
                                               2
Deviation from California's Long Run Average

                                                                Divorces | state & year effects              Friedberg's fitted trend
                                                                Friedberg's short sample                     Actual pre-existing trend
       Divorce Rate, relative to the US




                                               1




                                               0




                                               -1                                           Unilateral divorce law adopted
                                                    1950               1960                 1970                 1980               1990
                                                                     Divorce rate relative to fitted trend
                                                                              (and state and year fixed effects)
                                                2
                                                                  Divorce relative to Friedberg's fitted trend
Deviation from California's fitted trend




                                                                  Divorce relative to pre-existing trend
  Divorce Rate, relative to the US




                                                1




                                                0




                                                -1
                                                                                             Unilateral divorce law adopted
                                                     1950               1960                1970                 1980               1990




                                                                                    Charts – p.4
                                                                                              Chart 5

                                                               Estimates of State-Specific Linear Time Trends
                                                             Each point represents a regression-estimated state*time coefficient
      Estimated state time trends: Friedberg    .2
                                                                    States that reformed divorce laws
                                                                    Control states
           Table 1, Col. 2 specification

                                               .15                  45-degree line                                                 NM
                                                                                                                              AK
                                                                                                                         TN
                                                                                                                       AR
                                                                                                                      DE
                                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                                   NY
                                                                                                                   VT
                                                                                                                  WV
                                                                                                                  DC
                                                .1                                                      LAUT  SC WYGAIN
                                                                                                           NJ
                                                                                                     VAMS
                                                                                                      OH          NH
                                                                                                 OK
                                                                                                 MO
                                                                                                WI             ME
                                                                                                SD         OR KS
                                                                                                          CT
                                                                                                         WACO
                                                                                                    RI
                                                                                                    MTKY
                                                                                          ILPA
                                                                                         MD      TX HIIDFL
                                                                                                       AL
                                               .05                                                 ND
                                                                                                MINE
                                                                                                MN
                                                                                             IA
                                                                                         MA CA
                                                                                    AZ

                                                0
                                                     0                        .05                       .1                 .15          .2
                                                                                 Estimated state time trends: Wolfers
                                                                                     Table 2, Col. 2 specification
                                                     Population-weighted least squares regression; 1956-1988.
                                                     Nevada off-s cale (-0.63, -0.60).




                                                                                              Chart 6




Notes: Chart is constructed based on the specification in column 3 of table 5.



                                                                                           Charts – p.5
                 Appendix A: Extending the Sample (Friedberg’s specification)
                                    (1)                       (2)                         (3)
                            Basic Specification      State-Specific Trends          State-Specific
                                                            Linear                     Trends
                                                                                      Quadratic

                        Panel A: Friedberg’s Sample: 1968-88 (n=1043)
Unilateral                         .004                .447***                           .441***
                                  (.056)              (.050)                            (.055)
Year Effects                    Yes, F=89***             Yes, F=95***               Yes, F=8.9***
State Effects                   Yes, F=217***            Yes, F=196***              Yes, F=131***
State Trend, Linear                  No                  Yes, F=25***               Yes, F=9.3***
State Trend,                         No                       No                    Yes,F=6.5***
Quadratic
Adjusted R2                         0.946                     0.976                      0.982

                          Panel B: Wolfers’ Sample: 1956-88 (n=1631)
Unilateral                         -.057               0.496***                         0.367***
                                   (.061)             (0.056)                          (0.047)
Year Effects                    Yes, F=90***             Yes, F=58***               Yes, F=74***
State Effects                   Yes, F=190***            Yes, F=629***              Yes, F=229***
State Trend, Linear                  No                  Yes, F=75***               Yes, F=101***
State Trend,                         No                       No                    Yes, F=19***
Quadratic
Adjusted R2                         0.979                     0.994                      0.996
*** **
  , and * respectively denote significant at 1%, 5% and 10% levels. (Standard errors in parentheses)
Estimated using state population weights.


         Panel A reproduces the results from Friedberg’s 1968-88 sample. In Panel B, I extend
Friedberg’s sample back to 1956. Divorce data were hand-entered from annual editions of Vital
Statistics. Extending the data on divorce laws was relatively simple. In two cases, Friedberg
codes the adoption of unilateral divorce as pre-dating her sample – Alaska and Oklahoma.
Gruber codes these reforms as having occurred in 1935 and 1953 respectively, and hence I simply
follow his coding.
         These results are not particularly sensitive to extending the sample. At first glance, this is
surprising – intuition suggests that the inclusion of a longer stretch of pre-intervention data offsets
the bias issues described in the text. Simulations indicated that while adding centuries of pre-
intervention data would indeed yield consistent estimates, the inclusion of another twelve years of
data probably yields slightly more biased estimates.




                                         Appendix Tables – A
