                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE CASE OF THE MISSING PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH:
                  OR, DOES INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXPLAIN
              WHY PRODUCTIVITY ACCELERATED IN THE UNITED STATES
                         BUT NOT THE UNITED KINGDOM?

                                              Susanto Basu
                                             John G. Fernald
                                            Nicholas Oulton
                                            Sylaja Srinivasan

                                          Working Paper 10010
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10010


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




Forthcoming in the NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003. We thank Olivier Blanchard, Ian Bond, Jeff
Campbell, Mark Gertler, Elhanan Helpman, Dale Jorgenson, John Laitner, Jim Morsink, John Nichols, Ken
Rogoff, Bob Triest, Gianluca Violante, and Christina Wang for helpful comments and discussions. We thank
Shanthi Ramnath and Sunil Kapadia for superb research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of others affiliated with the Federal Reserve
System or the Bank of England. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Susanto Basu, John G. Fernald, Nicholas Oulton, and Sylaja Srinivasan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Case of the Missing Productivity Growth: Or, Does Information Technology Explain why
Productivity Accelerated in the United States but not the United Kingdom?
Susanto Basu, John G. Fernald, Nicholas Oulton, and Sylaja Srinivasan
NBER Working Paper No. 10010
October 2003
JEL No. E22, O47, O52

                                          ABSTRACT

We argue that unmeasured investments in intangible organizational capital—associated with the role
of information and communications technology (ICT) as a ‘general purpose technology’—can
explain the divergent U.S. and U.K. TFP performance after 1995. GPT stories suggest that measured
TFP should rise in ICT-using sectors, perhaps with long lags. Contemporaneously, investments in
ICT may in fact be associated with lower TFP as resources are diverted to reorganization and
learning. In both the U.S. and U.K., we find a strong correlation between ICT use and industry TFP
growth. The U.S. results, in particular, are consistent with GPT stories: the TFP acceleration was
located primarily in ICT-using industries and is positively correlated with industry ICT capital
growth from the 1980s and early 1990s. Indeed, as GPT stories suggest, controlling for past ICT
growth, industry TFP growth appears negatively correlated with increases in ICT capital services
in the late 1990s. A somewhat different picture emerges for the U.K. TFP growth does not appear
correlated with lagged ICT capital growth. But TFP growth in the late 1990s is strongly and
positively associated with the growth of ICT capital services, while being strongly and negatively
associated with the growth of ICT investment.

Susanto Basu                                        Nicholas Oulton
Department of Economics                             Centre for Economic Performance, London
University of Michigan                              School of Economics and Political Science
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                            Houghton Street
and NBER                                            London WC2A 2AE
sbasu@umich.edu                                     n.oulton@lse.ac.uk


John G. Fernald                                     Sylaja Srinivasan
Research Department, 11th Floor                     Structural Economic Analysis Division
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                     Monetary Analysis, HO-2
230 LaSalle Street                                  Bank of England
Chicago, IL 60604                                   Threadneedle Street
jfernald@frbchi.org                                 London EC2R 8AH
                                                    sally.srinivasan@bankofengland.co.uk
1. Introduction

        After the mid-1990s, labor and total factor productivity (TFP) accelerated in the United States but not in

most other major economies. A growing body of research has explored the robustness of the U.S. acceleration,

generally concluding that the acceleration reflects an underlying technology acceleration. This research, along

with considerable anecdotal and microeconomic evidence, suggests a substantial role for information and

communications technology (ICT). 1

        In this paper, we seek fresh insights into the nature of the U.S. experience in international comparative

perspective. First, we focus narrowly but more deeply on the relative productivity performance of the United

States and the United Kingdom. Second, to better understand comparative productivity performance, we do

detailed growth accounting at an industry level for both countries. Third, we focus on the role of ICT, which

many see at the heart of the productivity acceleration.

        Why do we take this approach? First, the U.K. experience provides an intriguing counterpoint to both

the U.S. and Continental European experiences. In particular, overall macroeconomic performance looks

similar to that of the United States, but productivity performance looks similar to the rest of Europe.

        In terms of late 1990s macro performance, output growth in both the U.S. and U.K. rose, investment

surged, inflation moderated, and unemployment rates fell to levels that seemed implausible just a few years

earlier. In the U.S. case, many commentators attributed this strong macroeconomic performance to the strong

productivity growth. But in the U.K., both labor and total factor productivity growth decelerated rather than

accelerated. Hence, understanding the U.K. experience may provide insights into the U.S. experience.

        In terms of cross-country productivity evidence, van Ark et al. (2002) and Gust and Marquez (2002),

among others, document that TFP and labor productivity growth decelerated in the European Union overall and

in Japan.2 To the extent that one expects ideas—especially when embedded in easily traded physical capital—to

diffuse easily across borders, the lack of a strong response abroad surprised many observers. Hence,

understanding the lack of a productivity acceleration in the United Kingdom may provide insight into the anemic

productivity performance elsewhere.



        1
           See Jorgenson (2001) or Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2002) for reviews of the empirical literature on the
productivity acceleration and the role of information technology. We discuss this literature in greater detail later.
         2
           Gust and Marquez look at 13 industrialized countries. Compared with the 1980-95 period, their data show a
positive TFP acceleration in 1995-2000 for the United States, Finland, Sweden, Australia, and Canada.
                                                                                                                          2

        Second, we build up from industry data in order to understand the aggregate data. Because of data

limitations, most cross-country comparisons have used aggregate data. But many hypotheses about relative

productivity growth—e.g., about the role of ICT—are observationally equivalent in aggregate data.

        In order to implement this bottom-up approach, we construct a new industry-level dataset for the United

Kingdom that includes industry use of information technology. This allows us to isolate the sources of U.S. and

U.K. productivity growth at an industry level.

        Third, we seek to better understand the myriad roles of ICT in both countries. Much of the existing

discussion has focused on the distinction between the use and production of ICT. In standard neoclassical

growth accounting, the use of ICT leads to capital deepening, which boosts labor productivity. TFP growth in

producing ICT goods shows up directly in the economy’s measured TFP.

        This standard growth accounting framework leads to the first question we ask of the data, for both the

United States and the United Kingdom: Were the 1990s a time of rising total factor productivity growth outside

of the production of ICT?     Although existing work often seems to consider this an open question, our industry

data strongly support the view that a majority of the TFP acceleration reflects an acceleration outside of the

production of ICT goods and software.3 Even when we focus on arguably “well-measured” sectors (Griliches

1994; Nordhaus 2002), we find a substantial TFP acceleration outside of ICT production.

        The productivity acceleration in sectors that use ICT raises the deeper question: Does ICT itself explain

some or all of the measured acceleration in TFP in sectors using it? This question is at the heart of the debate

over whether computers are a new “General Purpose Technology” (Helpman and Trajtenberg, 1998, for

example, argue ‘yes’; Gordon, 2003, rejects this notion). The main feature of a GPT is that it leads to

fundamental changes in the production process of those using the new invention. Chandler (1977) discusses a

number of examples, such as how railroads allowed nationwide catalog sales, which in turn transformed

retailing. David and Wright (1999) also discuss historical examples.

        Indeed, the availability of cheap ICT capital is likely to effect truly major changes only if firms can, as a

result, deploy their other inputs in radically different and productivity-enhancing ways. That is, if cheap

computers and telecommunications equipment stimulates an ever-growing series of complementary inventions


        3
          In our view, more studies than not find a widespread acceleration in technology, e.g., Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro
(2001), Baily and Lawrence (2001), Bosworth and Triplett (2002), Council of Economic Advisers (2003), Jorgenson,
                                                                                                                    3

in industries using ICT, thereby continually shifting out the demand curve for ICT capital, then innovations in

the production of ICT can have substantial long-run effects before diminishing returns set in.

        Why do we focus so intently on relatively subtle arguments about the role of ICT? An important reason

is that other explanations for the U.K. experience fall short. In particular, in this case of the missing productivity

growth, we round up and interrogate the plausible suspects. Some are routine and can be dismissed quickly;

others require deeper investigation, as the paper discusses. The suspects include the following:


        (1) Cyclical mismeasurement of inputs. Productivity is generally procyclical, rising sharply in the early
              phase of a business cycle upswing. Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro (2001) and Council of Economic
              Advisers (2003), using different methods, conclude that the level of unobserved labor effort and
              capital utilization probably fell in the U.S. after the mid-1990s. For example, both capacity
              utilization and hours per worker fell over the second half of the 1990s. In the U.K. case, macro
              performance was stronger in the second half of the 1990s than the first, making it unlikely that
              business-cycle considerations held down measured productivity.

        (2) Differences in national accounts methodology. The U.S. employs hedonic methods for some crucial
               ICT price indices (e.g., for computers), while the U.K. and many other countries do not. Also, the
               U.K. has only recently included software as a form of investment in GDP. Is it possible that part
               of the difference between U.S. and U.K. performance is a statistical illusion? The data we use for
               the U.K. addresses this issue by using U.S. methodologies.

        (3) Differences in regulation of product and labor markets. Many people suggest that inflexible labor
               and product markets prevent European countries from benefiting from new technologies and
               innovations. Gust and Marquez (2002), for example, find that countries with a more burdensome
               regulatory environment—particularly regulations affecting labor market practices—tended to
               adopt information technologies more slowly and also had slower total factor productivity growth.
               Gust and Marquez suggest that economies with more flexible labor and product markets should
               benefit first, and to a larger extent, than less flexible economies.
                        But many of the institutional features—such as the extent of the labor and product market
               rigidities emphasized by Gust and Marquez—are similar in the United Kingdom and the United
               States. Thus, this suspect seems completely absent from the scene.

        (4) U.K. unemployment fell sharply. When unemployment falls, low-skilled workers are often the ones
              drawn disproportionately into the labor force, reducing measured labor and total factor
              productivity. We control for labor quality, but the productivity puzzle remains.

        (5) Differences in the size of the high-TFP-growth ICT-producing sectors. If the ICT sector were larger
               in the U.S., this could explain some at least of the aggregate gap in productivity growth. But
               relative to GDP, the ICT-producing sectors are about the same size in the two countries (Oulton,
               2001b). And even when outside of ICT production, the U.S. data still show a sharp productivity
               acceleration, whereas the U.K. data show an even sharper deceleration.




Stiroh, and Ho (2002), Nordhaus (2002), Oliner and Sichel (2000), Stiroh (2002a, 2002b). Gordon (2003) remains a
skeptic.
                                                                                                                           4

         (6) Intensity of competition. Although measures of regulation look similar across sectors, some
                commentators think that many sectors of the U.K. economy have less competitive pressure, and
                that this retards pressure for innovation. (See Nickell 1996, Lovegrove, et al. 1999.)4

         (7) Disruption costs associated with investment. Investment accelerated in both the U.S. and U.K. data
               in the second half of the 1990s. A long literature suggests that because of various adjustment
               costs, measured output and productivity are lower in the period in which the investment takes
               place. Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro (2001) argue that in the second half of 1990s, considerations of
               adjustment costs raise the magnitude of the U.S. acceleration in “true” technology relative to
               measured productivity; a similar calibration reduces the magnitude of the slowdown in U.K.
               productivity growth. But such calibrations don’t resolve the puzzle, in part because they increase
               the acceleration in U.S. productivity at the same time.

         (8) Finally, the GPT nature of ICT capital: Benefiting from ICT requires substantial complementary
                investments in learning, reorganization, and the like, so that the payoff in terms of measured
                output may be long delayed. This is our main hypothesis. As it turns out, the evidence is much
                stronger for the U.S. than for the U.K., where the evidence remains mixed. Much of the evidence
                for this hypothesis is circumstantial—the suspect’s fingerprints are all over the crime scene.

         What is the evidence for the GPT hypothesis? To begin, once we have confirmed that measured U.S.

TFP accelerated strongly in non-ICT-producing industries during the late 1990s, we assess whether the

acceleration in measured TFP is related to the use of ICT. We find that the U.S. results are quite supportive of

the joint hypothesis that ICT is a GPT—i.e., that complementary investment is important for realizing the

productivity benefits of ICT investment—and that, since these complementary investments are unmeasured, they

can help explain the cross-industry and aggregate TFP growth experience of the U.S. in the 1990s. Specifically,

we find that industries that had high ICT capital growth rates in the 1980s or early 1990s (weighted by ICT

revenue shares, as suggested by theory) also had high TFP growth rates in the late 1990s. Controlling for lagged

capital growth, however, ICT capital growth in the late 1990s was negatively correlated with contemporaneous

TFP growth. These results are consistent with—indeed, predicted by—a simple model of unmeasured

complementary capital investment.

         Bolstered by these encouraging results for the U.S., we ask whether complementary capital

accumulation can explain the “missing” TFP growth in the U.K. in the second half of the 1990s. The aggregate

data are encouraging: the U.K. had a huge ICT investment boom in the late 1990s—by some measures, a larger

boom than the one labeled historic in the U.S. over the same period. The U.K. had had much lower ICT

investment in the early 1990s, due to a severe recession. And the U.S. results say that current TFP growth is



         4
           A long literature has, of course, explored how competition affects innovation. Aghion et al (2002) provide recent
theoretical and empirical work suggesting that over some range, greater competition raises innovation.
                                                                                                                  5

positively correlated with lagged investment, but negatively correlated with current investment—and on both

counts measured U.K. TFP growth should have been low in the late 1990s.

        However, results using industry-level U.K. data are more mixed. TFP growth does not appear correlated

with lagged ICT capital growth, which could reflect that lagged ICT capital growth is a poor proxy for

unobserved U.K. complementary capital accumulation. Contemporaneously, rising ICT capital growth is

positively, not negatively, correlated with the industry’s TFP acceleration, although ICT investment growth (as

the proxy for unobserved complementary investment) is negatively correlated. If the lags between ICT

investment and unobserved complementary investment are shorter in the U.K., then this finding, too, is

consistent with the GPT story. However, the magnitude of the negative investment effect is too small to explain

the pervasive TFP slowdown in U.K. industries. On the other hand, our results do suggest, albeit tentatively, that

the U.K. could see an acceleration in TFP growth over the next decade.

        In sum, we search for suspects in this case of the missing U.K. productivity growth. The crime is of

particular interest because the most obvious suspect—differences in labor and product market regulations—

appears to be absent from the scene. In our search for clues, we ask what sectors account for the productivity

acceleration in the U.S. data, and explore whether those same sectors show an acceleration in the U.K. We

explore the role of ICT in the U.S. and U.K.

        Although our tentative and incomplete answer to the puzzle emphasizes explanation eight—the GPT

nature of ICT, and the different timing of U.S. and U.K. investment in ICT—more than one of the suspects may

have conspired in the crime. For example, our explanation takes as given U.K. complementary investment and

leaves open the question of why the timing differs. Other suspects may have greater guilt in that question.

        The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 compares recent U.S. and U.K. macroeconomic

experience and makes some broader observations on the U.S. versus European experiences. Section 3 presents

data and basic TFP results, and also discusses some augmented growth accounting. Section 4 focuses more

specifically on the potential role of information technology as a GPT. Section 5 provides empirical evidence on

the importance of ICT in the U.S. and U.K., and provides some preliminary empirical results suggesting that the

GPT story fits at least some of the facts. Section 6 concludes.
                                                                                                                   6

2. Comparative U.S., U.K., and Continental European Macroeconomic Performance

2.1      UNITED STATES AND UNITED KINGDOM

        The U.S. economy performed admirably in many dimensions in the late 1990s. As Table 1 shows,

output growth rose, investment surged, inflation moderated, and unemployment rates fell to levels that seemed

implausible just a few years earlier. Many commentators attributed this macroeconomic strength to rapid

productivity growth—linked particularly to information technology—which rose at a rate nearly double that of

the preceding years. For example, the 2001 Economic Report of the President (page 245) stated that:


        The economy this expansion has created is not just greater in sheer size but ‘new’ in its structure and
        performance. It is dramatically more information intensive and more technology driven, more
        productive and more innovative. Today’s economy utilizes new, more efficient business practices and
        has redefined many traditional relationships between suppliers, manufacturers, investors, and customers
        to achieve ever-greater efficiency. The cumulative result of these trends and their interactions is a New
        Economy, one that is currently providing Americans of all walks of life the benefits of high growth, low
        inflation, high productivity, rising incomes, and low unemployment.


        As Table 1 shows, however, the United Kingdom shared many of these desirable macroeconomic

features. Output rose more quickly than in the preceding period; investment boomed; unemployment rates fell

sharply; inflation moderated. But in the United Kingdom, productivity growth does not appear to be the

explanation for this strong macroeconomic performance. Both labor and total factor productivity grew more

slowly in the second half of the 1990s than in the first half.

2.2      BROADER REFLECTIONS ON EUROPEAN CONVERGENCE AND DIVERGENCE

        van Ark et al. (2002) provide a fairly comprehensive comparison of the European Union (EU) and the

United States, using aggregate national accounts data. Their results cover 12 of the 15 EU countries, comprising

95 percent of EU GDP in 2000 (Belgium, Luxembourg and Greece are excluded), for 1980-2000. They find that

labour and total factor productivity grew much faster in the EU than in the United States in the 1980s and first

half of the 1990s. Labor productivity rose by nearly 2-1/2 percent per year, about 1-1/4 percentage points faster

than in the United States. But in the second half of the 1990s, productivity decelerated in Europe while the

opposite occurred in the U.S. As a result, in 1995-2000, labor productivity grew about ¾ percentage points per

year faster in the United States than in the E.U.

        With more detailed growth accounting, van Ark et al. find that some of this U.S advantage reflected the

higher contribution to labor productivity from ICT use, and some reflected a larger contribution of ICT
                                                                                                                        7

production to TFP growth. But another important factor was that TFP growth in the non-ICT part of the

economy fell sharply in Europe but rose in the United States. As we shall see, our consideration of the U.K. and

U.S. shows the same picture.

        The recent divergence reflects a reversal in convergence forces. Until the 1990s, labor productivity

generally grew more rapidly in Europe than in the U.S. The reason seemed clear: The European productivity

level was lower, so the Europeans were catching up. Table 2 shows that in 1999, the level of labor productivity

in the market sector of the U.K. lagged France and Germany as well as the United States. In particular, the U.S.

led the U.K. by 39 percent, France by 22 percent and Germany by 19 percent:

                                               TABLE 2
                       LABOR PRODUCTIVITY IN THE MARKET SECTOR 1999, U.K. = 100
United States                               139
France                                      122
Germany                                     119
United Kingdom                              100
Note: Market sector is GDP, excluding public administration and defense, health, housing, and education, per hour worked,
        measured at purchasing power parities.
Source: O’Mahony and de Boer (2002, Table 7).

        Intuitively, it is easier to grow when all you have to do is copy a successful example. And the

neoclassical growth model predicts that countries with a lower level of capital will grow faster along the

transition path. From this perspective, it was a surprise when the productivity gap between the United States and

Europe started to widen again from around 1995.

        Many popular accounts stress the U.S. strength in basic science and technological innovation. In

addition, a vibrant venture capital industry is ever eager to commercialise the results of the latest research.

Hence, one popular interpretation of the productivity acceleration is that the U.S. benefited from rapid leading-

edge creation of knowledge in producing high-tech goods; other industries then benefited from the presumed

relatively costless adoption of these new technologies, i.e., by capital deepening.

        Such an account is not altogether compelling. First, some of the basic technological innovations were, in

fact, European in origin. For example, if any one person can be said to have invented the World Wide Web, that

person was not Al Gore but an Englishman, Tim Berners-Lee. In the 1980s, Berners-Lee created the essential
                                                                                                                         8

elements of the Web — URLs, HTML, the HTTP protocol, web browser and web server programs—while

employed at CERN, the European center for research in particle physics.5

        Second, if the difference were just science and basic innovation, with technology adoption by other

sectors, one could reasonably expect the revival to diffuse relatively quickly—e.g., PCs and other new

technologies developed in the United States could be quickly installed in Europe as well. In other words, if the

issue were simply that the ideas were initially developed and implemented in the United States, then the

European failure to experience a comparable revival would be particularly puzzling.

        Third, as we discuss in Section 3, much of the measured productivity acceleration reflects an

acceleration in TFP in sectors other than those producing ICT. So the U.S. story goes beyond simple capital-

deepening, which in principle could be easily replicated elsewhere.

        If the U.S. advantage is not simply its capability in basic science and technological innovation, then

what is it? As we discuss later, many stories of the benefits of ICT emphasize that adopting new technologies

requires substantial complementary investments (such as reorganizations) and co-inventions. Gust and

Marquez (2002), following Greenspan (2000) and Feldstein (2001), promote essentially this story in arguing that

labor and product market regulations prevent many countries in Europe from benefiting fully from new

technologies because the regulations inhibit necessary reorganizations.

2.3         STRUCTURAL REFORM IN THE UNITED KINGDOM

        If the U.K has not yet benefited from ICT to the same extent as the U.S, it is not because of inflexible

labor markets, burdensome regulation, or the dead hand of government control of industry — all those things

summed up under the label “Eurosclerosis.” The U.K. now ranks highly on measures of competitiveness, labor

market flexibility, ease of starting a business and freedom from burdensome regulations; in all these areas, Card

and Freeman (2001) argue that the U.K.’s rank is similar to, and sometimes superior to, that of the United States.

        Why does the U.K. appear to have a more flexible economy than does continental Europe? The rise of

Margaret Thatcher to power in 1979 set in motion an extensive program of structural reform. This program

continued under her Conservative successor, John Major, Prime Minister from 1990 to 1997. The elements of



        5
          See Berners-Lee (1999). Of course, the Web relies on the Internet, which provides the physical infrastructure
and low-level software protocols like TCP/IP. In the 1970s, the U.S. Defense Department funded the Internet, and initially
commercial use of it was banned. But the government did not claim ownership of the intellectual property and it permitted
key personnel to quit and set up companies to exploit the new technology (Abbade 1999).
                                                                                                                   9

reform most relevant in the present context were fivefold. First, the government abandoned the attempt to

control inflation through wage and price controls; these had been employed in increasingly restrictive form since

the 1950s but had become particularly important in the aftermath of the first oil shock in 1973. Second, it

reduced the legal privileges of the trade unions (e.g., secondary picketing was banned), while also increasing the

rights of individual members vis-à-vis their own union (e.g., requiring ballots before strikes could be called).

Third, it began privatizing the “commanding heights” of the British economy—steel, telecommunications, and

later on the utilities (gas, electricity and water supply), coal mining, and the railways. Where elements of natural

monopoly existed as in telecommunications and the utilities, independent regulators were set up. Fourth, it

announced that it would cease to “bale out lame ducks”: no company was now “too important to fail.” This

new policy was largely adhered to and was cemented by selling off commercial companies that had for various

reasons fallen into government ownership (e.g., Rolls Royce, British Aerospace, British Airways and the U.K.’s

national champion in the car industry, then known as British Leyland). Fifth, financial markets were

deregulated and virtually all exchange controls were abolished.

        The Labour government that came to power in 1997 announced in advance that it did not intend to

reverse the reforms of the Thatcher-Major period. It has continued the process of privatization. For example,

air traffic control services are now supplied by a private company, not a government agency as in the United

States. Immediately after it came to power, the new government gave the Bank of England operational

independence in monetary policy. A Monetary Policy Committee was established at the Bank with the remit of

meeting a target for inflation set by the Chancellor of the Exchequer: this target was (and has continued to be)

2.5 percent p.a. as measured by the Retail Prices Index excluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX). The new

government also announced a framework of rules for fiscal policy.

        Apart from law and order and defense, the government owns or directly controls little of the economy

other than health and education. In 1999, less than 30 percent of the labor force were members of a trade union,

down from 50 percent in 1980; collective bargaining agreements now cover fewer than 36 percent of the labor

force, down from 68 percent, over the same period (Nickell and Quintini, 2001). The bulk of union members

work in the public sector; as in the U.S., private sector union membership is now quite low. The kind of

regulation found in some European countries, which make it costly to close plants, does not exist in the U.K.
                                                                                                                     10

        In sum, as Card and Freeman (2001) argue, the U.K.’s reform program has reversed the process of

relative economic decline that became apparent in the 1960s and 1970s.6 Nor does weak U.K. productivity

performance reflect a failure of macroeconomic policy. Inflation peaked at an annual rate of about 9-1/2 percent

in late 1990 but then declined steadily towards what became the target rate of 2.5 percent in mid 1997; since

then, inflation has fluctuated in a narrow range. The unemployment rate (the internationally comparable ILO

definition) peaked in early 1993 at 10.7 percent. Since then it has halved.

        Lest this should seem to paint too rosy a picture, one long-standing weakness continues to hamper the

U.K. economy: a low level of skills. In 1999, the share of the U.K. labor force with a degree or higher was little

more than half the U.S. share. Although the U.K. share was similar to France and Germany, the U.K. proportion

with vocational qualifications was also much lower:

                                                    TABLE 3
                                            LABOR FORCE SKILLS, 1999

Percentages at          Higher: Degree level      Intermediate: Post-high-school       Low: High school
different levels        or higher                 vocational qualifications            only or below
United States                    27.7                           18.6                            53.7
France                           16.4                           51.2                            32.4
Germany                          15.0                           65.0                            20.0
United Kingdom                   15.4                           27.7                            56.9
        Source: O’Mahony and de Boer (2002, Table 5).

        Other aspects of policy may also be relevant. For example, some have argued that U.K. town and

country planning laws limit the expansion of new forms of retailing (Lovegrove et al.1999). More generally,

Nickell (1996) argues that competition promotes productivity growth. But historically, U.K. law has been much

more lenient towards uncompetitive behavior than has been the case in the U.S. (This may now be changing

with the coming into force in 2000 of the 1998 Competition Act.)

3. Data and preliminary empirical results

        We begin with results from standard growth accounting in order to establish some stylized facts. Doing

so will help us dismiss a few potential explanations for the productivity divergence and, hence, helps motivate

our later focus on the general-purpose nature of ICT.




        6
          The underlying weaknesses of the U.K. economy and the extent to which these have been alleviated by policy are
discussed in Bean and Crafts (1996), Oulton (1995) and Crafts and O’Mahony (2001). O’Mahony and de Boer (2002)
compare productivity levels and growth rates across countries.
                                                                                                                            11

         We focus on disaggregated, industry level results for total factor productivity. Even if one is interested

in aggregate outcomes, such a disaggregated approach is helpful. Any number of stories can be told to explain a

single time series like GDP or GDP per worker. It is often very difficult to reject a particular hypothesis using

just aggregate data. Here sectoral and industry data can help. In addition, if one wishes to explore the

differences between the ICT-producing and ICT-using sectors, then it is natural to disaggregate.

         In this section, we first briefly describe our data sets; we then discuss results. Finally, we consider and

reject several sources of measurement error as explanations for our results.

3.1          U.S. DATA

         We use a 51-industry dataset that updates that used in Bosworth and Triplett (2002) and Basu, Fernald,

and Shapiro (2001). For industry gross output and intermediate-input use, we use industry-level national

accounts data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. For capital input—including detailed ICT data—we use

Bureau of Labor Statistics capital input data by disaggregated industry. For labor input, we use unpublished

BLS data on hours worked by two-digit industry. Gross output is not available before 1977, and, for some

industries, is not available before 1987. 7,8

         There are several issues to keep in mind. First, we do not have industry measures of labor quality, only

raw hours. We do incorporate an aggregate adjustment for labor quality in our ‘top line’ numbers, using an

index calculated by Aaronson and Sullivan (2001) (their index is relatively close to that produced by the BLS).

Second, the BEA industry data come from the income-side of the national accounts which, as is well known,

accelerated faster than the expenditure side in the late 1990s. It is not clear which side of the national accounts

is more reliable; the Council of Economic Advisers, for example, takes an agnostic view and uses a geometric

average for growth accounting. This is not possible with industry-level data.




         7
            We thank Jack Triplett for sending us their industry dataset that merged the BEA and BLS data. We updated the
BEA data to incorporate November 2002 NIPA industry revisions and also removed owner-occupied housing. The BEA
labor compensation data do not include proprietors or the self-employed, so we follow Bosworth and Triplett in using BLS
data that correct for this. We thank Larry Rosenblum at the BLS for sending us unpublished industry hours data, which
makes adjustments for estimated hours worked by non-production and supervisory employees as well as the self-employed.
We updated the BLS capital data from http://www.bls.gov/web/prod3.supp.toc.htm (downloaded December 2002). We
follow Bosworth and Triplett and exclude several service sectors where consistent input or output data are unavailable:
holding and other investment offices, social services, membership organizations, and other services. We do include those
industries in the ICT capital-by-industry data reported later in the paper.
          8
            Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2002) use different industry data sources; unfortunately, their dataset was not publicly
available as of April 2003. Brookings Institution (2002) discusses key differences across datasets.
                                                                                                                    12

        The detailed industry definitions differ a bit from the U.K. To simplify comparisons in summary tables,

we aggregate to approximately a 1-digit level, where definitions are reasonably close.

3.2      U.K. DATA

        We use a new industry dataset developed at the Bank of England, containing data for 34 industries

spanning the whole U.K. economy, running from 1979 to 2000.9 For each industry, we have gross output and

inputs of capital services, labor services, and intermediates, in both nominal and real terms. Capital services

cover three types of ICT and four types of non-ICT capital. The non-ICT assets are structures, plant and

machinery (equipment), vehicles; and intangibles. The three ICT assets are computers, software and

communication equipment. The real capital input index is a rental-price weighted average of the growth rates of

these asset stocks. The real intermediate index is a weighted average of purchases from all of the other

industries and from imports.

        Labor services are measured as hours worked and are built up in a number of steps. First, we estimate

total usual hours for each industry. Second, we apply two aggregate adjustments. The first is to constrain the

growth of total hours to conform with the official index of aggregate hours worked. This allows for cyclical

variability in hours, though at the same rate in all industries. The second aggregate adjustment is to apply a

correction for changes in labor quality, mainly due to rising levels of educational attainment (quality change is

discussed below).

        Prior to several adjustments described below, the data set is reasonably consistent with the official U.K.

national accounts in both real and nominal terms. This is important because, otherwise, any story based on

industry data will not be very convincing as an explanation of what is happening at the macro level.

        For making comparisons with the United States, we need to use the same methodology to derive ICT

capital services in both countries. We therefore assume that computers and software depreciate geometrically at

rates similar to those used in studies of the U.S. (e.g. Jorgenson and Stiroh, 2000), which are in turn based on

those used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We also employ U.S. price indices, converted to

sterling terms, to deflate investment in current prices. U.S. ICT prices generally fall faster than U.K. ones, so

this means that our ICT capital and investment measures will grow more rapidly. The U.K. is also an ICT

producer, so we have made corresponding adjustments to the growth rates of output of the ICT industries.
                                                                                                                       13

        In addition, we have made a large adjustment to the official nominal level of software investment,

multiplying it by a factor of three, for reasons discussed in Oulton (2001b) and (2002). Compared with the

United States, official software investment is very low relative to computer investment; also, a much lower

proportion of the sales of the computer services industry is classified as investment. The “times three”

adjustment can be justified as putting the two countries on the same footing methodologically.

3.3         EXONERATING TWO OF THE SUSPECTS

        We briefly expand on two broad data issues related to the challenge of cross-country data comparability.

First, the official U.K. statistics do not control for hedonics in the same way or degree that the U.S. national

accounts do. Second, the U.K. had an even larger decline in unemployment than the United States, which could

reduce overall productivity if those pulled into the labor force have lower-than-average skills and productivity.

Neither story explains the divergent performance of U.K. and U.S. productivity since, as noted above, our U.K.

industry data incorporate adjustments for these two issues.

        First, what difference do the computer hedonics make? National accounts in Europe (including the

U.K.) have, so far, lagged in introducing satisfactory methods for measuring ICT, leading to implausibly large

variation across countries in computer price indices (Schreyer 2002). Indeed, the main weakness of U.S.

methods of measuring ICT is that they don’t go far enough. For example, there is no true price index for

investment in custom and own account software (two thirds of the total), only for prepackaged software (Parker

and Grimm, 2000). And within telecommunications, hedonic methods are only just starting to be introduced

(Grimm, Moulton, and Wasshausen, 2002).

        A related issue is that although measured GDP in both Europe and the U.S. now includes software

investment, different methodologies lead to substantial differences in estimated levels (Lequiller, 2001). Hence,

again, cross-country comparisons need to use impose a comparable methodology.

        Most researchers have dealt with these issues by applying as far as possible U.S. methods to other

countries. However, that this will not necessarily transform European productivity performance because inputs

as well as output grow faster (see again Schreyer 2002). Oulton (2001b) finds that U.S. methodology raises the




        9
            A detailed appendix describing the industry input, output, and ICT capital data is available on request.
                                                                                                                           14

growth rate of U.K. GDP by about a third of a percentage point per annum in the last half of the 1990s. Despite

this, aggregate labor productivity still slowed down over this period.10

         Second, why isn’t declining labor quality quantitatively important in explaining the divergence? We

apply an index of U.K. labor quality (constructed by Burriel-Llombart and Jones 2003). As is standard, we

define labor quality as the growth of quality-adjusted labor input minus the growth of unweighted total hours.11

The unemployed do tend to have below-average skills or qualifications and, indeed, falling unemployment

contributed to a lower growth rate of labor quality from the first to second half of the 1990s. But other factors

affected U.K. labor quality, such as increasing female participation, declining participation by older, unskilled

men, and (of particular importance) the retirement or death of older, less qualified people and their replacement

by younger, better qualified workers. In both countries, we find that labor quality growth was positive

throughout the 1990s, though in both the rate of growth decelerated.12

3.4       RESULT FROM TRADITIONAL GROWTH ACCOUNTING

         Tables 4 and 5 provide standard estimates of TFP for various aggregates, including the 1-digit industry

level. The first three columns show TFP in gross-output terms. Since aggregate TFP is a value-added concept,

we present industry TFP in value-added terms as well; by controlling for differences in intermediate input

intensity, these figures are ‘scaled’ to be comparable to the aggregate figures. The final column shows the

sector’s nominal value-added share. 13

         We start by discussing the U.S. results in Table 4, focusing on the value-added measures. The top line

shows the sizeable acceleration in TFP growth, from about 0.6 percent per year to about 1.9 percent.14 These

calculations incorporate labor quality adjustments from Aaronson and Sullivan (2001), shown in the second line.

Labor quality growth grew more slowly in the second half of the 1990s, when the booming economy drew lower


         10
            Gust and Marquez (2000) and van Ark et al. (2002) also find that differences in national accounts methodology
cannot explain the productivity growth gap between the U.S. and Europe.
         11
            Quality-adjusted hours is a Törnqvist index of hours worked by 40 groups, where each group’s hours are
weighted by its share of the aggregate wage bill. The groups consist of 4 qualifications groups (degree, A level, O level and
“other”) and 5 age groups (covering ages 16-65), for each sex.
         12
            See Tables 4 and 5 below, line 2 labeled “labor quality adjustment”.
         13
            With Törnqvist aggregation, aggregate TFP growth is a weighted average of industry gross-output TFP growth,
where the so-called ‘Domar weights’ equal nominal industry gross output divided by aggregate value added; the weights
thus sum to more than one. In continuous time, this is equivalent to first converting gross-output residuals to value-added
terms by dividing by (one minus the intermediate share), and then using shares in nominal value added. (In discrete time,
using average shares from adjacent periods, they are approximately equivalent.) Basu and Fernald (2001) discuss this
aggregation and its extension to the case of imperfect competition; see also Oulton (2001a).
         14
            As noted earlier, the acceleration exceeds that in product-side BLS data shown in Table 1.
                                                                                                                    15

skilled workers into employment. Hence, adjusting for labor quality growth heightens the magnitude of the TFP

acceleration calculated with raw hours (shown in the third line, calculated as the appropriate weighted average

of the industry TFP growth rates shown in the table).

        The remainder of the table shows various sub-aggregates, including the 1-digit SIC level (none of which

incorporate a labor quality adjustment). It is clear that in our dataset, the acceleration was not limited to the

ICT-producing sectors. First, if we focus on the non-ICT producing sectors (third line from bottom), they show

an acceleration of nearly a percentage point. In an accounting sense, these sectors contribute about 0.9

percentage points of the 1.2 percentage point total (non-quality adjusted) acceleration. Major non-ICT sectors

contributing to the acceleration include wholesale trade; retail trade; finance; and insurance.

        Second, Griliches (1994) and Nordhaus (2002) argue that real output in many service industries are

poorly measured—e.g., it is often difficult even conceptually to decide on the ‘real output’ of a bank or a lawyer;

as another example, in health care, the hedonic issues are notoriously difficult. Nordhaus argues for focusing on

what one hopes are the ‘well-measured’ (or at least, ‘better measured’) sectors of the economy. The acceleration

in TFP in well-measured industries is even larger than the overall acceleration; the acceleration is sizeable even

when we exclude ICT-producing sectors.

        Table 5 shows the comparable table for the U.K. economy. Between the first and second halves of the

1990s, productivity growth fell in the U.K. private non-farm economy by about a percentage point, even after

adjusting for the much slower growth in labor quality in the second half of the 1990s. Looking at major

industries, TFP growth (unadjusted for labor quality) rose substantially in finance/insurance and manufacturing

durables, but was flat or declined in most other major sectors.

        By contrast, aggregate productivity growth rose in the U.S. by 1.3 percentage points per annum (Table

4), so the difference in acceleration was about 2.3 percentage points. Given this broad difference, there are some

similarities in the sectoral pattern across the two countries. For example, the productivity acceleration was much

faster in durables than in non-durables; finance and insurance surged.

        Looking more closely at the sectoral data, a major difference between the U.S. and the U.K. is the trade

sectors, especially retail. U.S. retail value-added TFP growth rose by 4.5 percentage points per year; U.K. TFP
                                                                                                                          16

growth fell by about 1.7 percentage points. Nevertheless, they are not the entire story. Even excluding them, the

U.S. data still show an acceleration, whereas the U.K. data still show a deceleration.15

         That the U.S. productivity acceleration was broadbased is consistent with a growing body of recent

work. For example, the Council of Economic Advisers (2003) reports that between 1973-1995 to 1995-2002,

non-ICT TFP accelerated sharply, with its contribution to U.S. growth rising from 0.18 percentage points per

year to 1.25 percentage points, roughly in line with the figures here.16 Bosworth and Triplett (2002) focus on the

performance of service industries, and find a widespread acceleration. Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2002b) also

find that TFP accelerated outside ICT production, although by a smaller amount.

3.5       AUGMENTED GROWTH-ACCOUNTING CONSIDERATIONS

         Some research has looked at whether the results cited here are robust to deviations from the standard

assumptions of growth accounting, generally concluding that they are. Using different methodologies, Basu,

Fernald, and Shapiro (2001), Council of Economic Advisers (various years), and Baily and Lawrence (2001)

find that cyclical mismeasurement of inputs plays little if any role in the U.S. acceleration of the late 1990s.

Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro also find little role in the productivity acceleration for deviations from constant

returns and perfect competition.

         Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro do find a noticeable role for traditional adjustment costs associated with

investment. Because investment rose sharply in the late 1990s, firms were, presumably, diverting an increasing

amount of worker time to installing the new capital rather than producing marketable output. In other words, if

there are costs of adjusting the capital stock and faster growth leads to higher costs, then true technological

progress was faster than measured. These considerations strengthen the conclusion that the technology

acceleration was broadbased, since service and trade industries invested heavily in the late 1990s and, hence,

paid a lot of investment adjustment costs.



         15
             Wholesale and retail trade “account” for about three-quarters of the U.S. acceleration (Domar weighted industry
TFP growth), and one-third of the U.K. deceleration. McKinsey (2001) provides anecdotal as well as quantitative evidence
on the transformation of wholesale and retail trade; Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2002) link the retail industry data to
firm-level developments. We would note that Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2002), who use output data from the BLS Office
of Employment Projections, do not find as important a contribution from the trade sectors.
          16
             The CEA methodology is very similar to that of Oliner and Sichel (2002), who report no TFP acceleration
outside of ICT production. But Oliner and Sichel discount their finding on this score, since their method takes non-ICT
TFP is a residual. Since the Oliner-Sichel end-point is a recession year, 2001, they point out that any cyclical effects on
productivity are forced to show up in non-ICT TFP. In addition, the CEA measure of labor productivity is a geometric
average of income- and product-side measures of output per hour.
                                                                                                                         17

         The United Kingdom had even more sharply rising investment than did the United States, so

conceivably adjustment costs might be masking an underlying improvement in U.K. productivity growth. From

1990-1995, aggregate investment in the U.K. private non-farm economy fell at 0.45 percent per year, while over

1995-2000 it rose at 8.60 percent per year.17 So how much of the decline in U.K. productivity growth might be

attributable to adjustment costs? Following Basu, Fernald and Shapiro (2001), we calibrate these costs as a

parameter φ times the growth rate of investment; following Shapiro (1986), they take φ to be 0.035.18 This

calibration implies that investment adjustment costs held down measured TFP growth by about 0.30 percentage

points per year over 1995-2000, but boosted it by 0.02 percentage points from 1990-95. Hence, the slowdown in

true productivity growth was about 0.63, not 0.95, percentage points per annum. Hence, adjustment costs might

account for about a third of the observed productivity deceleration.

         Of course, the same correction would raises the U.S. technology acceleration by a bit under 0.2

percentage point.19 Hence, although this correction makes a larger difference to the U.K. data, it doesn’t reverse

the U.K. decline or even noticeably narrow the gap with the United States.



4. Industry-Level Productivity Implications of ICT as a New GPT

         The U.S. productivity acceleration coincided with accelerated price declines for computers and

semiconductors but, as we just saw, most of the TFP acceleration appears to have taken place outside of ICT

production. Can ICT somehow explain the measured TFP acceleration in industries using ICT? We first discuss

broad theoretical considerations of treating ICT as a new General-Purpose Technology (GPT), and then present

a simple model to clarify the issues and empirical implications.

4.1       GENERAL PURPOSE TECHNOLOGIES: “SPOOKY ACTION AT A DISTANCE”

         Standard neoclassical growth accountants identify several effects of ICT on aggregate labor and total

factor productivity growth. Faster TFP growth in producing ICT contributes directly to aggregate TFP. In


         17
             This estimate uses the same data employed to estimate capital services in the U.K. at the industry level.
         18
             Shapiro does not estimate different values of φ for IT and non-IT capital; one could imagine that the values
differ. We hope to estimate these values in future work.
          19
             These numbers are qualitatively the same but smaller than those reported in Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro (2001)
for three reasons. First, we have added an extra year of data (2000) in which investment growth was weak. Second, data
revisions have reduced the growth rate of investment in the second half of the 1990s. Third, Jason Cummins and John
                                                                                                                        18

addition, the use of ICT contributes directly to labor productivity through capital deepening: By reducing the

user cost of capital, falling ICT prices induce firms to increase their desired capital stock.20

        Standard growth accounting does not presume that the use of ICT has any particular effect on TFP. By

contrast, many microeconomic, firm-level, and anecdotal studies suggest that there are important—but often

indirect and hard to foresee—potential roles for ICT to affect measured production and productivity in sectors

using ICT. Conceptually, one can separate these potential links into two categories: Purposeful co-invention,

which we interpret as the accumulation of “complementary capital,” which leads to mismeasurement of true

technology; and externalities of one sort or another.

        These indirect effects that arise from general purpose technologies such as ICT are akin to what

Einstein, in the context of particle physics, called “spooky action at a distance”: quantum physics predicts that

in some circumstances, actions performed on a particle in one location instantaneously influence another particle

that is arbitrarily far away. In terms of the effects of ICT, an innovation in one sector, ICT, often causes

unexpected ripples of co-invention and co-investment in sectors that seem almost arbitrarily far away. Many of

the GPT stories (e.g., Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995, or Helpman and Trajtenberg, 1998) fall in the “spooky

action” camp. (Of course, Einstein’s spooky action was instantaneous; the effects of GPTs are not.)

          First, firm-level studies suggest that benefiting from ICT investments requires substantial and costly

co-investments in complementary capital.21 For example, firms that use computers more intensively may

reorganize production, thereby creating ‘intangible capital’ in the form of organizational knowledge. These

investments may include resources diverted to learning; they may involve purposeful innovation arising from

R&D. As Bresnahan (undated) argues, “advances in ICT shift the innovation possibility frontier of the economy

rather than directly shifting the production frontier.” I.e., ICT induces co-innovation and co-investment by firms

using the technology, with long and variable lags.

        The resulting “organizational capital” is analogous to physical capital in that companies accumulate it in

a purposeful way. Conceptually, we can think of this complementary capital as an additional input into a



Roberts pointed out a mistake in our conversion from Shapiro (1986)’s framework to ours. This led us to reduce our
estimate of φ from 0.048 in Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro (2001) to 0.035 in this work.
          20
             Tevlin and Whelan (2000) for the U.S. and Bakhshi et al (2003) for the U.K. provide econometric evidence that
falling relative prices of ICT equipment fuelled the ICT investment boom.
          21
             See, for example, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2000) and Bresnahan (undated) for a discussion of the kinds of
complementary investments and co-invention that firms undertake in order to benefit from ICT, given its ‘general purpose’
attributes. David and Wright (1999) provide a nice historical reflection on general purpose technologies.
                                                                                                                     19

standard neoclassical production function; it differs from ordinary capital and labor in that it is not directly

observed but must, somehow, be inferred. 22

        Second, the GPT literature suggests the likelihood of sizeable externalities to ICT. For example,

successful new managerial ideas—including those that take advantage of ICT, such as the use of a new business

information system—seem likely to diffuse to other firms. Imitation is often easier and less costly than the

initial co-invention of, say, a new organization change, because you learn by watching and analyzing the

experimentation, the successes and, importantly, the mistakes made by others. 23 Indeed, firms that don’t use

computers more intensively may also benefit from spillovers of intangible capital. For example, if there are

sizeable spillovers to R&D, and if R&D is more productive with better computers, then even firms that don’t use

computers intensively may benefit from the knowledge created by computers.

        These GPT considerations are completely consistent with the traditional growth accounting framework

but suggest difficulties in implementation and interpretation. In particular, these considerations suggest that the

production function is mismeasured because we don’t observe all inputs (the service flow from complementary,

intangible capital) or all outputs (the investment in complementary capital). Hence, TFP is mismeasured.

        Note that the ‘spooky action’ nature of the co-inventions and externalities suggests that we should not

expect the benefits of ICT to diffuse quickly across borders. First, if large complementary investments and

innovations are necessary, diffusion will inevitably take time. Second, Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995) note

that co-invention often requires “coordination between agents located far from each other along the time and

technology dimension” (p.3), so that institutional arrangements and market structure—which affect the ability to

contract successfully in an environment with asymmetric information and uncertain property rights—are likely

to matter; these factors are likely to differ across countries. Third, adoption costs may differ across countries,

just as they seem to differ across firms, so that low adjustment/adoption cost countries may adopt new

technologies first. These differences in cost may reflect the presence or absence of complementary factors—




        22
            Much of Brynjolfsson’s work tries to quantify the role of unobserved complementary capital. Macroeconomic
studies of the effects of organizational capital include Greenwood and Yorokoglu (1997), Hornstein and Krusell (1996),
Hall (2001), and Laitner and Stolyarov (2001).
         23
            Bresnahan (undated) provides a nice discussion of the channels for externalities to operate. Bresnahan and
Trajtenberg (1995) highlight both ‘vertical’ externalities (between general purpose technology producers and each
application sector) and ‘horizontal’ externalities (across application sectors).
                                                                                                                           20

business-school-trained managers, for example—or the vintage structure of the existing capital stock.24 Finally`,

spillover effects may be stronger at closer distances (e.g., within Silicon Valley).

         In looking at the U.S. versus the U.K., this discussion makes clear the difficulty of the task at hand: we

need to find a way to infer unobserved complementary investments. That is, the U.S. could be benefiting from

past intangible investments in knowledge and reorganization, leading to high measured TFP growth; the U.K.

might have begun heavy intangible complementary investment only more recently, diverting resources from

production of market output and appearing to have low TFP growth. We now turn to a formal model that

suggests variables that might proxy for these unobservables.

4.2       INDUSTRY-LEVEL IMPLICATIONS OF ICT AS A NEW GPT: A SIMPLE MODEL

      The last 10 years, and especially the last five, have seen an explosion in papers modeling the effects of

“general-purpose technologies” (GPTs), and interpreting the ICT revolution as the advent of such a

technology.25 But it is quite difficult to derive industry-level empirical implications from this literature. For

example, it is often unclear how to measure in practice some of the key variables, such as unobserved

investment and capital; and even for observed variables, measurement conventions often depart from those used

in national accounting.26

      On the other hand, conventional industry-level growth-accounting studies of the sort reviewed and

extended in Section 3 are typically hard to interpret in terms of GPT considerations because they generally lack

a conceptual, general equilibrium framework to interpret movements in TFP. Although some studies try to look

for a “new economy” in which ICT has indirect effects on measured TFP in ICT-using industries, in the absence

of clear theoretical guidance, it is not clear that many would know if they had, in fact, found it.

      Finally, as discussed above, a large empirical literature, often using firm-level data or case studies, stresses

the importance and costly nature of organizational change accompanying ITC investment. This literature, while


         24
             Chandler (1977), for example, highlights the rise of professional managerial skills. In addition, new
technologies may be somewhat specific to a country’s particular cultural and institutional arrangements—society’s general
‘organization’, ‘infrastructure’, ‘social capital’, and the like. In other words, ‘appropriate technology’ may matter even in
comparisons of the U.S. versus U.K. companies. This is related to the literature on factors that affect costs of adopting a
new GPT. Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998), for example, have some interesting examples of which industries adopted
semiconductors first—e.g., hearing aids and computers, where the existing technology was inadequate; and which adapted
late, notably telecom and automotives, with a large body of vintage capital.
          25
             A very incomplete list is Caselli (1999), Greenwood and Yorukoglu (1997), the collection of papers edited by
Helpman (1998), Hobijn and Jovanovic (2001), Jovanovic and Rousseau (2003), and Laitner and Stolyarov (2001).
                                                                                                                         21

important and insightful, rarely makes contact with economy-wide productivity research.27 In many ways, our

empirical work below is a tentative attempt to make just that connection.The model below provides the bare

bones of a theoretical framework to capture some of the key issues, focusing on cross-industry empirical

implications. Our model takes as given the arrival of a particular GPT, which here is taken to be the production

of ICT capital at a continuously falling relative price. The distinguishing feature of a GPT is that its effects are

general—going well beyond the industry of production—but require complementary investments by firms in

order to fully benefit from its use. For empirical implementation, we focus on industries that use the GPT.

      Value added in industries that use, but do not produce, IT is given by28:

                          Qit ≡ Yit + Ait = F ( Z t G ( KitIT , Cit ), K itNT , Lit ) , i = 1, … N           (4.1)

where F and G are homogeneous of degree 1 in their arguments. Z is a technology term that each industry takes

as exogenous. We discuss the distinction between A and Y shortly. For simplicity, we are ignoring materials

input (although we add it back in our empirical work), imperfect competition, increasing returns, and capital

adjustment costs. All could be added, at the cost of considerable notation.

      Each industry rents ICT capital KIT and non-ICT capital KNT in competitive, economy-wide markets. The

aggregate stocks of the two types of capital evolve as:

                                    K tJT = I tJT + (1 − δ JT ) K tJT−1 ,      J = I, N                      (4.2)

      Industries must, however, individually accumulate their stocks of complementary capital, C. We think of

this capital as business and organizational models or training in the use of IT, and the investment flow A as the

time and resource cost of training and creating new business structures.29 Industries forego producing market

output Y to accumulate this capital:

                                               Cit = Ait + (1 − δ C ) Cit −1                                 (4.3)




        26
             For example, capital is typically measured as foregone consumption, which is sensible for an aggregative model
but difficult to relate to industry-level capital accounts that deal with capital heterogeneity and quality change by
(attempting to) measure capital input in efficiency units. Howitt (1998) attempts to bridge the two conventions
          27
             An exception is Brynjolfsson and Yang (2001).
          28
             With constant returns and competition, one can speak of firms and industries interchangeably. “An industry
does x” is our shorthand for “all firms in an industry do x.”
          29
             Chandler (1977) discusses innovations in inventory management made possible by railroads. Wal-Mart
inventory management system provides an example of innovations made possible by ITC.
                                                                                                                          22

We assume that investment in all three kinds of capital is irreversible. Since both A and NT investment goods

cost the same to produce, the economic difference between the two types of capital is that they interact in

different ways with the ICT capital stock. The difference from the point of view of measurement is that Y is

measured in the national income accounts, but A is not.30

      The main economic implication of the separability assumption built into (4.1) is that the marginal

productivities of K IT and C are closely tied to one another. We assume that the elasticity of substitution

between the two inputs in the production of G is relatively small. We also assume Inada-like conditions to the

effect that the marginal productivity of each input is very low if the level of the other is close to zero. Thus,

when the GPT arrives and ICT capital starts getting cheap, the incentive to also accumulate C is very strong.

      Note that conceptually, ‘innovation’ as traditionally construed can take two forms. First, we lump

purposeful innovations into C (indeed, we have assumed that all purposeful innovation is closely linked to ICT).

Second, we interpret Z as all ‘exogenous’ increases in technology, including, for example, the component of

organizational change that spills over from the sector of origin—for example, the idea of using individual

electric motors at each workstation in a factory, rather than relying on the single drive train of a steam engine.

4.3      TFP MEASUREMENT WITH UNOBSERVED INPUTS AND OUTPUT

      What are the implications of complementary capital accumulation for the measured TFP of ICT-using

industries? Differentiating, we can write the production function in growth rates as:

                            FK IT K IT        FC C      FK NT K NT        FL
                     ∆q =                ∆k +
                                            IT
                                                   ∆c +            ∆k NT + L ∆l + sG ∆z                    (4.4)
                               Q               Q            Q              Q

Since we have made Solow’s assumptions of constant returns to scale and perfect competition, we have

                                     FK IT K IT     FC C FK NT K
                                                                 NT
                                                                     FL
                                                  +     +           + L =1.                                (4.5)
                                           Q         Q       Q        Q

      If we observed total output Q, and knew the required rates of return to capital, we could back out the

elasticity of output with respect to complementary capital, C:

                                         FC C      WL PKIT K IT PKNT K NT
                                              = 1−    −        −          .                                (4.6)
                                          Q        PQ   PQ         PQ



        30
            Some fraction of A is probably measured: for example, consultant services and many forms of software. It is
not clear how much of what is measured is properly capitalized, as required by equation (4.3).
                                                                                                                    23

      Without independent information on the flow of A or the stock of C (perhaps from stock market

valuations), one cannot implement this procedure using measured output, YNT. Rewrite equation (4.6) as:

                                 FC C   Q   WL     PKIT K IT PKNT K NT
                                      =   −      −          −          .
                                 Y NT Y NT PY NT    PY NT     PY NT
Since Q/YNT is not observed, within broad limits we are free to believe that complementary capital is arbitrarily

important in production by assuming that an arbitrarily large share of the true output that firms produce is not

counted in the National Accounts.

      Some algebraic manipulations of (4.4) yield an expression for the conventional Solow residual:

                                              PK IT K IT                 PK NT K NT             FL L
                                ∆y   NT
                                          −         NT
                                                           ∆k   IT
                                                                     −         NT
                                                                                      ∆k NT −        ∆l
                                      PY            PY                                           Q      .   (4.7)
                                       FC         A
                               ≡ ∆TFP = CNT ∆c − NT ∆a + sG ∆z
                                       Y        Y

We see that omitting complementary inputs can cause us to either overestimate or underestimate TFP growth.

When unmeasured output is growing (∆a > 0), TFP growth is underestimated (the “1974” story) as resources are

diverted to investment. When unmeasured input is growing (∆c > 0), TFP growth is overestimated. In steady

state, of course, the accumulation equation implies that ∆c = ∆a which, in turn, implies that the steady-state

mismeasurement is

                                                A       C  *              g + δC 
                                           FC − C  g = Y NT ( r + δ C ) − 1 + g  g ,
                                 C
                                Y NT                                             

where r* is the steady-state real interest rate. In a dynamically efficient economy, the mismeasurement is

necessarily positive: True steady-state TFP growth is lower than measured, not higher.

      This point is a simple one, but it is a quantitatively important correction to statements in the existing

literature (e.g., Bessen, 2003).31 Of course, if one corrects only output mismeasurement (∆a ), then ICT will

appear fantastically productive, far beyond what is ordinarily measured. But firms choose to divert resources to

unobserved investment ∆a in order to create an intangible capital stock that contributes to future production.

The resulting unmeasured flow of capital services implies a bias in the other direction. The net bias may be

either positive or negative at a point in time, but is positive in the steady state.



        31
          Laitner and Stolyarov (2001) also stress the importance of including complementary capital in a growth
accounting exercise.
                                                                                                                     24

     We now seek an observable proxy for unobserved investment in, and growth in the stock of,

complementary capital. In light of the firm-level evidence, observed growth in ICT capital provides a reasonable

proxy. Suppose G takes a CES form:
                                                   σ −1                 σ −1 σ
                                      G = [α K   IT σ
                                                          + (1 − α )C    σ σ −1
                                                                           ]

We consider the optimization sub-problem of producing G at minimum cost, which firms solve every period.

The solution of the sub-problem is:

                                            ∆ct = ∆ktIT + σ ∆ptIT ,                                        (4.8)

where ∆ptIT is the change in the relative rental rate of ICT capital to C-capital. This equation implies a direct

link between growth in complementary capital and growth of observed ICT capital.

     We can use the accumulation equation to express unobserved investment ∆a in terms of current and lagged

growth in unobserved capital ∆c:


                                      ∆ at =
                                               C       (1 − δ C ) ∆c  .
                                                 ∆ct −
                                               A        (1 + g ) t −1 
     Substituting the last equation and equation (4.8) into (4.7), we have in principle an equation for TFP

growth that indicates the importance of complementary capital accumulation:

                 F C    C                                  C (1 − δ C ) 
          ∆TFP =  CNT − NT         ∆k t
                                           IT
                                              + σ ∆pt
                                                     IT
                                                         Y NT (1 + g )   ∆kt −1 + σ∆pt −1  + sG ∆z
                                                         + 
                                                                                IT        IT
                                                                                                           (4.9)
                 Y     Y                                                

The first term is proportional to ( r * + δ − 1) , so under reasonable circumstances it is negative. The second term,

on the other hand, is clearly positive. Hence, our GPT-type framework implies that firms/industries that invest

substantially in GPTs have lower current measured output, but higher future measured output. I.e., other things

equal, industries that are making large IT investments today will have low measured TFP growth, but those that

made such investments in the past will have high measured TFP growth. (This discussion is independent of any

externalities, which may also be important.)

        As an estimating equation, (4.9) has the difficulty that industries are likely to differ in their long-run

C/YNT ratios. Using the CES assumption for G, the cost-minimizing F.O.C. implies that
                                                                σ         −σ
                                                 K IT  1 − α    PK 
                                                     =          ,
                                                  C     α    P 
                                                                                                             25

        or
                                                                 σ        1−σ
                                       C    PC PK K IT  1 − α    PK 
                                          =             =         sK IT
                                      Y NT PK K IT PY NT  α    P 

In the convenient Cobb-Douglas case, we have that the C/YNT ratio is proportional to the observed ICT share, so

ceteris paribus the mismeasurement of complementary capital is more important in those industries where ICT

capital is used to a greater extent—a reasonable conclusion.

                                                        (1 − δ C )  %
                              ∆TFP = [ FC − 1] β k%t +              β kt −1 + sG ∆z ,            (4.10)
                                                        (1 + g ) 
                   1−σ                                                    σ
            P                                                1−α 
where k%t =  K         sK ICT  ∆ktICT + σ∆ptICT  and β =      .
             P                                                α 

     As an alternative way of implementing equation (4.7), when can we take ICT investment as a direct proxy

for unobserved complementary capital investment? Combining the accumulation equations for complementary

capital and ICT capital implies:

                                 Ait   I
                                     = it + (δ C − δ ICT ) + σ∆p ICT .
                                 Cit K it −1
If δ C = δ ICT and σ = 0, then ∆a = ∆i ICT . This implies that:

                                                    P A   PI I  ICT
                                ∆TFPit = FC k%it −              ∆iit + sG ∆zit
                                                    PI I   PY                                  (4.11)
                                 = F k% − bi% + s dz , where i% = s I ∆i ICT .
                                      C it     it    G   it          it       it   it


Note that the capital and investment terms incorporate the income share of complementary capital and the share

of complementary investment in output, which are likely to differ greatly across industries. So we are assuming

that the complementary shares are correlated across industries with the ICT shares.

     When will equation (4.10) be preferable to equation (4.11)? The key issue is the lag between ICT

investment and complementary investment. For example, suppose a company invested heavily in an expensive

enterprise resource management system in the mid-1980s and then spent the next decade learning how best to

reorganize to benefit from the improved information availability. Then equation (4.10)—with very long lags—

should work well. By contrast, if the reorganization was contemporaneous with the ICT investment, then
                                                                                                                            26

equation (4.11) should work well (assuming the other conditions involved in deriving it are not too

unreasonable) and there might not be long lags.

      Our method of using cost-minimization conditions to proxy for unobserved variables from observables is

common in the literature on cyclical productivity with unobserved factor input (utilization).32 As in that

literature, it can imply a fairly elaborate proxy, which may not be easy to estimate. Given that fact, should we

try to follow Hall (2001) and several other authors, who measure the importance of organizational capital from

the gap between firms’ stock market valuations and the replacement values of their physical capital?33

      We do not do so, for two reasons. First, given the importance of the issue, it is interesting to investigate a

different approach to estimation and see if we get broadly the same answer. Second, given the recent large

swings in equity markets, we are wary of any attempt to impute the real service flow of the stock of

organizational capital from stock-market valuations. Setting aside the usual concerns about stock market

bubbles, suppose the recent fall in equity prices is due to the realization that much of the current “e-capital” will

become obsolete sooner than previously expected. This information will appropriately lead to a lower market

value of the capital, but does not imply that its current real service flow into production must be lower.34

4.4       EXTENSIONS TO THE BASIC FRAMEWORK

         Clearly, the implications of a new GPT for measured productivity growth are subtle and may be hard to

distinguish from alternatives. But the theory does suggest that one needs lags of ICT capital growth in the TFP

equation, in addition to the current growth rate.35

         One complication is that the externality captured in ∆z can be a function of industry Ci, as well as

aggregate C. In that plausible case, one can no longer tell whether the capital growth terms in equation (4.9)

represent accumulation of a private stock, or intra-industry externalities that are internalized within the industry.

Similarly, if we find that lagged ∆k IT is important for explaining current productivity growth we do not know


         32
            See, for example, Basu and Kimball (1997).
         33
            See Brynjolfsson and Yang (2001) for an example of this alternative approach.
         34
            Formally, capital aggregation theory shows that the service flow of capital is proportional to the value of the
stock only if depreciation occurs at a constant, exponential rate. A large, one-time capital loss is an excellent example of a
non-constant depreciation rate. Jovanovic and Rousseau (2003) make exactly the same argument about changes in stock
market valuation when a GPT is introduced. But given the false starts and dead ends that often accompany a recently-
introduced GPT, their logic should apply equally to episodes after the GPT is introduced but before it has become a mature
technology. (Think, for example, of DC power generation in the United States.)
                                                                                                                       27

whether that finding supports the theory we have outlined, or whether it indicates that the externality is a

function of lagged capital.

        In addition, a free parameter is the length of a period, a point on which the theory gives us no guidance.

The lagged ∆k IT may be last year’s ITC capital accumulation, or the last decade’s. Furthermore, equation (4.3)

for the accumulation of complementary capital has no adjustment costs, or time-to-build or time-to-plan lags in

the accumulation of C. But such frictions and lags are likely to be important in practice, making it even harder

to uncover the link between ICT and measured TFP.

        One further concern is whether other variables should enter the production function for A, which we do

not account for here. Our framework implicitly assumes the same production function for A and Y. But it is

possible, as many have recognized, that the production of complementary capital is particularly intensive in

skilled (i.e., college-educated) labor.36 This hypothesis is particularly interesting given the noticeable difference

between the U.S. and the U.K. in the fraction of skilled workers that we documented in Table 3. If true, the

hypothesis implies that the relative price of accumulating complementary capital may differ significantly across

the two countries (and perhaps across industries within a country) in ways that we may not be able to capture.



5. Evidence for the GPT hypothesis

5.1      EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON THE ROLE OF ICT

        We concluded earlier that much of the U.S. acceleration in measured TFP reflects an acceleration

outside of the production of ICT products. TFP can move around for a lot of reasons unrelated to ICT. For

example, it could be that the United States experienced broad-based managerial innovations that raised TFP

growth throughout the economy. Nevertheless, the previous section suggests that the acceleration—and

managerial innovations—could be associated with the use of ICT.

         Several studies explore whether TFP growth across industries is correlated with ICT intensity. In

contrast to firm-level studies, these industry studies rarely find much correlation between ICT capital and TFP


        35
             Hence one needs to generalize the approach followed by, e.g., Stiroh (2002b), who argues against a
spillovers/GPT story by regressing TFP growth on only the current-year growth rate of IT capital. Brynjolfsson and Hitt
(2002) also find significant lags in firm-level data, which nicely complements our more aggregative evidence.
         36
            In a different framework, Krueger and Kumar (2003) ask whether the different educational systems in the U.S.
and Europe (especially Germany) may be responsible for their different growth experiences in the 1990s. See also Lynch
and Nickell (2002).
                                                                                                                        28

growth (e.g., Stiroh, 2002b and Wolff, 2002). But given the GPT nature of ICT, the contemporaneous

correlation need not be positive—even if ICT is, in fact, an important contributor to measured TFP.

        Wolff does find that U.S. industries investing heavily in ICT have greater changes in their occupational

mix and the composition of intermediate inputs, consistent with substantial reorganization. Gust and Marquez

(2002) find that, in a sample of industrial countries, those with a more burdensome regulatory environment—

particularly regulations affecting labor market practices—adopted ICT more slowly and also had slower TFP

growth. Those findings are consistent with the notion that the uptake of ICT could affect measured TFP in the

sectors using the ICT. 37

        As discussed in Section 2, the Gust-Marquez regulatory variables look similar in the U.S. and U.K.. But

an open question is whether, for other reasons, U.S. society was better able to undertake the disruptions

associated with reorganization than was the United Kingdom (or other countries).

5.2      THE CROSS-INDUSTRY PATTERN OF ICT USE IN THE U.S. AND U.K.

        A small number of U.S. and U.K. industries account for a large share of ICT use. For example,

finance/insurance and business services/real estate own a disproportionate share of computers and software;

communications uses a majority of communications equipment. Manufacturing, which accounts for about a

fifth of GDP in both countries, has only 14 to 16 percent of computers and software in the two countries.

        Tables 6 and 7 show one measure of the importance of ICT capital—the ICT income share, i.e., the ratio

of profits attributable to ICT capital to value added. Between 1990 and 2000, the income share of ICT in the

U.K. increased by almost 50 percent, rising from 4.30 percent to 6.26 percent. The biggest rises occurred in

Communication (+10.1 percent), Wholesaling (+3.5 percent) and Non-durables (+2.66 percent). The overall

share is now above the corresponding figure for the U.S., 5.50 percent, which rose by much less in the 1990s. In

short, on this measure the U.K. has caught up.

        These income shares are central for growth accounting since the contribution of ICT capital to output

growth uses these shares as weights on growth in ICT capital services. That these shares are now similar means



        37
            In terms of standard growth-accounting, van Ark et al (2002) compare the U.S. and E.U., applying U.S. deflators
for ICT and equipment. (Earlier comparisons by Daveri (2002) and Schreyer (2000), using private sector sources for ICT
investment and stocks, and Colecchia and Schreyer (2002), using national accounts data, find results broadly consistent
with those of van Ark et al.) They find that the E.U. and U.S. had similar ICT growth rates over 1980-2000. But the E.U.
had a lower level of ICT investment. Consequently, the income share of ICT is much lower in the E.U. As a result, van Ark
et al. (2002) find a smaller direct ICT contribution via capital deepening in the E.U.
                                                                                                                       29

that we expect a given growth in ICT capital to have the same impact on output growth. In addition, the GPT

model above suggests that unobserved complementary capital should be closely related to observed share-

weighted ICT capital growth (perhaps with an adjustment for the relative price of ICT).

5.3      CROSS-INDUSTRY EVIDENCE ON THE ROLE OF COMPLEMENTARY INVESTMENT

        We now present some preliminary cross-sectional industry evidence for the U.S. and U.K. that is,

broadly speaking, consistent with the hypothesis that complementary investment associated with ICT has

macroeconomic consequences. In particular, we explore the correlations between productivity growth (or the

productivity acceleration) in the second half of the 1990s and various measures of ICT growth.

        Such regressions are, of course, fraught with the potential for misspecification, given the uncertainty

about how long it takes to build complementary capital and how long it takes for any spillovers to occur. In

addition, given the difficulty of identifying valid instruments, all of our regression results are OLS; they capture

any correlation between true non-ICT-related industry productivity growth and accumulation of ICT capital,

regardless of direction of causation (if causal at all). It follows that all of our regressions need to be interpreted

with a high degree of caution, and should be interpreted in the spirit of data exploration. Nevertheless, the

results suggest that the GPT model does help illuminate the effects of ICT on productivity.

        We begin by estimating equation (4.10). One important difficulty in implementing this equation is that

we don’t know the length of time over which it should operate. The time lags will depend on factors such as the

time it takes to learn/innovate/reorganize, which depend in large part on the adjustment costs associated with

that complementary capital investment. Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002) find evidence of long lags in firm-level

data; Howitt (1998) calibrates a model to U.S. data, and finds that the beneficial effects of a new GPT will not

be detected in conventional national accounts data for more than 20 years.

        To capture these notions in a loose way, we consider the following:

                           ∆pi95− 00 = ci + ak%i95−00 + bk%i90 −95 + ck%i80−90 + ε i
        In this regression, k% 95− 00 , for example, represents the average value of k% for computers and software

over the period 1995 to 2000. 38 Thus, we regress average industry TFP growth over the 1995-2000 period on




        38
           The regressions including communcations equipment as part of ICT gave results that were less significant—
arguably because of lack of sufficient adjustment for quality change in communications equipment.
                                                                                                                           30

average share-weighted computer-and-software capital growth in the 1980s, early 1990s, and late 1990s. (We

ignore the relative price terms in these regressions.)

         We take this equation for each industry as a cross-sectional observation. This approach imposes an

identical constant term on each industry, so that any industry-specific fixed effects show up in the error term.39

Thus, this regression will tell us, simply as a matter of data description, whether we can relate productivity

growth to relatively current as well as lagged ICT investment in the cross section. Given that we are running an

OLS regression, we cannot, of course, infer causation from the results. But this regression tells us whether

productivity growth from 1995-2000 was larger in industries that had rapid share-weighted ICT growth in the

late or early 1990s, the 1980s, or none of the above (with minimal restrictions on the timing and stability; these

are likely to differ across industries). In the results that follow, we omit ICT-producing industries, in order to

focus on links between ICT use and TFP. (Including ICT producers generally has little effect on coefficients.)

         We report results for only the following measures of k% :

                                                         k% = s KCOMP ∆ ln kCOMP

         Figure 1 plots this measure for the total economy-wide ICT and computer capital in the U.K. and U.S.

The figure shows substantial fluctuations over time for k% in the U.K. and a more stable pattern for the U.S.,

especially since 1990. This measure of k% drops the relative price terms from the alternatives discussed;

regression results below appeared more stable with this measure than the alternatives, although qualitative

results were generally similar.

         The first column of Table 8 shows that for the United States, the data are reasonably consistent with the

predictions of the theory section that, with long lags, ICT capital growth should be positively associated with

TFP growth; and that, controlling for past investments, contemporaneous ICT capital growth should be

negatively associated with TFP growth. The data definitely want different coefficients across the well-measured

and poorly measured groups, which we have addressed by interacting a ‘poorly measured’ dummy with all right-

hand-side variables.40




         39
            We find similar results for a specification that removes these fixed effects by making the dependent variable the
change in TFP growth from 1990-95 to 1995-2000.
         40
            The point estimates give a reasonable summary of what happens when we estimate regressions for the two
groups separately.
                                                                                                                           31

         We find that for both groups, ICT capital investments in the 1980s are positively correlated with the

TFP acceleration in the late 1990s. For the poorly measured industries, ICT capital investments from the early

1990s were also positively associated with the TFP acceleration. In the late 1990s, by contrast, share-weighted

capital growth is negatively correlated with the TFP acceleration, statistically significantly so for the poorly

measured industries. The results for the poorly measured industries are consistent with the firm-level evidence

in Bryjolfsson and Hitt (2002), which also suggest a lag length of about five years for U.S. firms.

    These results are fairly robust to outliers. Two influential observations (based on the Belsley-Kuh-Welsch

‘hat matrix’ test) 41 are wholesale and retail trade. Given the importance of those two industries in the growth

accounting, we experimented with omitting them. Doing so makes 1980s growth less important but 1990s

growth more important—1990-95 is more positive, and 1995-2000 is more negative. These results could

reflect that wholesale and retail trade have particularly long lags because of the importance of complementary

capital. They may also be industries where ‘endogeneity’ is particularly important (for reasons unrelated to GPT

arguments, ICT grew a lot in the late 1990s just when the scale of complementary investment was waning.)42

         For the U.K., the same regression shows little.43 Almost nothing is statistically significant; and the

signs are reversed from what theory suggested. The lack of significance could reflect mismeasurement—the

industry ICT capital stock data for the 1980s are not that reliable. But taken at face value, these results suggest

that either the slowdown in U.K. TFP growth was not driven by complementary capital investment; that our

ICT-based proxy for such investment works particularly poorly in the U.K. (perhaps because our specification is

too simple); or because the timing assumptions embedded in the estimating equation (on lags between observed

ICT investment and unobserved complementary investments) do not match the U.K. experience.

         Table 9 shows results from our second specification, equation (4.11), which we term the investment

accelerator specification. As noted in the theory discussion, this equation may perform better if the



         41
             One standard statistical test is to look at the diagonal of the ‘hat’ matrix, X’(X’X)-1X’.For a regression with k
coefficients and n observations, Belsley, Kuh, and Welsch (1980) identify influential observations as those where the
diagonal element of the hat matrix exceeds 2k/n.
          42
             Overall, results for the U.S. appear robust to outliers. Using the Belsley-Kuh-Welsch ‘hat matrix’ test,
influential observations telephone and telegraph; wholesale and retail trade; depository and non-depository institutions;
securities brokers; real estate; and business services. When those observations (who account for about 1/3 of GDP) are
omitted, there is no evidence that poorly measured and well-measured industries look different—including the dummy
variables would have only minor effects on coefficients or even standard errors. When these outliers are omitted, the data
suggest that lagged growth of share-weighted computers and software are positively correlated with late-1990s TFP growth,
whereas contemporaneous growth is negatively correlated with TFP.
          43
             Due to concerns about the data, we drop rail transport, leaving 29 industries.
                                                                                                                                             32

complementary investment is closely correlated in time with the ICT investment. We can estimate this equation

as it stands as a cross section, for different time periods. When we do so, we find the right hand side variables

are insignificant. This is not surprising since in the specification the constant term differs across industries and

may well be correlated with the explanatory variables. But a cross section regression imposes a common

constant. Hence we prefer to take first differences of both sides, thus eliminating the fixed effects. Our

dependent variable is now the acceleration of TFP growth: i.e., average TFP growth in 1995-2000 minus

average TFP growth in 1990-1995. The ICT and investment deepening terms are defined analogously as

changes in weighted growth rates. The estimating equation thus becomes:

                                                                (                              )
         (∆TFPi ,1995− 2000 − ∆TFPi ,1990−1995 ) = ci + a k%i ,1995− 2000 − k%i ,1990 −1995 − b ( i%i ,1995− 2000 − i%i ,1990−1995 ) + ε i

    Table 9 shows these results. For the U.S., this equation shows little, basically reflecting the point made

above, that the U.S. data want long lags.

        By contrast, in the U.K., the coefficients have the expected signs and are statistically significant. As

expected, ICT capital deepening enters with a positive sign, and is significant. Also as expected, investment

deepening has a negative sign; we find that it too is significant. Three industries are influential according to the

“hat” matrix, but dropping these has little effect on the results.

        This result is highly suggestive. But there is an important qualification. Multiplying these means by

their respective coefficients, we find that capital deepening would have raised TFP growth on average by 0.93

percent per annum, while investment deepening would have lowered it by 0.47 percent per annum, for a net

positive effect of 0.46 percent per annum. So though investment deepening did serve to retard measured TFP

growth, it cannot be said to account for the absolute fall in TFP growth.

        On the other hand, one would expect endogeneity considerations to be particularly important in this

equation, in a way that works against finding results consistent with the GPT hypothesis, even if true. In this

specification, we regress the TFP acceleration on the contemporaneous investment acceleration. Because

investment is endogenous, a positive industry-specific technology shock could lead to higher investment as well

as higher TFP, thereby biasing the coefficient on investment upward. Hence, the true investment coefficient

may be more negative than we find in our OLS regression.

        In sum, the U.S. evidence is consistent with the notion that ICT investments affect measured

productivity growth with a long (but variable) lag. Contemporaneously, they are correlated with a lot of
                                                                                                                     33

diverted resources towards unmeasured complementary investment, and hence—once one controls for lagged

growth rates—they are negatively correlated with output. It appears that in the U.K., the rapid growth of ICT

investment after 1995—which was higher than the growth of the ICT capital stock—appreciably retarded the

measured growth of productivity. Comparing the second with the first half of the 1990s, the change in TFP

growth is positively and significantly related to the change in ICT capital deepening. But it appears significantly

and negatively associated with ICT investment growth. In the long run, of course, ICT capital and investment

must grow at the same rate. So this suggests one reason for thinking that TFP growth in the U.K. must

eventually recover, at least somewhat. The U.K. data suggest that the lags are much shorter—and that

complementary investment was going on in the late 1990s. But although this effect is present, it is not large

enough to explain the TFP slowdown in the U.K. in the late 1990s.

5.4      EXPLAINING THE U.K. EXPERIENCE

        The basic story that we wish to tell based on our simple model of complementary capital investment is

one where measured output growth is contemporaneously low when complementary investment is high, and

high in periods after such investment has taken place and the stock of complementary capital is high.

Furthermore, the theory suggests that complementary capital investment will generally be high when observed

investment in ICT capital times the share of such capital is high.

        Apart from the evidence presented in Table 9, another reason we took this approach is that the aggregate

data appear consistent with this story. Look at the summary statistics by sub-sample for the U.S. and the U.K.

given in Table 1, and at Figure 1. The regressions used the industry-level versions of the variable plotted in the

top panel of Figure 1, the computer share times the growth rate of the computer stock, but we also plot the

analogous series for software in the lower panel. We conclude that the U.K. had far larger swings in this key

variable than did the U.S., especially in the period before 1995. As we discussed before, the regressions with

U.S. data support the hypothesis that the positive effects of IT investment and—we assume—complementary

capital investment show up in measured output with a lag of about five years. (Two important industries in the

U.S., wholesale and retail trade, prefer longer lags, but these industries are not as important for explaining the

U.K. experience as they are for the U.S.)

        If investments become productive with roughly a five-year lag, Figure 1 shows that the broad outlines of

the macro experience in the U.K. are consistent with the story that we are telling. Note that the U.K. had
                                                                                                                   34

extremely high levels of k% for both computers and software in the 1985-90 period, and both dropped sharply in

the 1990-95 period as the U.K. fell into a deep recession. Our story suggests that measured TFP growth in

1985-90 should have been low, and measured growth in 1990-95 should have been high. This is the pattern one

finds in Table 1, where TFP growth in 1985-90 was 1.2 percent, and growth in 1990-95 was 1.6 percent. Note

that this difference is almost certainly understated, because the TFP numbers have not been corrected for

cyclical mismeasurement coming from changes in utilization. The period of the late 1980s was a time of strong

output and fixed investment growth (3.1 and 7 percent, respectively), while the figures for the early 1990s are

1.8 and –0.8 percent. It is amazing that a period with a deep recession should show an increase in measured TFP

growth at all, and indicates to us that the effects of IT and complementary capital investment may be

quantitatively important.

         If one accepts this story, then it should be unsurprising that the next five years were bad ones for

measured TFP growth in the U.K. The reason is two-fold. First, the level of IT investment in the previous five

years was low, so the contribution of complementary capital was presumably low. Second, the U.K. also had a

very steep increase in computer and software investment in the second half of the 1990s—in many ways a

stronger surge than the one labeled historic in the U.S. According to our story, this should also have been a time

of high unmeasured investment in complementary capital. Both considerations have the effect of reducing

measured TFP growth.

         There is also suggestive evidence consistent with the idea that the U.K. was experiencing a surge of

supply-driven growth in the period 1995-2000. Note that over this period the U.K. was going from a deep slump

to a boom. The average growth rate of output grew by 1 percentage point, and of investment by 7.2 percentage

points, while unemployment fell a full 2.8 percentage points to 6.7 percent, a level not seen for decades. And in

the midst of this boom, the inflation rate also fell, by 1.4 percentage points to 2.5 percent. Admittedly, it is not

clear that embedding our story in a short-run macro model must lead to this result, since we claim that TFP

growth was higher than recorded because output growth was also higher than recorded, which should have put

extra upward pressure on prices. But it is suggestive, in part because it is difficult to see how else one might

reconcile the full set of facts.

         Having said all this, it remains true that although regression results for U.K. industries are somewhat

consistent with this GPT story, the point estimates do not allow us to explain the recent growth and TFP
                                                                                                                     35

experience based on investment in unmeasured complementary capital. That is, the regression suggests that the

net effect of ICT is to raise, not lower, TFP growth when comparing the first and second halves of the 1990s.

        But as we have already discussed, the form of the equation that appears to work better for the U.K. is

also subject to larger endogeneity concerns, with a bias against finding support for the GPT view; this provides a

potential, but so far only speculative, reconciliation. A second possibility is that the accumulation of

complementary capital requires large inputs of skilled labor. This suggests that our proxy for complementary

investment may be too simple; we may also need to allow for cross-industry variations in skill intensity. Indeed,

it could be that even if complementary investment explains the divergent TFP performance, it is not, in fact, as

closely linked to ICT capital accumulation in the U.K. as in the U.S.

6. Conclusions

        The “crime” or puzzle we investigated in this paper was the slowdown in U.K. productivity growth,

both TFP and labor, in the second half of the 1990s, which coincided with rising U.S. productivity growth. We

found that for the private non-farm economy, the slowdown was nearly a percentage point. Moreover, the

slowdown was particularly marked in industries like wholesale and retail trade that were among the major

contributors to the U.S. improvement.

        Many proposed explanations for the weak U.K. productivity performance seem insufficient. For

example, the differences do not reflect differences in the importance of ICT production or a failure to account

for falling labor quality. Nor do the genuine differences in national accounts methodology explain the

differences: the U.K. slowdown persists even when the same methodology is applied to both countries.

        Earlier work for the U.S. suggested that the disruption cost associated with investment might play a role

since, in periods when investment is rising, such costs may reduce measured productivity growth. Investment

accelerated even more sharply in the U.K than the U.S. in the second half of the 1990s, so this suspect has a case

to answer. We found that disruption costs could account for at most about a third of the measured slowdown.

        Given that the most obvious suspects for the U.K. performance seem to have alibis, we take an

alternative path. 44 In particular, we believe that understanding why the U.K. has not yet seen a TFP acceleration



        44
          In keeping with the mystery theme of this paper, now seems an appropriate time to quote Sherlock Holmes:
“[W]hen you have excluded the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.” We are
dumbfounded anew by Holmes’s genius, since we have never managed to exclude enough impossibles to reduce the
improbable-but-true set to a singleton!
                                                                                                                 36

requires that we understand why, in fact, the United States did. Our answer emphasizes ICT and the role of

complementary investments/innovations induced by it. ICT seems to many observers to be the major locus of

innovation in recent decades; but at the same time, we find that most of the measured TFP acceleration took

place outside of the production of ICT goods. These two observations are consistent with the predictions of

models of ICT as a general purpose technology.

        In particular, a pervasive theme of the microeconomic literature on ICT is the need for organizational

change if full advantage is to be taken of the new technology. We modeled organizational change as the

accumulation of intangible “complementary” capital. This means that the typical firm is also producing a stream

of intangible output that constitutes gross investment in complementary capital. Some of this output, such as the

production of own-account software, is now explicitly measured in the national accounts, but arguably much is

not. To the extent that there is unmeasured output and unmeasured capital, conventional TFP growth will be a

biased measure of true technical change. Growth in the complementary capital stock tends to raise measured

TFP growth, but growth of complementary investment tends to reduce it, by diverting resources from normal

production. During the transition to a new steady state, the net bias can go either way; but the more that the

growth rate of complementary investment (unmeasured output) exceeds that of complementary capital

(unmeasured input), the more likely is it that measured TFP will be below the true rate of technical change. This

GPT view also suggests that current productivity growth may be influenced by the accumulation of

complementary capital in earlier periods.

        A fundamental difficulty, of course, is that complementary investment and capital are unmeasured.

However, theory suggests that observed ICT capital and investment should serve as reasonable proxies. In line

with this GPT view, the U.S. industry data suggest that ICT capital growth is associated with industry TFP

growth with long (and perhaps variable) lags of 5 to 15 years. Indeed, controlling for past growth in ICT capital,

contemporaneous growth in ICT capital is negatively associated with TFP growth in the late 1990s. We find

this result encouraging, since to our knowledge no other empirical exercise has connected aggregate and

industry-level U.S. TFP performance in the late 1990s either to the persuasive macro models of General Purpose

Technologies or to the stimulating micro empirical work that supports the GPT hypothesis.

        The results for the U.K. are weaker. But we do find that in the U.K. the rapid growth of ICT investment

post 1995, which was higher than the growth of ICT capital, appreciably retarded the measured growth of

productivity. Comparing the second with the first half of the 1990s, the change in TFP growth is positively and
                                                                                                                    37

significantly related to the change in ICT capital deepening. But it is significantly and negatively associated

with ICT investment growth (the latter weighted by the investment-output ratio). These results are consistent

with the notion that U.K. firms were accumulating complementary capital intensively in the late 1990s, in

contrast with the U.S. accumulation much earlier. Hence, in this view, the U.K. economy most likely

experienced strong underlying TFP growth despite the poor measured figures. But the point estimates suggest

that as a whole, ICT investment raised, not lowered, overall TFP growth in the U.K. in the late 1990s—i.e., they

do not explain the pervasive TFP slowdown.

        The results in this paper are suggestive but, as yet, it is too early to indict complementary capital as the

sole culprit in the crime. It is, of course, always a challenge to provide incontrovertible proof of a hypothesis

that implies that both inputs and output are unobserved! Nevertheless, several puzzles remain. In particular, if

our hypothesis is correct, why did the U.K. invest later in complementary capital than the U.S.? Even granted

that they did invest later, why are the coefficients on contemporaneous ICT investment so low?

        One hypothesis that we are considering in current research is that there may have been a shortage of

skilled, college-educated managers to implement required reorganizations earlier. This hypothesis would

suggest that our model (and our empirical specification) is too simple—we need a third factor, skilled labor, to

make complementary capital productive or else its accumulation cheaper. Certainly, the evidence that the skills

premium has widened in the U.K. (as it did earlier in the U.S.) is potentially consistent with this view. This

hypothesis also suggests that on its own, ICT might be an inadequate proxy to fully capture the complementary

investments we think are going on.

        In addition, although labor and product market regulation generally appear similar, differences in

competitive intensity could still play a role. A major contrast between the U.S. and the U.K is in wholesale and

retail trade. As we have seen, productivity rose sharply in these industries in the U.S. post-1995 while falling in

the U.K. Some (e.g., Lovegrove et al., 1999) have blamed restrictive planning laws in the U.K. which may have

hampered the growth of “big box” retailing. But it is not immediately clear why the major U.K. retailers (who

also carry out the wholesale function) should invest less in ICT just for this reason: why does a comparatively

low store size in a chain of supermarkets inhibit the retail firm from investing in computerised inventory control

systems?   However, if planning laws reduce competitive intensity by blocking entry, then they may inhibit

investment too. At all events, the role of competitive intensity also seems a fruitful topic for future research.
                                                                                                             38

                                                     Bibliography


Aaronson, D. and D. Sullivan. (2001). Growth in worker quality. Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank
       of Chicago, (25:4): 53-74.

Abbade, J. (1999). Inventing the Internet. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, and P. Howitt. (2002). Competition and innovation: An inverted
       U relationship. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper 9269.

Baily, M. N. and R. Lawrence. (2001). Do we have a new e-conomy? American Economic Review 91:308-312.

Bakhshi, H., Oulton, N. and J. Thompson. (2003). Modelling investment when relative prices are trending:
       theory and evidence for the United Kingdom. Bank of England Working Paper 189.

Basu, S. and J. G. Fernald. (2001). Why is productivity procyclical? Why do we care?” In New Developments
        in Productivity Analysis, edited by C. Hulten, E. Dean, and M. Harper,. Cambridge, MA: National
        Bureau of Economic Research.

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and Matthew D. Shapiro. (2001). Productivity growth in the 1990s: Technology,
        utilization, or adjustment? Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 55:117-165.

Basu, S. and M. Kimball. (1997). Cyclical Productivity with unobserved input variation. Cambridge, MA:
        National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper 5915 (December).

Bean, C. and Crafts, N. (1996). British economic growth since 1945: relative economics decline … and
       renaissance? In Economic growth in Europe since 1945, edited by N. Crafts and G. Toniolo, Cambridge,
       New York and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.

Belsley, D., E. Kuh, and R. Welsch. (1980). Regression Diagnostics: Identifying Influential Data and Sources of
        Collinearity. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

Berners-Lee, T. (1999). Weaving the Web: The Past, Present and Future of the World Wide Web by Its Inventor
       (with M. Fischetti). London: Orion Business Books.

Bessen, J. (2003). Technology adoption costs and productivity growth: The transition to information technology.
        Manuscript.

Bosworth, B. P. and J. E. Triplett. (2002). ‘Baumol’s Disease’ has been cured: IT and multifactor productivity
       in U.S. services industries. Manuscript, Brookings Institution.

Bresnahan, T. F. (undated). The mechanisms of information technology’s contribution to economic growth.
       Prepared for presentation at the Saint-Gobain Centre for Economic Research.

Bresnahan, T. F. and M. Trajtenberg. (1995). General purpose technologies: ‘Engines of growth?’ Journal of
       Econometrics 65(Special Issue, January):83-108.

Brookings Institution. (2002). Workshop on economic measurement service industry productivity: New
       estimates and new problems, May 17, 2002. Summary of the Workshop.
       http://www.brook.edu/es/research/projects/ productivity/workshops/20020517_summary.pdf
       (Downloaded March 16, 2003).
                                                                                                            39

Brynjolfsson, E. and L. M. Hitt. (2000). Beyond computation: Information technology, organizational
        transformation and business performance. Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(4):23-48.

Brynjolfsson, E. and L. M. Hitt. (2002). Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence, MIT Working Paper
        4210-01 (Web site draft revised November 2002).

Brynjolfsson, E. and S. Yang. (2001). Intangible assets and growth accounting: Evidence from computer
        investments. Manuscript.

Burriel-Llombart, P. and J. Jones. (2003). A quality-adjusted labour input series for the UK (1975-2002). Bank
        of England Working Paper, forthcoming.

Caselli, F. (1999). Technological revolutions. American Economic Review 89(March).

Chandler, A. D. Jr. (1977). The Visible Hand. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Card, D. and R. B. Freeman. (2001). What have two decades of British economic reform delivered? Cambridge,
       MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper 8801.

Colecchia, A and P. Schreyer. (2002). ICT investment and economic growth in the 1990s: is the United States a
       unique case? A comparative study of nine OECD countries. Review of Economic Dynamics 5(2):408-
       42.

Council of Economic Advisors. (2001). Annual report of the Council of Economic Advisors. In the Economic
       Report of the President, January.

Council of Economic Advisors. (2003). Annual report of the Council of Economic Advisors. In the Economic
       Report of the President, February.

Crafts, N. and M. O’Mahony. (2001). A perspective on UK productivity performance.” Fiscal Studies 22
        3:271-306.

Daveri, F. (2002). The new economy in Europe. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 18(Autumn): 345-362.

David, P. A. and G. Wright. (1999). General purpose technologies and surges in productivity: Historical
        reflections on the future of the ICT revolution. Manuscript.

De Long, J. B. (2002). Productivity Growth in the 2000s. Paper presented at NBER Macroeconomics Annual
      Conference. Cambridge, MA, April.

Feldstein, M. (2001). Comments & analysis. In The Financial Times, June 28.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan. (2002). The link between aggregate and micro
        productivity growth: Evidence from retail trade. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
        Research. NBER Working Paper 9120.

Gordon, R. (2003). High tech innovation and productivity growth: does supply create its own demand?
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper w9437.

Greenspan, A. (2000). Technology and the Economy. Speech before the Economic Club of New York, January
       13. Available at www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2000.
                                                                                                               40

Greenwood, J., Hercowitz Z., and P. Krusell. (1997). Long run implications of investment-specific technological
      change. American Economic Review 87:342-362.

Greenwood, J. and M. Yorokoglu. (1997). 1974. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 46:49-
      95.

Griliches, Z. (1994). Productivity, R&D, and the data constraint. American Economic Review 84(1):1-23.

Grimm, B. T., Moulton, B. R., and D. B. Wasshausen. (2002). Information processing equipment and software
       in the national accounts. Paper prepared for the NBER/CRIW Conference on Measuring Capital in the
       New Economy, April 26-27, 2002, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. Available from
       www.bea.gov.

Gust, C. and J. Marquez. (2000). Productivity developments abroad. Federal Reserve Bulletin, 86(10): 665-81.

Gust, C. and J. Marquez. (2002). International Comparisons of Productivity Growth: The Role of Information
        Technology and Regulatory Practices. Labour Economics Special Issue on Productivity edited by Gilles
        Saint-Paul, forthcoming.

Hall, R. E. (2001). The stock market and capital accumulation. American Economic Review
        91(December):1185-1202.

Helpman, E. (ed). (1998). General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998.

Helpman, E. and M. Trajtenberg. (1998). Diffusion of general purpose technologies. In General Purpose
      Technologies and Economic Growth, edited by E. Helpman. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Hobijn, B. and B. Jovanovic. (2001). The information-technology revolution and the stock market: evidence.
        American Economic Review 91(December):1203-1220.

Hornstein, A. and P. Krusell. (1996). Can technology improvements cause productivity slowdowns? In NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual edited by Bernanke and Rotemberg. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research.

Howitt, P. (1998). Measurement, obsolescence, and general purpose technologies. In General purpose
        technologies and economic growth, edited by E. Helpman. Cambridge and London: MIT Press.

Hulten, C. R. (1996). Quality change in capital goods and its impact on economic growth. Cambridge, MA:
        National Bureau of Economic Research . National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 5569.

Jones, C. (1995). R&D-based models of economic growth. Journal of Political Economy, 103(August):759-784.

Jorgenson, D. W. (2001). Information technology and the U.S. economy. American Economic Review
       91(March): 1-32.

Jorgenson, D. W., Ho, M. S., and K. J. Stiroh. (2002). Growth of U.S. industries and investments in information
       technology and higher education. Manuscript, October 7, 2002.

Jorgenson, D. W., and K. J. Stiroh. (2000). Raising the speed limit: U.S. economic growth in the information
       age. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:125-211.

Jovanovic, B. and P. L. Rousseau. (2003). Mergers as Reallocation. Unpublished, NYU, February.
                                                                                                              41


Krueger, D. and K. Kumar. (2003). US-Europe differences in technology adoption and growth: The role of
       education and other policies. Manuscript prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference, April 2003.

Krusell, P., Ohanian, L., Rios-Rull, J., and Gianluca Violante. (2000). Capital-skill complementarity and
        Inequality: A Macroeconomic analysis. Econometrica 68(September):1029-54

Laitner, J. and D. Stolyarov. (2001). Technological change and the stock market. Manuscript, University of
         Michigan.

Lequiller, F. (2001). The new economy and the measurement of GDP growth. INSEE Working Paper G 2001 /
        01. Paris.

Lovegrove, N. C., Fidler, S., Harris, V. J., Mullings, H. M., Lewis, W. W., and S. D. Anthony. (1999). Why is
       labor productivity in the United Kingdom so low? The McKinsey Quarterly anthologies. McKinsey
       Global Institute.

Lynch, L. and S. Nickell. (2001). Rising productivity and falling unemployment: can the US experience be
       sustained and replicated?” In The Roaring Nineties, edited by A. Krueger and R. Solow. New York:
       Russell Sage Foundation.

McKinsey Global Institute. (2001). US productivity growth 1995-2000: Understanding the contribution of
      information technology relative to other factors. Washington, D.C.: McKinsey Global Institute. October.

Nickell, S. (1996). Competition and corporate performance. Journal of Political Economy 104:724-46.

Nickell, S. and G. Quintini. (2001). The recent performance of the UK labour market. Talk given to the
        Economic Section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 4th September, in
        Glasgow. Available from www.bankofengland.co.uk.

Nordhaus, W.D. (2002). Productivity Growth and the New Economy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
       2.

O’Mahony, M. and de Boer, W. (2002). Britain’s relative productivity performance: updates to 1999. Final
      report to DTI/Treasury/ONS. Available at www.niesr.ac.uk.

Oliner, S.D. and D E. Sichel. (2000). The resurgence of growth in the late 1990s: Is information technology the
        story? Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(Fall):3-22.

Oliner, S.D. and D E. Sichel. (2002). Information technology and productivity: Where are we now and where
        are we going? Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 87(3):15-44.

Oulton, N. (1995). Supply side reform and UK economic growth: what happened to the miracle? National
        Institute Economic Review 154(November):53-70.

Oulton, N. (2001a). Must the growth rate decline? Baumol’s unbalanced growth revisited. Oxford Economic
        Papers 53:605-627.

Oulton, N. (2001b). ICT and productivity growth in the UK. Bank of England Working Paper 140. Available at
        www.bankofengland.co.uk.

Oulton, N. (2002). ICT and productivity growth in the UK. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 18(3):363-379.
                                                                                                                  42


Oulton, N. and S. Srinivasan. (2003). Capital stocks, capital services and depreciation: an integrated framework.
        Bank of England Working Paper 192. Available at www.bankofengland.co.uk.

Parker, R. and B. Grimm. (2000). Recognition of business and government expenditures for software as
        investment: methodology and quantitative impacts, 1959-98. Washington, DC: Bureau of Economic
        Analysis. Available at www.bea.doc.gov.

Schreyer, P. (2000). The contribution of information and communication technology to output growth: a study
       of the G7 countries. Paris: OECD. STI Working Papers 2000/2.

Schreyer, P. (2002). Computer price indices and international growth and productivity comparisons. Review of
       Income and Wealth 48(March):15-31.

Shapiro, M. (1986). The dynamic demand for capital and labor. Quarterly Journal of Economics

Stiroh, K. J. (2002a). Are ICT spillovers driving the New Economy? Review of Income and Wealth 48(1):33-58.

Stiroh, K. J. (2002b). Information technology and the U.S. productivity revival: what do the industry data say?
        American Economic Review 92(5):1559-1576.

Tevlin, S. and Whelan, K. (2000). Explaining the Investment Boom of the 1990s. Journal of Money, Credit and
        Banking (forthcoming).

van Ark, B., Melka, J., Mulder, N., Timmer, M., and G. Ypma. (2002). ICT investment and growth accounts for
       the European Union, 1980-2000. Final Report on ICT and growth accounting for the DG Economics
       and Finance of the European Commission, Brussels. Downloaded from
       http://www.eco.rug.nl/GGDC/dseries/Data/ICT/euictgrowth.pdf.

Wolff, E. N. (2002). Productivity, Computerization, and Skill Change. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
        Economic Research. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8743.
                                                                                                                                                            43

                                                                     TABLE 1
                                                         MACRO PERFORMANCE: U.S. VS. U.K.
                                                               (annual percent change)
                                                                           United States
                                                                     Whole economy                                  Private non-farm business
                                                       Bus. Fixed Equip. and               Unemploy-     PCE
                                              GDP                                 Hours                            Output/ hour      TFP
                                                          Inv.    Soft. Inv.                 ment      Inflation
                       1980-95                 2.9        5.7        3.3           1.7        7.1        3.8           1.5            0.5

                                  1980-85      3.1        6.8        4.5           1.4        8.3        5.0           1.8            0.5
                                  1985-90      3.2        4.1        1.1           2.1        5.7        3.7           1.4            0.5
                                  1990-95      2.3        6.2        4.3           1.7        6.7        2.7           1.5            0.6

                       1995-00                 4.0        10.5       8.4           2.5        5.4        1.9           2.5            1.1


                                                                       United Kingdom
                                                                     Whole economy                                  Private non-farm business
                                                       Bus. Fixed Equip. and               Unemploy-    RPIX
                                              GDP                                 Hours                            Output/ hour      TFP
                                                          Inv.    Soft. Inv.                 ment      Inflation
                       1980-95                 2.5        3.1        3.7           0.0        9.9        5.4           3.4            1.2

                                  1980-85      2.1         3.2       3.9           -0.3      11.1        7.1           3.5            1.4
                                  1985-90      3.1         7.0       6.5            2.0       9.0        5.2           2.6            0.6
                                  1990-95      1.8        -0.8       1.1           -1.5       9.5        3.9           3.9            1.7

                       1995-00                 2.8        6.4        10.0          0.8        6.7        2.5           2.9            0.8

Sources: U.S.: GDP, business fixed investment, equipment and software investment, and PCE inflation are from Bureau of Economic Analysis and (except for
        business fixed investment) refer to whole-economy averages. Unemployment rates are from Bureau of Labor Statistics and are averages over the
        respective periods. Hours, output per hour, and TFP are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics multifactor productivity dataset, and cover the private
        nonfarm business sector. TFP incorporates an adjustment for labor quality.

        U.K.: Output, business fixed investment, hours, unemployment, and inflation are from the Office of National Statistics and (except for business fixed
        investment) refer to whole-economy averages. Equipment and software investment is from the Office of National Statistics and Oulton and Srinivasan
        (2003). Output per hour and TFP are derived from the UK dataset constructed for this paper and cover the private nonfarm business sector. While the
        hours data match the aggregate, the output data differ from the National Accounts because of adjustments to ICT investment in each industry and the
        output of the financial services industry. TFP incorporates an adjustment for labor quality.
                                                                                                                                                                                             44

                                                                 TABLE 4
                       U.S.: TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH BY INDUSTRY IN PRIVATE NON-FARM BUSINESS, 1990-2000
                                                           (percent change, annual rate)

                                                                                                                                                                         Share of Nominal
                                                                       Productivity (Gross Output terms)2                Productivity (Value - Added terms)3               Value Added
                                                                     pre-1995      post-1995    Acceleration            pre-1995      post-1995   Acceleration                (2000)
           Private Non-Farm Economy
           (adjusted for labor quality)1                                     0.30            0.98              0.68             0.59            1.92              1.32               100.0
                    contribution of labor quality                           0.16             0.09             -0.08            0.32             0.16
           Private Non-Farm Economy
           (NOT adjusted for labor quality)                                  0.47            1.06              0.60             0.91            2.08              1.17

           Mining                                                            1.61            -1.16            -2.77             3.08           -2.15             -5.23                 1.6
           Manufacturing                                                     0.86             0.97             0.11             2.40            2.76              0.36                20.6
                    Nondurables                                              0.34            -0.39            -0.73             1.02           -1.20             -2.22                 8.7
                    Durables                                                 1.34             2.08             0.74             3.47            5.61              2.14                12.0
           Construction                                                      0.22            -0.58            -0.80             0.39           -0.98             -1.38                 6.1
           Transportation                                                    0.83             0.77            -0.06             1.69            1.53             -0.16                 4.2
           Communication                                                     1.47             0.01            -1.46             2.31            0.15             -2.16                 3.7
           Electric/Gas/Sanitary                                             0.27             0.11            -0.16             0.42            0.17             -0.25                 2.9
           Wholesale Trade                                                   1.08             3.39             2.32             1.66            5.37              3.71                 9.2
           Retail Trade                                                      0.49             3.23             2.74             0.83            5.33              4.50                11.8
           Finance & Insurance                                               0.24             1.95             1.72             0.44            3.39              2.96                10.7
                    Finance                                                  0.86             2.96             2.10             1.31            4.90              3.59                 7.5
                    Insurance                                               -0.81             0.05             0.86            -1.49           -0.06              1.44                 3.2
           Business Servs. & Real Est.                                       0.68             0.24            -0.45             1.12            0.40             -0.72                13.9
                    Business Services                                        0.41            -0.89            -1.30             0.60           -1.40             -2.00                 7.1
                    Real Estate                                              0.87             1.27             0.40             1.55            2.34              0.79                 6.8
           Other Services                                                   -1.19             0.05             1.24            -1.89            0.08              1.97                15.2

           ICT producing4                                                    2.41            4.43              2.02             5.52           11.02              5.50                 5.3
           Non ICT producing                                                 0.32            0.80              0.48             0.61            1.54              0.93                94.7
           Well Measured Ind.5                                               0.82            1.44              0.62             1.80            3.17              1.37                54.2
           Well Measured (excluding ICT producing)                           0.62            1.04              0.42             1.35            2.24              0.88                48.9

1. For productivity purposes, our definition of private non-farm business excludes holding and other investment offices along with miscellaneous services,
since consistent input and output data are unavailable for these industries.
2. A sector’s gross-output TFP growth is calculated as a weighted average of the industry-level gross-output TFP growth rates; the weight for each industry is the
 ratio of its Domar weight to the sum of the Domar weights for that sector.
3. Value-added TFP growth is defined as (gross output TFP growth)/(1-share of intermediate inputs). Implicitly, this uses the Tornquist index of value added for a sector.
4. For the US: ICT-producing includes industrial machinery and electronic and other electrical equipment sectors.
5. US and UK: Well-measured industries include mining, manufacturing, transportation, communication, electric et al., and wholesale and retail trade.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 45

                                                                 TABLE 5
                      U.K.: TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH BY INDUSTRY IN PRIVATE NON-FARM BUSINESS, 1990-2000
                                                       (percent change, annual rate)



                                                                                                                                                                        Share of Nominal
                                                                                                             1                                                  2
                                                                      Productivity (Gross Output terms)                 Productivity (Value - Added terms)                Value Added
                                                                   1990-1995     1995-2000 Acceleration               1990-1995     1995-2000 Acceleration                   (2000)
           Private Non-Farm Economy with Quality
           adjusted labor input                                             0.79            0.35             -0.44            1.72            0.78              -0.94                    100.0
                                Labor quality adjustment                    0.39            0.21            -0.18             0.84            0.48             -0.37
           Private Non-Farm Economy with Non-Quality
           adjusted labor input                                             1.18             0.56            -0.62            2.56             1.25            -1.31                     100.0

           Mining                                                           5.69             0.89            -4.79            9.20             1.34            -7.86                      3.8
           Manufacturing                                                    1.11             0.51            -0.59            3.03             1.42            -1.61                     23.2
                                Nondurables                                 1.04            -0.03            -1.07            2.81            -0.07            -2.89                     15.7
                                Durables                                    1.26             1.57             0.31            3.52             4.57             1.05                      7.5
           Construction                                                     0.67            -0.31            -0.98            1.77            -0.84            -2.61                      6.6
           Transportation                                                   1.62             0.50            -1.12            3.46             1.18            -2.28                      6.5
           Communication                                                    3.26             2.61            -0.65            4.83             4.77            -0.06                      3.9
           Electric/Gas/Sanitary                                            1.22             0.99            -0.24            3.11             2.61            -0.50                      3.1
           Wholesale Trade                                                  2.22             2.13            -0.09            3.44             3.71             0.28                      6.8
           Retail Trade                                                     0.38            -0.58            -0.96            0.73            -1.17            -1.90                     13.0
           Finance and Insurance                                            0.90             1.56             0.66            1.89             3.87             1.98                      6.2
                             Finance
                             Insurance
           Business Services and Real Estate                                0.64             0.53            -0.11            1.13             0.99            -0.14                     21.0
                            Business Services
                            Real Estate
           Other Services                                                   1.06             0.10            -0.96            2.05             0.19            -1.86                       5.7

           ICT producing3                                                   1.45             3.75             2.30            3.82           10.46              6.64                      3.3
           Non ICT producing                                                1.16             0.41            -0.75            2.52            0.93             -1.59                     96.7
           Well Measured Ind.4                                              1.38             0.59            -0.79            3.10             1.37            -1.73                     60.5

           Well Measured (excluding ICT producing)                          1.37            0.37             -1.00            3.90             0.45            -3.45                     57.2

1. A sector’s gross-output TFP growth is calculated as a weighted average of the industry-level gross-output TFP growth rates; the weight for each industry is the
ratio of its Domar weight to the sum of the Domar weights for that sector.
2. Value-added productivity growth equals (gross output productivity growth)/(1-share of intermediate inputs)
3. For the UK: ICT-producing comprises electrical engineering and electronics (SIC92 30-33)
4. For the UK: Well-measured industries comprise mining, manufacturing, transportation, communication, electricity, water and gas supply, wholesale, retail trade and waste treatment.
                                                                                                                                                                                         46


                                                                   TABLE 6
                                 U.S. : COMPUTER, SOFTWARE, AND COMMUNICATION SHARES OF VALUE - ADDED REVENUE
                                                                    (percent)

                                                                        1990                                                                              2000
                                       Computer             Software       Communication            Total ICT           Computer             Software        Communication   Total ICT
 Private Non-Farm Economy                1.35                 1.24             1.70                   4.29                1.60                 2.31              1.59          5.50

Mining                                    0.18                 0.15               0.32                 0.65                 0.27                0.36             0.13          0.77
Manufacturing                             1.09                 0.94               0.56                  2.59                1.32                1.81             0.61          3.74
         Nondurables                      0.76                 0.66               0.31                 1.73                 1.00                1.37             0.53          2.89
         Durables                         1.48                 1.26               0.84                 3.58                 1.74                2.32             0.71          4.77
Construction                              0.42                 0.37               0.12                  0.91                2.89                4.01              1.19         8.09
Transportation                            0.16                 0.14               1.52                 1.82                 0.64                0.87             2.44          3.95
Communication                             1.23                 1.09               30.51                32.83                1.70                2.51             24.81        29.01
Electric/Gas/Sanitary                     1.33                 1.14               3.18                  5.65                1.25                1.66              3.10         6.01
Wholesale Trade                           2.78                 2.48               0.87                  6.12                4.37                5.34             1.19         10.91
Retail Trade                              1.03                 0.85               0.20                  2.08                1.04                1.35              0.31         2.69
Finance & Insurance                       3.35                 3.56               1.16                 8.06                 2.60                5.22             0.87          8.69
         Finance                          3.90                 4.16               1.38                 9.44                 3.01                6.09             0.98         10.08
         Insurance                        1.97                 2.06               0.59                 4.62                 1.55                2.99             0.61          5.15
Business Servs. & Real Est.               1.98                 1.86               0.64                 4.48                 1.87                2.08             0.47          4.43
         Business Services                4.75                 4.48               0.95                 10.17                3.44                3.82             0.70          7.96
         Real Estate                      0.05                 0.04               0.42                 0.50                 0.13                0.14             0.23          0.49
Other Services                            0.69                 0.62               0.25                 1.56                 0.67                1.23             0.27          2.16

ICT producing1                            1.84                 1.57                1.39                4.80                 2.49                3.29             0.83          6.60
Non ICT producing                         1.32                 1.23                1.73                4.28                 1.56                2.27             1.64          5.47
Well Measured Ind.2                       1.15                 0.99                2.39                4.53                 1.58                2.06             2.41          6.06
Well Measured (excluding
ICT producing)                            1.08                 0.94                2.53                4.55                 1.51                1.96             2.59          6.06
1. For the US: ICT-producing includes industrial machinery and electronic and other electrical equipment sectors.
2. US and UK: Well-measured industries include mining, manufacturing, transportation, communication, electric et al., and wholesale and retail trade.
Note: “Holding and other Investment Offices” data were included in finance, and other services contains more services than had been previously defined for our
calculations of productivity.
Source: Author’s calculations using payments to ICT capital from BLS and nominal value added from BEA.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   47


                                                                   TABLE 7
                                 U.K. : COMPUTER, SOFTWARE, AND COMMUNICATION SHARES OF VALUE - ADDED REVENUE
                                                                                              (percent)

                                                                              1990                                                                          2000

                                              Computer            Software     Communication             Total ICT          Computer            Software     Communication               Total ICT
      Private Non-Farm Economy                       1.97                 1.58          0.75                     4.30              2.82                 2.59          0.85                       6.26

  Mining                                                0.04                0.11               0.22               0.37                0.02                0.22               0.11               0.35
  Manufacturing                                         0.68                1.08               0.29               2.05                1.74                1.25               0.29               3.28
                       Nondurables                      0.53                0.97               0.47               1.98                2.41                1.55               0.68               4.64
                       Durables                         0.75                1.13               0.20               2.08                1.41                1.11               0.11               2.62
  Construction                                          0.31                2.85               0.49               3.65                0.41                3.11               0.26               3.78
  Transportation                                        0.35                0.35               0.02               0.73                1.10                1.32               0.02               2.44
  Communication                                         1.12                0.22               6.85               8.19                5.51                2.03              10.72              18.26
  Electric/Gas/Sanitary                                 0.78                0.65               0.83               2.25                1.34                1.10               0.86               3.30
  Wholesale Trade                                       2.99                1.55               0.89               5.43                4.74                4.12               0.55               9.40
  Retail Trade                                          1.03                0.95               1.28               3.26                1.21                1.46               0.55               3.22
  Finance and Insurance                                 5.51                5.90               0.05              11.46                4.75                8.53               0.09              13.37
                    Finance
                    Insurance
  Business Services and Real Estate                     6.13                1.84               0.39                8.37               5.70                3.74               0.58              10.02
                   Business Services
                   Real Estate
  Other Services                                        1.55                1.20               1.37                4.12               1.58                1.88               1.16               4.61

  ICT producing                                         0.81                1.87               1.21                3.88               2.79                2.61               0.83               6.23
  Non ICT producing                                     1.49                1.25               0.60                3.34               2.74                2.57               0.82               6.13
  Well Measured Ind.                                    0.91                0.90               0.90                2.71               2.00                1.59               1.05               4.64
  Well Measured (excluding ICT
  producing)                                            0.92                0.84               0.88                2.64               1.90                1.55               1.03               4.48

1. For the UK: ICT-producing comprises electrical engineering and electronics (SIC92 30-33)
2. For the UK: Well-measured industries comprise mining, manufacturing, transportation, communication, electricity, water and gas supply, wholesale, retail trade and waste treatment.
                48


                                                              TABLE 8
                                    ICT REGRESSIONS WITH CURRENT AND LAGGED ICT CAPITAL GROWTH
               Using         k% = s K ∆ ln k        as right-hand regressor, with computers and software as measure of capital
                                                       United States               United Kingdom
C                                                                -0.001                       -0.09
                                                                (0.003)                      (0.48)
k%1980 −1990                                                       4.1                        1.39
                                                                  (7.2)                      (3.56)
k%1990−1995                                                       17.4                        0.65
                                                                  (5.7)                      (2.80)
k%1995− 2000                                                       -8.9                       0.65
                                                                  (4.8)                      (1.48)

 Poorly*C                                                       0.011                          -0.18
                                                               (0.0058)                       (0.48)
 Poorly* k%1980 −1990                                            15.3                          2.77
                                                                 (7.7)                        (3.56)
 Poorly* k%1990−1995                                              -8.1                         -1.60
                                                                 (6.6)                        (2.80)
 Poorly* k%1995− 2000                                            -10.1                         -2.60
                                                                 (5.8)                        (1.48)

R2                                                               0.38                          0.10
Observations                                                      49                            28

Robust standard errors in parentheses. We omit ICT-producing industries (this has relatively little effect on coefficients).


                                                                    TABLE 9
                                                 INVESTMENT-ACCELERATION FORM OF ICT REGRESSION




                                                       United States                  United Kingdom
( k%   i ,1995 − 2000   − k%i ,1990−1995     )         0.21
                                                       (2.27)
                                                                                      4.41
                                                                                      (1.02)
( i%i ,1995 − 2000      − i%i ,1990−1995 )             -0.04
                                                       (0.75)
                                                                                      -1.63
                                                                                      (0.41)
R2                                                     0.01                           0.41
Observations                                           49                             28

Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Constant term not shown. We omit ICT-producing industries (this has relatively little
        effect on coefficients).
 49



                            FIGURE 1.
               CAPITAL SHARE TIMES CAPITAL GROWTH


1.25
                      Capital Share x Capital Growth (computers)


1.00


                 UK
0.75



0.50
                                                                   US

0.25




       1980   1985                1990                 1995                  2000


 0.6                             Capital Share x Capital Growth (software)


 0.5

                UK
 0.4


 0.3

                                                                    US
 0.2


 0.1

       1980   1985                1990                 1995                  2000
