                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            SEX-RELATED WAGE DIFFERENTIALS AND WOMEN'S
        INTERRUPTED LABOR CAREERS -- THE CHICKEN OR ThE EGG




                          Reuben Gronau




                      Working Paper No. 1002




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           October 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper /11002
                                                  October 1982



Sex—Related Wage Differentials and Women's Interrupted Labor Careers——
                        The Chicken or the Egg


                               ABS TRACT



     Sex—related wage differentials are almost universal. Economists tradi-
tionally tend to attribute a major fraction of the differential to the
difference in on—the—job training. This difference is in turn often ex-
plained by the lower profitability of this investment for women who plan
to interrupt their careers for family reasons. An alternative explanation,
that women do not invest because of lack of investment opportunities owing
to employers' expectation that they will drop out of the market, has been
given little attention in the literature. The present paper tries to
ascertain, theoretically and empirically, the validity of this argument.

     Employers have little stake in their employees' investment in general
human capital. Thus, if employers' decisions affect investment, this has
to be investment in firm—specific human capital. The paper explores the
way employers and employees share in such an investment and the way em-
ployers' conceptions about women's labor force attachment can affect the
size of the investment, women's wages, and their labor—force separation rate.

     To test the hypothesis that employers' expectations affect women's
wages, I examine the effect of plans for labor—force separation on wages.
It is assumed that employers are not aware of individual plans, so that
absence of a plan's effect on wages can serve as prima facie evidence for
the hypothesis. In a simultaneous—equation system it is observed that
wages affect plans but plans do not affect wages. Further investigation
indicates that the skill intensity of jobs which men and women occupy is
a major determinant of the wage gap. This variable is very sensitive to
past performance (as measured by labor—force experience and tenure) and
future plans in the case of men, but is hardly affected at all by these
variables in the case of women.


                                   Reuben Cronau
                                   Department of Economics
                                   The Hebrew University
                                   Jerusalem, ISRAEL
+                                                                          +




SEX-RELATED WAGE DIFFERENTIALS AND WOMEN'S INTERRUPTED

LABOR CAREERS--THE CHICKEN OR THE EGG*




The wage differential between men and women is a thorn in the side of

economists, theorists and empiricists alike. Theorists are by and large

at a loss to explain the persistence of such a wage gap in a competitive

environment, and empiricists are hard pressed to identify the factors

that explain it.    In their seminal study of this problem Mincer and

Polachek (1974) identified on-the-job investment as the major culprit.

Women expect to drop out of the labor force when they have children, the

argument goes, and hence invest less in on-the-job training. Consequently,

they enjoy only moderate wage rises over their life cycle, so that the

wage gap widens with age. Mincer and Polachek argue that differences in

labor-force experience explain 70 percent of the hourly-earnings

differential between married men and women, but they also admit that

post-school investment on the job may be indirectly affected by earnings

differentials. In their words, "indirect effects occur in that the

existence of market discrimination discourages the degree of market

orientation in the expected allocation of time and diminishes incentives


*
    This   research was supported by NSF grants SOC 79-07848 and SES-7812878
    AOl. Helpful comments were provided by Gary Becker, Jennifer Gerner,
    Edward Lazear, Jacob Mincer, Sherwin Rosen, and members of workshops
    at Columbia University, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Ohio State
    University at Columbus, the University of Chicago and Yale. Special
    thanks are due to my research assistant Gregory Tang, whose devotion
    made this study feasible.
+                                   —2-                                     +



to   investment in market-oriented human capital. Hence, the lesser job

investments and greater depreciation of female market earning power may

to some extent be affected by expectations of discrimination" (Mincer and

Polachek, 1974, p. S104).

       This by now traditional explanation runs into some difficulties

when used to explain the persistence of the wage gap. The l960s and 1970s

have witnessed a continuous increase in the labor-force participation rate

of women (and in particular married women), a change accompanied by a

decline in the labor-force drop-out rate of married women with young

children. Nevertheless, there has been no obvious decline in the wage

gap (Fuchs, 1974; Oaxaca, 1977),1

        In view of these difficulties, this study explores an alternative

hypothesis, which argues that the traditional explanation suffers from

reverse causality. Putting it informally, it is not that women do not

want to invest in their careers, but that they are not given adequate

opportunities to do so. Employers who expect women to drop out of the

labor force when they have children are reluctant to admit them to positions

that involve invesetment. Consequently, women are cofined to jobs which

promise little wage promotion. Once they have children, they do not (given

the nature of their job) find it worth while to stay in the labor force,

thus confirming their employers' expectations and creating a vicious circle

they cannot break.

        This argument, often advanced by women, abounds with difficulties.



     Of course, it can be argued that the increase in participation rates is
     associated with a decline in the average labor-force experience of women
     and that the average wage gap would have increased if that for the more
     experienced women had not narrowed.
+                                    -3-                                     +


On a formal level, wage increases are usually explained by investment in

general human capital, i.e., training that increases a person's producti-

vity regardless of where he is employed. However, in the absence of

binding labor contracts, this kind of training is fully financed by the

employee himself (in the form of wages which fall short of productivity

during the initial stages of the investment). Since employers do not

participate in this type of investment, it is not clear why they should

prefer men to women unless it is assumed that they are pure discriminators.

     Any formalization of our argument must therefore rely on the invest-

ment in specific training. Specific training is defined as training that

increases a person's productivity only in the firm in which he was

trained. Given the uncertainty of future employment, the employee may be

reluctant to invest in this kind of training on his own (since he may be

fired at no cost to the employer), and so will be the employer (since the

employee may quit at no cost to himself). Consequently, this investment

will be undertaken only if employer and employee can reach some agreement

on how to share costs and returns.

     The investment in specific training affects the slope of the age-

earnings profile inasmuch as the employee shares in the costs and reaps

part of the returns, and insofar as the investment in specific and general training

is a joint venture. When it is difficult to separate the specific and the

general elements in training, and the one cannot be acquired without the

other, the employer's reluctance to invest in his employee's specific

skills may prevent the latter from increasing his general skills.

     To formalize this hypothesis, I present a formal model analysing the

sharing of costs and returns of the investment in specific training. The

general discussion is followed by a discussion of the specific case of
+                                               -4-                          +



women: how do the employer's conceptions (or misconceptions) about women's

quit rate affect the sharing and overall size of the investment?

       To confront this hypothesis with the traditional one, I examine the

effect on wages of planned labor—force quits. It is assumed that if a

woman plans to quit the labor force she has no reason to disclose her

plans to her employer. Thus, the intention to drop out of the labor force

will depress wages if women who plan to do so reduce their investment in

training. On the other hand, plans to quit should have no effect on wages

if access to training is controlled by an employer who has no knowledge of

the plans. The absence of any plans-to--quit effect on wages can therefore

serve as prima facie evidence for our hypothesis.

       The relationship between wages and plans to quit is far from being a

simple one—way relationship. Plans may affect wages (through their effect

on investment in human capital), but lower wages may also induce quits.

One cannot expect, therefore, to detect the effect of plans on wages in a

simple one-way regression scheme. What is required is a simultaneous

scheme where plans are affected by wages and wages are affected by plans.

Estimating such a model, using panel data, reveals that it is lower wages

which encourage quits but that quits do not affect wages.

       To test the sensitivity of the results to the specification of the

model, the model was expanded to incorporate on-the-job training directly.

I distinguish between investment in training and the training required for

the specific job (there is direct information on both variables in the

data of the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics). Both variables

affect wages, and are (or might be) in turn affected by planned quits

(which depend on wages). The estimation of the four-equation model

reveals that there is no fundamental difference between men and women in
+                                 -5--                                    +



the wage, labor-force separation, and on-the-job training equations (the

only major difference is in the sensitivity of quits to demographic changes

such as marriage, separation, children, and residential mobility). On the

other hand, the sex differences in the job-requirements equation are most

pronounced. On the average, women occupy jobs which require substantially

less training than men's jobs. They are concentrated in occupations which

involve less training, and within broad occupations they occupy positions

which need less training. Their experience in the labor force and with

the firm has much less weight in determining the quality of their jobs,

and their future plans (in sharp contrast to those of men) are not consi-

dered at all.

     In evaluating these results, observe that when race, marital status,

union membership and some other variables are controlled for, women earn

rather less than three quarters of the men's hourly wage. The sex

differences in current training and job requirements explain about two-

thirds of this differential (i.e., if women had on-the-job training and

if they got jobs which require the same training as men's jobs, the wage

gap would shrink to 10 percent). The sex difference in labor-force

separations (which in turn is traced to the sex difference in the effect

of the demographic factors on separation) explains much of the difference

in training. It cannot, however, account for the difference in job

requirements. In particular, if men quit the labor force at the same rate

as women, if they had the same experience, tenure, and occupational

structure, they would have jobs that are substantially inferior (in terms

of training) to those they actually hold, and consequently much lower

wages. On the other hand, if women were to reduce their quit rate,

increase their labor-force experience and tenure, and change their
+                                    —6--                                      +



occupational   composition, they would obtain only marginally better jobs,

and the wage gap would narrow by very little. What is required to close

the gap is a structural change. It is only if their observed characteristics

(e.g., labor-force experience and tenure) were given the same weight as

men's in the allocation of jobs by employers that women would have an

incentive to change their participation behavior and reduce their quit rates.



I. LABOR TURNOVER AND INVESTMENT IN SPECIFIC CAPITAL


Specific human   capital   has traditionally been regarded as a major

determinant of labor turnover. The investment in skills which are

specific to the firm is an endeavor shared by employer and employee, each

being reluctant to undertake it on his own. The larger the investment,

the greater the stake of the two partners in the continuation of the

partnership, and hence the lower the labor turnover.

     In this section the relationship between specific human capital and

labor turnover is formalized.      I discuss the decline in job separation as

tenure increases, the effect of investment in specific human capital on

the age-earnings profile, the effect of the reservation wage on this

investment, and the role of the employer's conception of his employees'

career attachment.

     The formal presentation is based on a recent model by Hashimoto (1979)

and incorporates some modifications by Carmichael (1981). Hashimoto sets

out to solve an old puzzle: how do employer and employee share the costs

and returns of the investment in specific human capital? The problem is

as old as the concept of specific human capital itself. It was Becker

(1962) who first posed the question: given that the returns to the

investment are conditional on the continuation of the employee's connection
+                                   -7-                                   +


with   the firm, and given the high cost of enforcing labor contracts, how

would each party secure its share in the returns when the other threatens

to sever the connection? Becker suggested that the two parties share in

the costs of the investment, so as to make breaking up the partnership

costly to both. However, he did not specify the rules which should govern

the allocation of costs and returns. It was later argued (Mortensen, 1978)

that these rules are immaterial if labor contracts can be renegotiated and

wage offers are matched whenever one of the parties threatens to sever the

relationship, or alternatively, when each party has to compensate the

other for damage caused by the break-up of the partnership.

       Hashimoto addresses the question of what form the labor contract

takes when information on some aspects of the partnership is not shared

equally and is costly to convey. For example, the employee's productivity

is known to the employer but not (or only partly) to the employee, and

wage offers from outside (or, in Carmichael's formulation, job satisfac-

tion) are known to the employee but are costly to convey to the employer.

In this case, matching wage offers or ascertaining damages becomes very

costly (and the incentive for fraud very great) and one has to revert to

other ways of resolving the partnership problem. Hashimoto's solution,

which is defined within a two-period optimization scheme, involves a

pre-negotiated two-tier wage scheme: in the first period the employee

draws a wage which is lower than his marginal productivity (and the wage

he could get elsewhere) so as to pay for his share in the cost of the

investment; for the second period he is promised a wage which exceeds his

alternative wage (but falls short of his expected marginal productivity),

where the premium in excess of the alternative wage represents the

employee's share in the returns (the employer's share being the difference
+                                  -8-                                   +


between marginal productivity and the wage). The returns are shared so

as to maximize the overall benefits of the association. The wage rate,

which determines the apportionment of the benefits, is determined so that

the marginal gain to one party from a change in the share equals the

marginal loss to the other.

      Formally, it is assumed that employer and employee are both risk

neutral. The investment in specific human capital takes place in the

first period at a cost C. The outcome of the investment process is

known only at the end of that period. The employer learns the employee's

productivity and the employee learns the amount of satisfaction (i.e.,

psychic income) he derives from the job. The employer decides to fire

the employee if his realized productivity falls short of the prenegotiated

wage, and the employee decides to quit when his total wage package (wage

plus job satisfaction) falls short of his reservation wage.

      Let M denote the mean productivity of employees who have invested

in the firm-specific human capital, n., the random component in producti-

vity (varying from one person to the next) and W the prenegotiated wage;

the employee is fired if




He quits his job when


            W+ 0< R

where 0 denotes job satisfaction and R the reservation wage.2 Let


2 It is assumed that ri    is known only to the employer and 0 only to
    the employee so that W cannot be renegotiated in order to prevent or
    reduce job separations if either of these inequalities holds.
+                                                   -9-                                                   +



f(n)     and q(O) denote the density functions of the random components r

and 0, respectively. The probability of the employee being fired is

then


(1)          F=F(W-M)=prob(n<W-M),

where F is the distribution function of r. Similarly, the probability

of a quit is


(2)          Q = Q(R -      W)       =   prob(0    < R   -




where     Q is the distribution function of 8. For simplicity it is assumed

that the mean values of r and 0 are zero and that they are uncorrelated,


            E(ri) =    E(0)      =    cov(,       0) =   0.


        A wage-raise increases the employee's share of returns and reduces

the probability of his quitting but increases the risk of his being fired.

This risk may be reduced by reducing the wage but only at the expense of

an increase in the probability of quitting. The optimum wage rate is that

which maximizes the joint gains from the association. These gains (G)

can be reaped only if the association persists, and they are composed of

the gains in productivity and psychic income associated with the

investment,


(3)         G = (1 -       F)(l      -   Q)[(M    - R)   +E(nln >      W -   M) +   E(eI0     > R - W)]

              =   (1   -   F)(l      -
                                         Q)[(W
                                                    - M) +
                                                                i0(R
                                                                       -



where     u(Z) = E(z        -
                                 ZIz     >   Z)   denotes the expected residual (i.e., the

difference between the truncated mean and the truncation point) .                                  The

    In the notation used here, z =                  11       or 0, and Z =          (W - M)     or (R -
+                                                 -10-                                    +



optimum wage satisfies the condition

                                       - W) =                  -
(4)              (W -     M)A0(R                     - W)X(W

where       X(Z) =       f(Z)/{l   -    F(Z)]    is the hazard rate, i.e., the conditional

density of z at Z given z                       Z. The average benefits accruing to

each partner from the continuation of the partnership are measured by 1;5

the   marginal change in the probability that the partner will break the

association is measured by X; and equation (4) indicates that the

optimum wage balances the expected losses from a break-up of the

partnership.

       The optimum wage (i.e., the optimum allocation of returns) determines

the probability of job separation and the gains to be reaped from the

investment. The optimum size of the investment (h) is determined by the

traditional equality of marginal returns and marginal costs


                     —
                 h       h
The share of each partner in the returns determines his share in the

costs.

       How are the wage rate, the probability of separation and the size of

the investment affected by an increase in the employee's mean productivity


      respectively. To derive (3) the expected net gains of the two parties
      can   be   broken into three disjoint events: the employee quits, he is
      fired, and the association continues. For details see Hashimoto (1979).
'

      Equation       (4) and the subsequent equations in this section are proved
      in the appendix.

      For example, 1i0(R - W) = (W - R) + E(OIe > R - W).                The first term
      measures the pecuniary rewards, the second term the nonpecuniary re-
      wards, from continuation of the employment.
+                                     —11-                                     +



(M)?6 To answer this question, the nature of the distributions of the

random components n and U must be defined more explicitly. For the

rest of this section it will be assumed that these distributions are

normal z     N(O, o) .    In   this case an increase in productivity, other

things being equal, increases the employer's share and his incentive to

maintain the association. The employer responds by increasing the wage

rate, allowing the employee to participate in the increased rewards. The

wage increase, however, falls short of the increase in productivity (i.e.,

W - M   declines). Consequently, the probability of firing and the proba-

bility of quitting both diminish, and the expected gain accruing to each

partner increases. The reduced risk of job separation and the increased

gains result in an increase in C and in the investment.

      An increase in the reservation wage, on the other hand, reduces the

employee's incentive to stay at the job. It leads to increased wage

demands, to a decline in the employer's profits, and hence an increase

in the probability of job separation (at the initiative of either party).

The gains from the association diminish and so does the investment in

specific human capital.

      An increase in the stock of specific human capital increases the

6 For analytical purposes, it is for the time being assumed that this
    change in M is not associated with changes in the variance of fl,
    nor is it accompanied by a change in the reservation wage R. At this
    point the presentation departs from that of Hashimoto and Carmichael.

    The results of this section apply to a much wider range of distributions,
    whose properties are described in the appendix (I have so far not been
    able to specify the general family of distributions for which the
    conclusions hold). They are, however, by no means universal. The
    exponential distribution (which satisfies A = 1/p =     constant)   is a
    nbtable counter example, where an interior solution does not exist.
+                                  -12-                                   +



employee's   productivity and should increase his wage rate and reduce the

probability of job separation.8 However, when it comes to investment in

human capital, it is very difficult to draw the line between investment

in specific and general skills. The two are very often joint outputs of

the investment process, and there is no way of acquiring one sort of skill

without acquiring also the others (for example, one cannot acquire the

skills required to become an executive without learning the features of

thetrade which are specific to the firm). Thus, an increase in the stock

of human capital may raise the employee's productivity outside as well as

in the firm. In that case, the increase in M is accompanied by an

increase in the reservation wage, R.      Both changes raise the wage rate.

However, so long as the increase in the reservation wage falls short of

the increase in productivity (dR < dM),      the investment in specific human

capital reduces both quit rates and firing.9



II. THE INVESTMENT IN HUMAN CAPITAL AND THE MARRIED     WOMAN



Ignoring   personal variation in productivity and job satisfaction, the

investment in specific capital, wages, and job separation are affected by

the employee's expected productivity in the firm and by his reservation

wage. It is legitimate to assume that except for occupations which require


8
    Thus G/h =   (G/M) (M/h) > 0   since both G/M and M/h are positive.

    Throughout the analysis it is assumed that the random components n
    and    0 are invariant to the stock of human capital. The analysis
    can easily be modified for the case where job satisfaction and personal
    variation in productivity increase with the investment in human capital.
    Hashimoto (1979) and Carmichael (1981) assume that M, R, r, and 0
    increase at the same rate. If this is so, the investment in specific
    human capital should not affect the separation rate.
+                                  -13-                                      +



physical   strength, there is no inherent productivity difference between

the sexes. Sex-related differences in specific (and perhaps general) on-

the-job investment, wages, and tenure are therefore attributable to

differences in the reservation wage.

       A man's reservation wage is usually the best wage offer he can

generate outside the firm. Barring unexpected events, such as drastic

changes in his state of health, his expected reservation wage changes

systematically with his stock of general human capital. As shown in the

preceding section, so long as the change in their reservation wage falls

short of the change in their productivity in the firm, men's wages and

specific investment are expected to increase and their separation rates

to decrease, as tenure increases.10

       This is not true for women. In the labor force, women (in particular

the married) usually face a three-way choice: to stay with their firm, to

move to another firm, or to withdraw from the labor force altogether (i.e.,

to choose self-employment in the home sector). Women's reservation wage

is the alternative market wage or the value of home productivity, whichever

is the higher. In contrast to men's reservation wage, where the major

source of variation over time is the accumulation of human capital, the

reservation wage of married women varies sharply with the value of time

at home. Thus, it varies with demographic changes (marriage, divorce,

more children) and with the husband's income, not to mention husband-

instigated residential mobility (Mincer, 1978). These factors are subject


10
     This is true subject to two qualifications:   (a) Given a finite time
     horizon, the investment in specific as in other forms of human capital
     will decline as the date of retirement approaches; and (b) like general
     capital, specific capital may be subject to obsolescence.
+                                    —14-                                   +



to sharp variation over time; very often they also involve asymmetry of

information: they are known to the woman but not to her employer.11

      To illustrate the woman's decision process, let it be assumed that

she faces two alternative wage schedules (Figure 1): a flat wage schedule

WA involving no investment in human capital,     and a wage schedule WB

associated with investment in specific capital. The latter is composed

of a lower initial wage WB      in the first period and a higher wage

(WB2 > WB1) thereafter. The woman's value of home production is            in


the first period but (because of demographic changes) it jumps to R2 in

the second (where WA < R2 < WB).12 A man who faces a constant value of

home production of        will regard it as an inferior alternative, and

make his decision whether to invest or not on the basis of WA and WB

alone. A woman facing an exogenous jump in her home production can opt

for one of two alternatives. She can either opt for job A in the first

period and drop out of the labor force thereafter, or she can choose job

B and invest in human capital. The latter will be preferred if the

present value of the WB income stream exceeds the best alternative,

namely WA in the first period and R2 in the second. If the woman

chooses WB she will stay at her job (and, of course, in the labor force)

throughout her two-period career.

      Throughout this paper I shall ignore another factor which may play an
      important role in the sex-related differences in mobility and tenure.
      Men's interfirm mobility may be impeded by transaction costs (e.g.,
      costs of search) which are much lower for a woman who chooses self—
      employment at home. The interaction of search costs and the investment
      in specific capital and their effect on labor turnover are discussed

      by Jovanovic (1979).
    12 In Figure 1 it is assumed that   R1 > WB1. This assumption is not
      essential to the discussion.
+                                                                                      -15-            +




    Figure 1.




         w



                                                                                  —
       WE2                                                                                    WB




       R2
                                                                                  —           R



                                                                                  ——
       WA                                                                                     WA



       R1



       WB1




             ________________________________________________________________ L


         0                                                                   1                     t
+                                 -16-                                    +



     However, as Figure 1 conveniently illustrates, given the higher home

reservation wage R2, women have less incentive to invest in human capital

than men (who are assumed to have a fixed home wage of R1 throughout).

Furthermore, given their higher reservation wage in period 2 (R2 > WA),

it has been shown that women may demand a higher wage, reducing the

profitability of the investment from the employer's point of view. Both

factors will result in a lower level of specific investment. Furthermore,

if specific and general capital are joint outputs, the employer's reluctance

to participate in the specific investment reduces the level of general

training.

      Up to this point the analysis does not in essence depart from the

tradition. It does, however, give rise to some new questions. Of special

interest is the question of misconceptions concerning the career attachment

of women. Assuming that the value of home production is unobserved by the

employer, can a bias in his expectations concerning the woman's value of

time and the probability that she will quit be self-fulfilling?13

      To answer this question one has to return to Hashimoto's model

described in the preceding section. It was argued there that the optimum

wage is the one that maximizes the joint gains from the investment in

specific human capital. It was implicitly assumed that the two parties

are in complete agreement about the parameters of the decision rules: the

joint gains, function G [equation (3)J is therefore acceptable to both.

13 The employer is usually not aware of the employee's personal plans
    concerning children, marriage, divorce, or residential mobility. Even
    if he knows the woman's family plans, he may be unable to assess her
    quit probability because it will to a large extent depend on the
    family's willingness to use substitutes for the woman's time (market
    services or time of other members of the household).
 +                                               -17-                                                          +



 If not, and if the parties differ in their estimates of these parameters,
the problem has to be reformulated so as to take separate account of the

gains accruing to each party.

         The gains to the employer                       accrue only so long as the

association between him and the employee continues, and are equal to the

difference between the employee's marginal productivity and the wage the

employer is committed to pay,


(6)          Ge =      - F)(1     -
                                      Q)[(M      -
                                                      W) +           >W    -
                                                                               M)}
                =
                    (l-F)(l-Q)(W-M)
The employee gets wage W plus job satisfaction so long as the partner-

ship survives; should the partnership collapse, he gets the reservation

wage R,


(7)          C = (1    -
                           F)(1   -
                                      Q)[W   +       E(eJo   > R -   W)]   +   [1    -   (1   -
                                                                                                  F)(l   -
                                                                                                             Q)]R
                = R + (1     -
                                 F)(1   -                - W)
                                            Qfl.i0(R

        From the employer's point of view the optimum wage is the one

maximizing Ge• The employer will press for lower wages so long as his

increased profits are not offset by the risk of the employee quitting the

firm.     A necessary condition for an optimum is


                      W)M(W       -
(8)          A0(R -                   M) = 1


where We is the employer's optimum wage.1 Roughly speaking, lowering

the wage rate by $1 increases profits by $1 but increases the risk of a

quit by X0 where the loss associated with a quit is                                           Similarly,


      Equation (8) and subsequent results are proved in the appendix.
+                                         -18-                                 +



the employee's gains are maximized when the wage he receives, W,

balances gains with potential losses


(9)          Ari(Ww -            - W)   = 1



        Comparison of (8) and (9) indicates that a wage which is optimal

from the employer's point of view is not necessarily optimal from the

employee's. Furthermore, comparison of (8) and (9) with the necessary

condition for joint maximization {equation (4)] indicates that neither

of them maximizes the joint returns of the partnership. In maximizing

his own gains, each party ignores the loss imposed on the other by a

change in the wage rate. Hence, not surprisingly, the individual optimum

diverges from the joint optimum.

        This divergence is demonstrated in Figure 2. The employee's desired

wage, W, is assumed to exceed that preferred by the employer, We•'5

Consequently, at W the marginal gain to the employee from raising the

wage falls short of the marginal gain to the employer from lowering it,

G < G. Similarly, at We an increase in wages entails marginal gains

to the employee which exceed the marginal losses to the employer. These

differences give rise to a wage renegotiation whose outcome is W0, the

wage at which the marginal gain to one party equals the marginal loss to

the other (G' =
                w       e

15 This is true in the case where r and 0 have uniform distributions
      (see appendix).       I suspect that it is also true in general (or at least
      for all the distributions discussed in the preceding section), but I
      have not yet been able to prove this. The point is, however, not
      essential to the rest of the discussion.

16 The renegotiation may assume the form of trading W against changes
      in the share of investment costs, C.
                                                                   +

    Marginal gains              __________________ ____________
                     (D-
                      G)




                           CD



                                                      /
                                                 /
                                                                  I.
                                                                  '4D


0                           0




                                   >-.       >        :1
              C)                I'_,     —
           CD—
          0



                                                                  +
+                                       —20-                                 +


          The separate analysis of the employer's and employee's motives allows

the incorporation of misconceptions. Assume that the employer is wrong

about the value of the employee's home productivity. If he overestimates

the employee's reservation wage and if the marginal probability of a quit

(i.e., the hazard rate) increases with the reservation wage

[X0(R -      W)/R}   >   0,'   he will be more reluctant to press for lower wages

for fear of inducing a quit. Consequently, the negotiated wage (W1 in

Figure 2) will be higher, but so will the probability of the employee's

being fired. The higher wage and the higher probability of separation

reduce the profitability of the employer's investment and his investment

in specific capital. Thus, while in the short run this form of

misconception might increase the employee's share in the returns, it will

in the long run lower his wage rate (and flatten his wage-age profile)

because the investment has been curtailed. The lower wage rate makes the

employee more prone to quit when his reservation wage really goes up, thus

confirming the employer's expectations.

          In an extreme case, the employer depicted in Figure 1 believes that

his employee's second-period reservation wage will exceed his productivity

in the market, M. In that case the employer refuses to participate in

the investment altogether. Thus the woman may be barred from investing in

specific human capital (i.e., in job B) and is forced to pick jobs which

involve little investment in training, such as job A; the result is

frequent entries and exits from the labor force associated with fluctua-

tions in her home wage.'8

     This is true whenever the distribution of 0 is characterized by an
     increasing hazard rate (e.g., when the distribution is uniform or
     normal), orwhen aq/0 > 0         in the relevant range.
18
     It   may be argued that the mere willingness to choose job B may serve
+                                   - 21   -                               +


       It   should be noted that when quit expectations are biased upward no

self-correcting mechanism exists. The employee who is offered a higher

wage (than if his quit probability had been correctly estimated) is

naturally not going to refuse, thus undercutting his long-run prospects

for investment in specific capital and wage advance. The higher quit

probability associated with the flat wage—age profile generates a vicious

circle of self-fulfilling prophecies.'9



III. WAGE RATES AND TURNOVER--PRELIMINARY EVIDENCE


The preceding section established that self-confirming expectations

resulting in lower wages, a slower wage increase over the life cycle, and

a higher turnover rate are a definite theoretical possibility. Can the

direction of causation be ascertained empirically? Is it labor-force (or

more precisely, planned) separations that lead (through lower on-the-job


    as a signal that the woman intends to stay in the labor force (since
    job A would be preferred by anyone restricting his job tenure to one
    period). This is admittedly true in the initial period, but need not
    be true subsequently, when the wages in job B may exceed those in
    job A. For more on the issue of the investment in specific capital
    as a signal, see Salop and Salop (1976).

    Note that underestimation of the reservation wage and the quit rate is
    subject to a self-correcting mechanism. When underestimating R, the
    firm may push the wage below the optimum level W0. This will generate
    a suboptimal level of investment and will raise the quit rate. The
    latter will tell the employer that his estimate of R is off the mark.
    If the employer overestimates R, the effect on wages can be offset
    only if the employee underestimates his future productivity M, and
    therefore moderates his wage demands. Even so, the perceived gains
    from the investment will be underestimated, leading to suboptimal
    investment and self-fulfilling expectations on both sides.
+                                   -22-                                 +



investment) to lower wages, or is it lower wages which lead to labor-
force separations? Put in the context of sex-related wage differentials,

the question can be reformulated: is it women's plans which shape their

age-earnings profiles, or are they shaped by the employer's expectations?2°

This section reports on some preliminary tests, while the final verdict

is reserved for the next section.

      A prerequisite for separating the two hypotheses is data on the

person's labor-force attachment as reflected in his future participation

plans. It is reasonable to assume that this piece of information, which

is, naturally, known to the employee, is not known to the employer. If

a person contemplates leaving the labor force (or quitting the firm) he

will as a rule be wiser not to disclose his intentions to his employer

prematurely. Similarly, an employee's declarationthathe is not going to

quit the firm in the foreseeable future may be discounted on the grounds

that it serves his interest to convey the impression that he is going to

stay with the firm, whatever his actual intentions. It may of course be

argued that the employee may hesitate to reveal his quitting plans to an

outside interviewer for the same reasons that he is reluctant to divulge

them to his employer. But one can then replace the data on plans by data

on their realization, naniely, the employeets subsequent behavior


20
     Sandell and Shapiro (1980) address themselves to the first part of this
     question. They report that the investment in general training of young
     women who plan to be out of the labor force at age 35 is lower than of
     those who reported 5 years earlier that they intend to stay in the labor
     force. Their study ignores the possibility that plans may change, and
     their findings are restricted to young women (aged 19-29 in 1973). Even
     if these findings are accepted, they do not preclude employers' expec-
     tations from affecting women's age-earnings profiles.
 +                                  -23--                                    +


 (specifically, his subsequent exit from the labor force).

        The data on women's labor force participation plans (or their

realization) are the cornerstone of my test. In order to disentangle

cause and effect, I employ a simultaneous-equation scheme in which both

wage rates and planned (or future) labor exits are the endogenous

variables. The test is in essence a test of omission. If it is shown

that women's wages affect their planned exits but planned exits do not

affect wages, it will serve as prima facie evidence of employer discri-

mination. If this is the case, it will be argued that women's plans do

not matter, the effective constraint being that the employer's expectations

prevent women from attaining higher wages irrespective of whether they

plan to stay in the labor force.

       Given the woman's wage in period t, the test requires knowledge of

her labor force plans and their subsequent realization. To obtain this

sort of data panel studies have to be used. The findings reported in this

paper are based on the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID) conducted

by the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan. The

ninth wave (1976) of this panel contained data of women's (as well as

men's) labor-force plans,2' and the subsequent waves (1977-79) provide

data on their realization.



21 The 1976 questionnaire contained the question, "Do you think you will
     keep on working for the next few years, or do you plan to quit?" The
     1976 wave serves as a convenient base for two other important reasons:
     (a) In that year heads of households and their wives were asked the
     same questions (in other years heads were asked about the activities
     of their spouses); and (b) the 1976 wave is one of the few containing
     information on the wife's tenure on the job (i.e., position) and with
     the firm (i.e., the same employer).
+                                 -24-                                    +



      The sample contains information on about 1,900 women (married and

non-married) who were employed in a civilian job in 1976.22 A similar

sample of about 2,400 men served as a control group. About 10 percent

of the women in the sample (12 percent of the married women) reported that

they intended to quit the labor force within the foreseeable future (versus

3.5 percent of men). Actual exists, however, by far exceeded reported

intentions. Almost 30 percent of the women and 7 percent of the men

dropped out of the labor force for at least one year (more precisely,

reported being out of the labor force in at least one of the subsequent

waves). Moreover, as Table 1 indicates, only 20 percent of the women

quitting in 1977-79 reported any intention of doing so in 1976, and over

one third of those who planned to quit did not do so within the next 3

years. Since we cannot separate unexpected exits from unreported plans,

we shall use the data on plans and realizations interchangeably.

      Hourly earnings are computed as the ratio of labor income and annual

hours. Following tradition (e.g., Mincer, 1974) the variable appears in

its logarithmic form.23 The explanatory variables in the hourly-earnings

function include years of schooling, years of experience, tenure with the

employer and on the job, whether the person belongs to a union, and


22 The sample excludes farmers and farm managers and all other self-

    employed and is restricted to those who were either head of house-
    hold or head of household's spouse in 1977 and for whom there were
    data throughout the period 1976-79 (i.e., it excludes people who died
    or moved to other households during that period). The sample changes
    somewhat from one test to the next because of missing information.

23 The data on hourly earnings reported in 1976 refer to 1975. Similar
    results are obtained when one uses the 1977 wave data (which refer
    to 1976).
+                                    -25-                                    +



Table 1. The Distribution of Plans to Quit (1976) and Actual Labor
          Force Ecite (1977—79)


                                                                 (percent)

Actual                               Plans to quit, 1976
exits,
1977-79                      Women                         Men

                     Yes     No        Total     Yes       No    Total

Yes                   6       22         28       2         5       7

No                    3      68          72       2        91      93


Total                9       91         100       4        96     100
+                                -26-                                   +


whether the job is a government (federal, state, or local) job. Marital
status, race, and region serve as control variables. In addition to these

traditional variables, two new variables were included in the regression:

years of training required for the job and on-the-job training. The labor-

force-separation and the plans-to-quit functions omit the tenure on the

job and required training but incorporate additional demographic variables:

presence of children, age of youngest child, children born in the period

1977-79, whether the person married or separated during that period, and

whether he moved to a new home. Finally, the labor-force-separation

function includes an income variable (family income, excluding the

respondent's earnings). The list of variables and their definitions are

presented in Table 2.

     Comparison of the means of the two samples (Table 3) highlights

the major differences between the labor-market attributes of the

two sexes. Working women have a somewhat higher level of schooling

than their male counterparts, but have significantly less experience

(in the labor force, in the firm, and in the job) as a result of

having spent more time out of the labor force. There are considerable

sex differences in the occupational structure. Men have a greater

tendency to belong to a union, and women have a greater tendency to

work for the government. A smaller percentage of employed women

are married and a higher percentage are non-white. This reflects

the lower participation rate of married women and the higher

participation rate of non-white women. The percentage of women

reporting on-the-job learning that may lead to a better job is only

slightly lower than the corresponding percentage of men, but there

are substantial differences in job requirements: on the average
 +                                             —27-                     +



 Table 2. The Variables



Ihonan capital        (years)
 Schooling                                                  sc
Experience, years worked since age 18                       EX
                    a!
Tenure with employer—                                       TE
Tenure on the job'                                          TJ
Time out of labor force.E"                                  TO
Age
Occupation (DV)
Professional, technical, and kindred workers
     (base group)                                           oc1
Managers, officials, proprietors                            oc2
Clerical and sales workers
                                                            oc3
Foreman, craftsmen, firemen, police, transport              OC
     equipment operators                                    oc5
Laborers

Family variables
Children (DV = 1 if children present)                       CH
Age of younger child, years                                 CY
New child (DV = 1 if child born 1977-79)                    CN
Newly married (DV =        1       if married 1977-79)      MN
Family separations (DV =              1   if respondent
     separated 1977-79)                                     FS
Family move (DV = 1 if respondent moved 1977-79)            FM
Family income excluding respondent's earnings
     ($10,000 units)                                        FY
Control variables
Marital    status (DV =        1   if respondent married)   MS
Government (federal, state, or local) job (DV)              GV
Union membership (DV)                                       UM
Health impairment (DV)!                                     HI
Region (DV =      1   if South)                             RG
Race (DV =    1   if black or Spanish-American)             RC

                                                                  .1.
+                                     -27a-                                 +



Table   2 (continued). The variables



Endogenous variables
log of hourly earnings                                 LHE
Labor force separation (DV = 1 if respondent
    left labor force 1977-79)                          LSP
Plans to quit (DV = 1     if respondent planned
    to quit in 1976)                                   PTQ
On-the-job training (DV =    1   if respondent
    reports training)!!                                OJI
Job   requirement, years of training required for
                                                       RQT

     Based on the question "How long have you worked for your present
     employer?"
     Based on the question "How long have you had your present position?"
     Time out of labor force since age 18 is measured as: age less
     experience less post-l8 schooling less 18.
     Based on the question "Do you have a physical or nervous condition
     that limits the type of work or the amount of work you can do?"
     Based on the question "Do you feel you are learning things in your
     job that could lead to a better job or to a promotion?"
     Based on the question "On a job like yours, how long would it take the
     average new person to become fully trained and qualified?"
+                                     -28-                           +



Table 3. Snple Means          a/
                         by Sex—




                               Women           Men      Difference

Schooling                      12.12          11.87         0.25
Experience                     12.67          17.63        -4.96
Tenure: with employer              5.08        7.83        -2.75
           on the job              3.20        3.80        -0.60
Time out of labor force            5.21        0.63         4.37
Age                            36.30          36.51        -0.21
Occupation: 1                  0.156          0.138       0.018
                2              0.041          0.110       -0.069
                3              0.364          0,119       0.245
                4              0.169          0.479      -0.310
                5              0.270          0.154       0.116
Children                       0.558          0.625      -0.067
Age of youngest child              4.14        3.89        0.25
Child born 1977-79             0.187          0.206      -0.019
Married in 1977-79             0.055          0.037       0.018
Family separation              0.057          0.054       0.003
Faiiiily move                  0.373          0.407      -0.034
Family income                  0.916          0.424       0.491
Marital status                 0.668          0.868      -0.200
Government job                 0.251          0.193       0.058
Union member                   0.142          0.300      -0.158
Health impairment              0.066          0.064       0.002
Region                         0.424          0.425      -0.001
Race                           0.368          0.322       0.046
log hourly earnings           5.7982         6.2059     -0.4077
Labor-force separation         0.283          0.068       0.215
Plans to quit                  0.093         0.037        0.056
On-the-job training            0.675          0.741      -0.066
Job requirement                0.745          1.695      -0.950

Sample size                    1,936          2,398

    See Table 2 for detailed definition of variables.
+                                 -29-                                    +


women report that their jobs require only 9 months of training,

compared with 20 months for men. Finally, labor-force separations

are four times as prevalent among women as among men, and men's

hourly earnings exceed women's by one half.

     The simple multivariate relationships between hourly earnings, labor-

force separations and the set of explanatory variables are described in

Table 4. These equations contain hardly any surprises. Schooling and

experience are the major determinants of the hourly-earnings profiles.

Tenure on the job and with the employer have an effect which by far exceeds

the marginal effect of labor-force experience. If the tenure effectreflects the

returns to specific training, these results underline the importance of

investment in specific human capital in shaping the earnings profile.

Career interruptions tend to reduce wages, at least in the case of women

(Mincer and Ofek, l98l).2+ Union members receive higher wages than others

with the same observed qualifications. A government job is associated

with higher pay for women but lower pay for men. Married men are better

paid than non-married, but marital status has no effect on women's hourly

earnings. Health impairment, being non-white, and living in the south

tend to depress wages.

     The effect of on-the-job investment on earnings is, in principle,

ambiguous. The cost of the investment should lower earnings early in one's

career but the returns on it raise earnings later on. Given the average

age of workers in the sample (36 years) the second effect predominates,

on-the-job training having a positive effect on women's earnings. Job

requirements reflect the amount of skill required for the job. This

2L+ Detailed discussion of the differences between the regressions for men
    and women is deferred to the next section.
 +                                     -30-                                         +



 Table 4. The Determination of Hourib' Earnings and Labor-Force
           Separations (OLS)


                          Women                                 Men

            log hourly         Labor force      log hourly          Labor force
          earnings (LHE)    separations (LSP) earnings (LHE)     separations (LSP
             b                    b     t         b       t           b     t

 Cons     4.6541   60.16    0.7303     6.15    4.8936   84.74 0.2984       4.61
 SC       0.0685   13.29    0.0011     0.22    0.0601   18.27 0.0009       0.46
 EX       0.0163    4.31 -0.0124       3.52    0.0234    7.97 -0.0103      5.71
 EX2    -0.0004     4.16    0,0005     5.32 -0.0004      6.08 0.0004       9.67
 TE      0.0348     5.46 -0.0059       1.37    0.0277    6.24 -0.0028      1.37
TE2     -0.0006    3.25     0.0001     0.86 -0.0005      3.72 0.0002       2.75
TJ       0.0724    4.37                        0.0419    3.12
TJ2     -0.0094    5.08                        0.0048    3.31
TO      -0.0058    3.86     0.0088     6.00    0.0027    0.55 0.0124       4.55
OJT      0.0653    2.88 -0.0541        2.68    0.0199    0.99 -0.0018      0.16
RQT      0.0359    4.14                        0.0460   10.29
CH                          0.0869     2.91                     -0.0066    0.45
CY                         -0.0135    4.81                      -0.0036    2.53
CM                          0.3565    13.78                     -0.0186    1.45
MN                          0.1619    3.66                      -0.0281    0.97
FS                          0.0898    2.18                      -0.0026    0.12
FM                          0.0536    2.47                       0.0130    1.18
FY                          0.0246    1.69                      -0.0161    1.57
MS       0.0124    0.54     0.1037    3.84     0.1096    4.28 -0.0086      0.45
GV       0.1056    4.16 -0.0531       2.34 -0.0320       1.48 0.0420      3.47
UM       0.2114    6.81     0.0133    0.47     0.2335   12.08 -0.0107     0.97
HI      -0.1215    2.89     0.0808    2.14 -0.1162       3.33 0.0549      2.81
RG      -0.0470    2.00 -0.0168       0.79 -0.1132       5.92 0.0076      0.71
RC      -0.1040    4.17 -0.0415       1.82 -0.0865      4.12 0.0124       1.06

LHE                        -0.0983    4.89                      -0.0352   3.15
LSP     -0.1010    4.22                       -0.1055   2.89

R2                 0.33               0.20.             0.44,             0.17
+                                  -31-                                    +



variable   proves to have an important positive effect which is independent

of the person's actual experience in the labor force and on the job.

      The labor-force separation functions highlight two features: (a) the

probability of exit from the labor force declines as experience in the

labor force and with the firm increase (the age-separation probability

profile is convex); people who have left the labor force once are more

likely to do so again,25 and (b) through their effect on home productivity,

demographic variables are important determinants of women's career inter-

ruptions, but they hardly affect men.26 Thus being married, having

children (particularly young ones), having a husband with a high income,

and changes in family circumstances (getting married, separating, or having

more children), all increase women's tendency to leave the labor force.

      Finally, the simple OLS equations cannot disentangle the direction

of causality: wages have a significant negative effect on separations and

future separations have a significant negative effect on wages.

      The picture changes dramatically, however, once the two equations


25 The convexity of this function is discussed in detail by Mincer and
    Jovanovic (1979).    It may reflect the effect of general and specific
    human capital or selectivity (people with a lower tendency to separate
    have more labor-force experience and longer tenure). The positive
    effect of time out of labor force may also be interpreted as an age
    effect.
       The separation functions (like all other dichotomous functions in
    this paper) are estimated using linear OLS regression. I have experi-
    mented with logit estimates but they did not alter the conclusions.

26 Other important differences occur in the case of race, non-white women
    being more attached to the labor force than white women, while the
    reverse is true of men, and women holding a government job have a
    smaller tendency to drop out of the labor force while the reverse is
    again true of men.
+                                 -32-                                    +



are estimated simultaneously (Table 5)•27 A simultaneous-equation system

explaining the determination of wages and labor-force separation abounds

with difficulties; a major one is the distinction between endogenous and

exogenous variables. An economist will be hard put to it to justify the

definition of children (and additional children) as exogenous in such a

scheme. Similarly, it is not clear how experience and tenure (i.e., past

non-separation) should be treated in this context. Nevertheless, at this

stage the list of endogenous variables is restricted to two: hourly earnings

and labor-force separation.

      The simultaneous equations yield seemingly unambiguous conclusions

on the direction of causality. Lower wages tend to encourage labor-force

separation for both men and women, but separations (or plans to separate)

have no effect on wages. Thus the previously observed (Table 4) negative

effect of separations on wages is an artifact of the negative effect of

wages on separations. The simultaneous equations contain no indication

that women who plan to drop out of the labor force have lower wages as a

result, thus lending support to the hypothesis that it is employer's

expectation and actions which determine women's wages irrespective of

women's plans.28




27 The coefficients in Table S and subsequent tables are derived by two-
    stage least-squares (TSLS).

28 In an earlier version of this paper separations included also those
    quitting into unemployment. Expanding this definition of separation
    does not affect our conclusions with respect to women, but in the case
    of men it is found that plans to separate reduce wages.
 +                                              -33-                                                     +


Table 5. The Simultaneous Determination of Eouriy Earnings and Labor Force
            Participation (TSLS)

                             Women                                               Men

                 LHE                     LSP                        LHE                     LSP

           b             t           b          t             b           t             b          t

Cons    4.6190         54.43      2.4998       3.97         4.9288 62.37               0.5811     2.29
SC      0.0687         13.30      0.0299       2.64         0.0599 17:99               0.0048     1.22
EX      0.0181          4.32     -0.0050       1.08         0.0198        3.22     -0.0088        3.89
EX2    -0.0004          4.19      0.0003       2.47        -0.0003 1.50                0.0003     7.60
TE      0.0354          5.52      0.0069       1.06         0.0261 5.07            -0.0009        0.36
TE2    -0.0006         3.29      -0.0001       0.68        -0.0004 2.54                0.0001     1.99
TJ      0.0751         4.47                                 0.0425 3.13
TJ2    -0.0098         5.17                                -0.0048 3.25
TO     -0.0059         3.95      o.oo          3.28         0.0059 0.85             0.0124        4.53
OJT     0.0698         3.01     -0.0251        1.03        0.0198 0.97              0.0008        0.07
RQT     0.0370         4.22                                0.0448 9.15
CH                               0.0939        2.87                                -0.0071        0.47
CY                              -0.0146        4.71                                -0.0035        2.48
CN                               0.3427     11.97                                 -0.0202         1.56
MN                               0.1766        3.64                               -0.0291         1.00
FS                               0.1106        2.43                               -0.0091         0.41
FM                               0.0528        2.23                                0.0122         1.10
FY                               0.0441        2.56                               -0.0141         1.34
MS      0.0035         0.14      0.0897        3.00        0.1022 3.62            -0.0018         0.09
GV      0.1096         4.26     -0.0028        0.09       -0.0212 0.78             0.0398         3.23
tiM     0.2117         6.80      0.0990        2.31        0.2276 10.57            0.0018         0.12
HI     -0.1284         3.01      0.0299        0.67       —0.0999 2.32             0.0478         2.32
RG     -0.0465         1.98     -0.0320        1.35       -0.1105 5.59             0.0010         0.08
RC     -0.1023         4.09     -0.0750        2.72       -0.0837 3.86             0.0052         0.39

LHE                             —0.0483        3.56                               —0.0930         1.81

                                                      •
LSP    —0.0339         0.48                               —0.3713     0.92

                       0.33                    0.17                   0.44                        0.17
+                                   -34-                                    +




IV.     WAGE RATES, TURNOVER AND ON THE JOB TRAINING- -SOME MORE EVIDENCE


Are the results of the last section as unambiguous as they seem? A

reassessment of the procedure used raises some doubts. The doubts concern

the validity of the specification and in particular the assumption that

on-the-job training (OJT) and job requirements (RQT) are exogenously

determined. It is after all inherent in the problem that these variables

are determined by the person's participation plans and what the employer

conceives the plans to be. A person who expects to drop out of the labor

force in the near future will be more reluctant to invest in human capital

and choose a job which requires more training. Furthermore, a person who

is expected to drop out of the labor force may not get the opportunity to

work on a job that requires a high level of training, irrespective of his

actual plans. Thus the natural place of these factors is among the

endogenous rather than the exogenous variables.

       Accordingly, I extended the model to include four endogenous

variables: log hourly earnings (LHE), separation from labor force (LSP)

(or alternatively, PTQ, plans to quit the labor force), on-the-job training

(OJT) and job requirements (RQT). The relationships between them are

described schematically in Figure 3. Hourly earnings are assumed to

depend only indirectly on labor-force separation. Planned separations

are assumed to affect on-the-job training and the kind of job the person

chooses (as measured by the job requirements), which in turn affect wages.

Job separations depend on the wage rate but not on the opportunities for

on-the-job training and not on job requirements.29 On-the-job training

29 In theory, a person may be more reluctant to quit his job and the
      labor force if the job offers opportunities for promotion and greater
+           -35--   +




Figure 3.
+                                   -36-                                    +


is   expected to increase with job requirements and be reduced by plans to

quit the labor force. The probability that a person is investing in human

capital on the job is expected to decline with age, experience, and tenure

with the employer. Schooling is conventionally assumed to facilitate on-

the-job training and union membership has been shown (Mincer, 1981) to

discourage it.30 Job requirements (RQT) will be inversely related to

labor force quits (LSP) if employees who plan to drop out of the labor

force opt for jobs that are less skill (and training) intensive. They

may be positively related to the person's readiness to invest in human

capital (OJT). The amount of training required for the job naturally

depends on the occupation and it is expected that the more educated and

the more experienced (in terms of both overall experience and experience

with the firm) will land the more skilled jobs. Jobs held by union members

may require less training than others.31


     responsibility (as measured by OJT and RQT, respectively). This is
     not, however, supported by the data.
30 Other exogenous variables appearing in the OJT equation are government

     job, marital status, and race. Although OJT is a dichotomous variable,
     the OJT equation employs a linear specification.

31 Other
           exogenous variables in the RQT equation are government job,
     marital status, and race. The variable RQT has been interpreted (Duncan
     and Hoffman, 1979, p. 596) to mean "the volume of training attached to
     the current job and acquired on the job." There is, however, nothing
     in the survey question (see notes to Table 2) to suggest that the
     training was obtained on the current job, and not in other firms or
     jobs. By Duncan and Hoffman's definition, the person invests in specific
     capital whenever RQT exceeds the person's tenure on the job (TJ).
     Comparing this definition of training with ours (OJT) for white men
     and women, it can be seen that they differ considerably (the numbers
     in parentheses are percentages within the OJT group).
                                                                 .1.
+                                            _37_                                      +



         The estimates of the structural equations are presented in Table 6.

The hourly-earnings functions (Table 6, Part A) do not differ substantially

from those reported in the preceding section (Table 5)--on-the-job training

and job requirements have a strong positive effect on wages. Comparing

the equations for men and women it is observed that schooling, experience,

and tenure each have essentially the same effect on the wages of both

sexes, as have on-the-job training and job requirements (the only exception

is job tenure, which has a stronger effect in the case of women). The

negative effect of career interruptions is more pronounced in the case of

women. The wage premium enjoyed by union members is greater in the case

of men, and government jobs tend to favor women (in the case of men, such

a job is associated with lower wages),32

         Neither are our earlier conclusions with respect to labor separations

affected by the change in the estimation scheme in Table 6, Part B.

Comparison of the equations indicates that schooling, labor-force

experience, tenure, and wages have the same effect on both sexes, and



     OJT                        White women                         White men

                     RQT < TJ        P.QT    > TJ         RQT < TJ     RQT > TJ

     0                   (86)               (14)     34      (81)          (19)   26
     1                   (75)               (25)    66       (61)          (39)   74

                         79                  21     100      66             34    100

     The differences are even larger for non-whites.
32
     Contrary to previous findings, it is found that the wage differential
     between whites and non-whites is greater for women than for men. This
     contradiction may be ecplained by the fact that the regression reported
     controls for job requirements, in which there are substantial inter—
     race differences for men, but which are almost the same for women of
     both race groups.
 +                                     -38-                                     +


 Table 6. The Simultaneous Determination of Hourly Earnings, Labor Force
          Separation, On-the-Job Training and Job Requirements.
          A. Log Hourly Earnings


                      Women                    Men               Difference
                b              t         b             t         b        t
Cons         4.5328       27.95       4.6331         23.22   -0.1003     0.51
 SC          0.0262           2.51    0.0320          4.65   -0.0058     0.62
EX           0.0164           3.32    0.0167          3.40   -0.0003     0.05
EX2         -0.0004           3.38   -0.0002          2.59   -0.0002     1.65
TE           0.0225           256     0.0177          2.88    0.0048     0.60
TE2         -0.0003           1.24   -0.0003          1.80    0.0000     0.05
TJ           0.0943           3.82    0.0460          2.59    0.0483     2.14
TJ2         -0.0096           3.66   -0.0040          2.10   -0.0056     2.33
TO         —0.0031            1.50    0.0090          1.28   —0.0121     2.10
MS          0.0051            0.17    0.0711          1.97   —0.0660     1.83
GV          0.0365            1.02   -0.0361          1.20    0.0725     2.06
UM          0.2496            6.03    0.3158         10.83   -0.0662     1.76
HI         -0.1076            1.93   -0.0563          1.12   —0.0513     0.91
RG         -0.0763            2.41   —0.1546         5.43     0.0783     2.44
RC         -0.1151        3.30       -0.0151         0.32    -0.1001     2.24
OJT         0.7910        5.04        0.6643         2.52    0.1268      0.53
RQT         0.1929        4.27       0.1488          3.95    0.0441      1.00
R2                        0.23                       0.31
+                                        ..39_                                   +



Table 6.   The Simultaneous Determination of Hourly Earnings, Labor Force
           Separation, On-the-Job Training and Job Requirements.
           B. Labor Force Separation


                      Women                      Men             Difference

                b              t           b           t         b         t

Cons         1.3830           3.99      0.6813         2.80   0.7016      1.62
SC           0.0119           1.64      0.0062         1.62   0.0057      0.74
EX          -0.0093           2.44     -0.0082         3.67   -0.0012     0.27
EX2          0.0004           4.15      0.0003         7.40   0.0001      0.63
TE          -0.0007           0.14     -0.0003         0.13   -0.0004     0.07
TE2          0.0000           0.21      0.0001         1.84   -0.0001     0.61
TO           0.0080           5.00      0.0124         4.50   -0.0045     1.10

CH           0.0954           3.15     -0.0068         0.45    0.1021     3.23

CY          -0.0148           5.17     -0.0036         2.48   -0.0112     3.75

CN           0.3542           13,44    -0.0206         1.58    0.3747    13.68

MN           0.1638           3.65     -0.0293         1.00    0.1931     3.60
FS           0.0989           2.36     -0.0114         0.51    0.1103     2.44

FM           0.0514           2.33      0.0121         1.08    0.0394     1.71

FY           0.0327           2.16     -0.0135         1.28    0.0462     2.46

MS           0.0969           3.52      0.0006         0.03    0.0963     2.75

CV          -0.0355            1.43     0.0390         3.16   -0.0745     2.88

LIM          0.0495            1.52     0.0059         0.39    0.0436     1.33

HI           0.0572            1.44     0.0451         2.19    0.0122     0.29

RG          -0.0258            1.20    -0.0012         0.10   -0.0247     1.04
RC          -0.0556           2.33      0.0027         0.20   -0.0583     2.22

LHE         -0.2464           3.37     -0.1133         2.31   -0.1331     1.50

R2                            .0.19.                   0.17
 +                                         40                                     +


 Table 6. The Simultaneous Determination of Hourly Earnings, Labor Force
          Separation, On-the-Job Training and Job Requirements.
          C. On-the-Job Training


                    Women                       Men              Difference
              b              t         b               t         b            t

Cons       0.6991           6.64    0.8276

SC         0.0108           1.40    0,0035            0.63    0.0073     0.79
EX        -0.0004           0.18    0.0009            0.21   -0.0012     0.27
TE         0.0008           0.29   -0.0022            1.10    0.0030     0.90
TJ        -0.0185           3.41   -0.0095            2.33   -0.0091     1.37
Age       -0.0035           2.46   -0.0081            1.95    0.0046     1.04
MS        -0.0028           0.12    0.0442            1.61   -0.0471     1.31
GV         0.0146           0.53    0.0429            1.84   -0.0283     0.80
UM        -0.0320           1.02   -0.0304            1.25   -0.0017     0.04
RG         0.0362           1.52    0.0532            2.62   -0.0170     0.56
RC         0.0529           2.08    0.0984            3.16   -0.0455     1.15

LSP       -0.1365           2.40   -0.2182            1.49    0.0817     0.52
RQT        0.0486           1.52    0.0749            2.83   -0.0263     0.65
R2                          0.05                      0.08
+                                    -41--                                 +



Table 6. The Simultaneous Determination of Hourly Earnings., Labor Force
         Separation, On-the-Job Training and Job Requirements.
         D. Job Requirements


                 Women                     Men             Difference
             b            t         b            t         b        t
Cons      0.3374         0.80    0.6733          0.81   -0.3360     0.38
SC        0.1154         7.67     0.1307         6.74   -0.0152     0.60
EX        0.0143         3.86     0.0341         4.66   -0.0198     2.55
TE        0.0094         1.47     0.0340         5.18   -0.0246     2.45

0C2      -0.4365         2.72     0.1847         1.08   -0.6212     2.44
0C3      -0.9770         10.42   -0.9909         5.95    0.0139     0.08
OC       -1.0986         7.45    -0.5262         3.25   -0.5724     2.43
0C5      -1.1351         7.65    -1.0759         4.72   -0.0591     0.22

MS        0.0448         0.71    -0.0175         0.14    0.0623     0.46
CV        0.1728         2.47    -0.0263         0.23    0.1990     1.52
UN       -0.0830         0.99    -0.4059         3.79    0.3229     2.29
RG       -0.0141         0.21     0.1213         1.14   -0.1354     1.10
RC       -0.0321         0.41    -0.7346         6.87    0.7025     5.22

LSP      -0.1318          0.84   -2.0879         3.31    1.9560     3.52
OJT      -0.5340          1.20   -0.5548         0.56    0.0207     0.02
R2                        0.22                   0.23
+                                 -42-                                    +



demographic changes are significantly more important in the case of women.
      The linear probability functions of on-the-job investment are

(statistically) the same for men and women (Table 6, Part C). The

probability is not directly affected by schooling, experience in the

labor force, or tenure with the firm, but declines as job tenure and age

increase. Being a union member discourages training, and (surprisingly)

non-whites report more often than whites that what they learn on the

current job may help them gain better jobs in the future. Finally, as

expected, the greater the amount of training required on the job, the

greater the probability that the person is engaged in investment; and the

greater the probability of dropping out of the labor force, the smaller

the probability of investment.

      The fact that schooling has no direct effect on on-the-job training

may at first be surprising, given past studies in the field. The puzzle

however, disappears once the fourth equation, job requirements, is

incorporated into the analysis (Table 6, Part D). According to this

equation, schooling affects on-the-job training through its effect on job

requirements. Thus the skill intensity of a job increases both with

formal schooling and experience (both in the labor force and with the

firm).33 it is, however, noteworthy that while the effect of schooling

on the type of job a person gets is almost the sante for men and women,

there is a substantial difference in the effect of experience. When it

comes to securing a better (i.e., a more skill intensive) job, women's

    Other factors worth noting are: marital status does not seem to affect
    the type of job a person gets; women may get more challenging jobs in
    the government sector; jobs held by union members are, in the case of
    men, less training intensive; non-white men get worse jobs than whites
    (Duncan and Hoffman, 1979).
+                                   -43-                                     +


years in the labor force and with the firm count as less than one half of
the men's. The lower weight given to women's years of experience may be

due to an actual tendency for women to invest less on the job (i.e., a

year's experience represents a smaller increment to human capital); or

to employers' belief in the existence of such a tendency.

        Furthermore, though there is no significant difference between the

sexes in the job requirement of professional, technical, and kindred

workers (the intercept is lower for women, but not significantly so),

there is a significant difference in two out of the other four occupational

groups. Thus, even if one controls for other observed variables and allows

for differential effects, women in managerial occupations and women

employed as foremen (forepersons?), craftsmen, police, etc., report fewer

months of training required for their jobs than reported by their male

counterparts.

        Finally, there is a remarkable difference between men and women in

the effect of labor-force separations on the type of job a person has (as

measured by RQT).35 While men's plans to quit are associated with lower

job requirements, women's plans to quit have no effect on job requirements.

    I   am aware that it can be argued that this is essentially a reporting
    problem. Men, to bolster their self image, tend to overestimate job
    requirements while women and members of minority groups tend to
    understate them. There is no way to verify or reject this argument
    from our data. It is worth noting, however, that in the related issue
    of on-the-job training, non-whites do not believe themselves to fare
    worse than whites.

    I do not present the estimates of the OJT and RQT equations where LSP
    is replaced by PTQ. These regressions are virtually identical to the
    ones reported, indicating that our conclusions concerning the effect
    of future separations hold also for plans to quit.
+                                -44-                                      +



Assuming that employers are ignorant of their employeest plans, I interpret
this finding to mean that whereas men are free to choose their jobs, and

thus choose a job with lower training requirements when they expect to drop

out of the labor force, women are forced to take jobs which are less skill

intensive regardless of their participation plans. It may be argued that

women are forced into these lower skilled jobs by discrimination. It is

my belief that it is due to misconceptions of women's market attachment

and the difficulty of separating those with low from those with high

attachment.



V. EVALUATION

Supporters of the traditional views concerning the sources of wage

differentials between men and women may find comfort in the findings of

the last section, particularly those concerning the participation of

married women. Once again it was demonstrated that women are more

sensitive than men to changes in the family environment. Planned changes

in their family life, such as additional children, are associated with

labor-force quits, which are in turn associated with reduced on-the-job

investment. But one can detect an additional undercurrent--women are

relegated to low-skill jobs regardless of their labor-force plans, and

when it comes to choice (or allocation) of jobs (as measured by RQT),

their labor-force experience carries a much lower weight than that of

men with the same observable (or, to be more precise, measurable)

qualifications.

     How important is this second factor in explaining sex-related wage

differentials? Can one distribute the blame for the wage differential

between the two explanations? These are difficult but important
+                                 -45-                                     +



questions, and I shall risk some tentative answers.

      In order to isolate the different factors contributing to the wage

differentials, the variables appearing in regression (6A) are combined

into five groups: the intercept, variables measuring the person's human

capital (schooling, experience, tenure with the employer, tenure on the

job, time out of labor force), on-the-job training (OJT), job requirements

(RQT), and control variables (government job, union membership, health

impairment, region, race, and marital status). Furthermore, equation (6A)

was re-estimated for both men and women with the coefficients whose sex

difference was found to be statistically nonsignificant (e.g., schooling,

experience, tenure with employer, health impairment, on-the-job training,

and job requirements) constrained to be identical in the regressions for

men and women.36 The new estimates are used to break down the wage

differential into the five major components (see panel A of Table 7).

      Women earn two thirds of men's hourly earnings. This is consistent

with the findings of many other studies in the field. The composition of

the differential may, however, come as a surprise to some. Job requirements

and on-the-job training (in particular the first) are by far the most

important factors explaining the wage gap, accounting for half of it. By

comparison, the direct contribution of schooling, labor-force experience,

and tenure (holding job requirements constant), is very small (about 4

percent), as is the autonomous factor (measured by the difference in

intercepts).37 The wage differentials can be broken down into the part

36 The regressions are presented in the appendix. They allow for a
    different intercept even when the differences in intercepts reported
    in Tables 6 were not significant.
    The 'other' variables account for about one quarter of the wage gap,
    the major contributors being union membership, race, and marital status.
+                                                                             +
                                     -46-

Table 7. The Deconrposition of the Sea Differentials in the Endogenous
           Varab


                        Total       Explained by        Explainedbydiffer-
                                 difference in means,   enceincoefficients,
                                    weighted by            weighted by
                                     A          A          -          -
                                                           xf         x
                                         f      m                      m
                          (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)


A. Hourly earnings   (EriE)

Constant              -0.0634            -          -   -0.0634    -0.0634
                          0.9k       1.00       1.00       Q.9t1      0.91+

Human capital         -0.0376     -0.0699    -0.0200    -0.0176     0.0323
                         0.96        0.93       0.98       0.98       1.03
Control               -0.1076     -0.0479    -0.0717    -0.0359    -0.0597
                          0.90       0.95       0.93       0.97       0.9'.

OJT                   -0.0458     -0.0458    -0.0458         -            -
                          0.96       0.96       0.96       1.00       1.00
RQT                   -0.1636     -0.1636    -0.1636         -            -
                          0.85       0.85       0.85       1.00       1.00
Total                 -0.4179     -0.3271    -0.3010    -0.1169    -0.0908
                          0.66       0.72       0.7'.      0.89       0.91
B. Labor force separation (ISP)
Constant              -0.0352            -          -   -0.0352    -0.0352
Human capital          0.0063      0.0087     0.0181    -0.0118    -0.0024
Faini ly               0.2079     -0.0206    -0.0064     0.2143     0.2285
Control               -0.0426     -0.0095    -0.0027    -0.0399    -0.0331
LHE                    0.0780      0.0780     0.0780         -            -
Total                  0.2144      0.0566     0.0870     0.1274     0.1578
C. On-the-job training
Constant               0.0248            -          -    0.0248     0.0248
Human capital          0.0150      0.0199     0.0191    -0.0041    -0.0049
Control               -0.0128     0.0070      0.0089    -0.0217    -0.0198
LSP                   -0.0421     -0.0421    -0.0421
RQT                   -0.0515     -0.0515    -0.0515
Total                 -0.0666    -0.0667     -0.0656    -0.0010     0.0001




                                                                     .1.
+


Table    7 (continued). The Decorrrpocition of the Sex Differentials in the
             EndogenouB Vari41b les



                              Total       Explained by                Explained by differ-
                                       difference in means,           ence in coefficients
                                           weighted by                    weighted by

                                           f                                 Xf         X

                               (1)         (2)              (3)              (4)        (5)
D. Job requireents           (RQT)
Constant                     -0.5677        -               -          -0.5677       -0.5677
Human capital                -0.5960    -0.0686       -0.2298          —0.3662       -0.5274

 Occupations                 -0.3090    -0.0021       -0.2157          -0.0933       -0.3069
 Control                      0.3792     0.0120           0.0353           0.3439     0.3672
 LSP                          0.1081    -0.0253       —0.4492              0.5573     0.1334
 OJT                          0,0352     0.0352           0.0352              -             -
Total                        -0.9502    -0.0488       -0.8242          -0.1260       -0.9014

    Columns (1) through (5) are respectively calculated from the columns
    of Table A2 as follows: (1) —         (3);    (1) —    (2);    (4) —    (3); (1) — (4);
       (2)   -   (3).   Small numerals in pahel A are the antilogs of the
    difference of the logarithms.
+                                              -48--                                     +


which is 'explained' by the difference in the means of the two sexes, and

the 'unexplained' part (the part due to differences in regression

coefficients).38 Three quarters of the hourly-earnings differential is

explained by the difference in the observed characteristics of men and

women (and their jobs), and only about one quarter cannot be explained.

Again, job requirements ranks high among the explanatory variables

(contributing two thirds of the explanation) and overshadow the direct

effect of differences in experience and tenure.

         By our assumptions, labor-force turnover does not affect wages

directly, but does so indirectly through its effect on training (OJT) and

job requirements (RQT). On the other hand, lower wages have been shown

to lead to increased turnover. To disentangle cause and effect one should

separate the causes of labor force separation.

      The difference between the 3-year separation rates of men and women

is 21 percentage points. Decomposing this difference by a method similar

to the one described above (panel B, Table 7)39                indicates   that demographic

38                                                      =
     Following        standard procedures, if
                                                          EJiXU     for group j,
     Y
      f   -   Y  E .(fi.
                  =
              m 1fi               -   X .) +
                                       mi      Z(fi
                                                  .   -
                                                        mimi
                  =      .( . -
                      j mi   fi
                                      X .) +
                                       mi      Z(fi
                                                  .   - .)X .,
                                                       mi fi
     where Y denotes mean of log hourly earnings, Xj the mean of
     explanatory variable i, ,                   the estimated regression coefficients,
     and m and f denote male and female, respectively. The first and
     second terms on the RI-IS are respectively the explained and unexplained
     part of the wage differential.
     The explanatory variables included in regression (6B) were combined
     into five groups: the intercept, the human capital variables, family
     variables (MS, CH, CY, CN, FS, MN, FM, FY), hourly earnings (LHE), and
     the rest. Note that marital status is here included in family variables
     (not, as elsewhere, as a control variable).
+                                  .-49..                                 +


changes (e.g., children, marriage, divorce, migration) are the major

contributor to this difference. In the absence of this factor, labor-

force turnover would have been about the same for both sexes. The wage

differential stands second in the order of importance, However, closing

the wage gap, other things being the equal, would not have eliminated the

difference in turnover rates (though it would have cut it by about one

third). The difference in wages is a major source of the 'explained'

difference, while sex differences in responsiveness to demographic factors

are the most important contributor to the unexplained part.

      The difference between the percentage of men and women reporting on-

the-job learning which would be helpful in gaining a better (or a better-

paid) job is surprisingly small (74 versus 67 percent, respectively).

Almost the whole of this difference is explained by differences in the

observed characteristics, the difference in turnover and job requirements

being the most important.

       Finally, the skill intensity of the job (as measured by RQT) has

throughout this paper been shown to be crucial in explaining the sex

differential in training and wages (and indirectly, through the latter,

in turnover). How helpful are the regressions in explaining the huge gap

in job requirements? The answers they provide are at once puzzling and

illuminating. Men's jobs require training that exceeds that of women's

by almost a whole year (20 and 8.9 months of training, respectively).

Standardizing for racial composition, marital status, union membership

and the 'other' variables (government job, region) increases the difference

to 16 months, almost one half of which is explained by the autonomous

factor (i.e., the intercept).'° The other half is traced to differences
kO
     The result stands in contrast to the results reported in Table 6, part
     D, where the sex difference in intercepts is found to be nonsignificant.
+                                  -50-                                      +


in   experience (in the labor force and with the employer) and to the

occupational structure of the two sexes. Surprisingly, the difference in

turnover tends to moderate the difference in training requirements.

       How much of these differences are explained by differences in the

observed characteristics? The answers to this question differ widely

according as one adopts a 'masculine' or a 'feminine' point of view.

Judging from men's experience (i.e., when the men's coefficients of labor-

force experience, turnover, and occupational composition are applied in

the standardization procedure), close to 90 percent of the difference in

RQT is explained by the difference in observed characteristics. In that

case, changing the participation behavior (labor-force separation,

experience, and tenure with the employer) and the occupational structure

of women to make them similar to men would eliminate the differential

almost entirely (it would reduce the difference in job requirements to

less than one month). On the other hand, judging from women's experience

(i.e., if we weight the difference in characteristics by the regression

coefficients derived from the women's sample), such a change would have only a

small effect. Specifically, if women's quits were reduced to the level

of men's, the quality of their jobs (as measured by RQT) would go up by

only 3 percent (the RQT differential would decline by 2 percent).

Equalization of labor-force experience and tenure would have increased

RQT by another 14 percent, and adoption of the men's occupational structure

would yield less than 1 percent.Ll All in all (using this scheme)
kl
     The last statement is, of course, true only if confined to the broad
     occupational definitions used in this study; it may prove to be wrong
     if one uses a more detailed definition. Put differently: given our
     definition, although occupational structure is important in explaining
     the wage distribution (through the effect of RQT on hourly earnings)
+                                   -51-                                     +


differences    in observed characteristics explain about 5 percent of the

difference in RQT.

        When the control variables (GV, UM, HI, RG, RC, and MS) are controlled

for, women's hourly earnings are about three quarters of the men's. If

women had reacted to demographic changes in a fashion siniilar to men there

would have been no sex difference in labor-force quit rates. In consequence

women would invest more on the job and would obtain better jobs. These

changes would in turn raise women's wages (and result in a further decline

in quit rates). Going by men's experience (i.e., given the effect of

labor-force separation on RQT from the men's regression) this first-round

effect would close over 40 percent of the wage gap (i.e., reduce it from

27 to 16 percent of men's wages). On the other hand, given women's

experience the wage gap would decline by only about 10 percent (from 27

to 24 percent).



VI.    SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS


In    this paper I have tried to formalize an alternative to the traditional

hypothesis concerning the wage differential between men and women.

Admittedly, there is little new in the general concept. The notion that

women suffer from 'statistical discrimination' has been with us now for

more than a decade (Arrow, 1973, Phelps, 1972). What is new, on the

theoretical side, is the attempt to show, within the framework of the

theory of human capital, how employers' misconceptions (the statistical

discrimination) translate into flatter wage profiles for women.     I also

try to explain why there are no self-correcting mechanisms (or if they do


      there remain substantial intra-occupational differences between men
      and women.
 +                                 -52-                                    +


exist,   why they operate very slowly) to reveal his mistake to the

employer. In the absence of such mechanisms, women may be confronted by

a vicious circle of self-confirming expectations, expectations of increased

job mobility resulting in increased job mobility.

      On the empirical level, 1 have shown that women's labor force

participation decision is definitely more sensitive to demographic changes

than men's. On the other hand, this difference goes only part of the way

in explaining the wage differential between the sexes. The amount of

training required for the job is an intervening factor crucial for

explaining the wage gap. The fact that employers give different weight

to the observed characteristics of men and women when making job offers

seems to be an essential ingredient of the situation.

      To the best of my knowledge, this is the first attempt to separate

cause and effect in the hourly-earnings and labor-career-interruption

functions. Naturally, it suffers from many shortcomings. In a

simultaneous-equation scheme such as the one presented, it is hard to

justify the choice of labor-force experience, tenure, and occupational

choice as exogenous variables. Similarly, it can be argued that family

stability and fertility behavior are affected by the labor-force-

participation decision as well as affecting it.

      I have focused on hourly earnings and the participation decision at

the expense of other dimensions of the phenomenon.   I have emphasized

participation, ignoring other aspects of the work decision (e.g., the

number of hours worked) which may serve as an indicator of the woman's

involvement with the market. In the empirical sections I discuss labor

force turnover, although in principle the variable one should discuss is

job turnover. The wage variable used in the statistical analysis is the
+                                  -53                                      +



level   of hourly earnings. The panel data, however, allow us to examine the

effect of turnover on temporal changes in wages. Finally, as mentioned,

the crucial variable in my analysis, job requirements (RQT), has elsewhere

been interpreted as "the volume of training attached to the current job

and acquired on the job" (Duncan and Hoffman, 1979). In my interpretation

the required training need not necessarily be obtained on the current job

(see also note 31).

        On a more fundamental level it may be argued that women's labor-force

experience and tenure count for less than men's in the determination of

RQT because women invest less on the job, so that a year of experience

represents a smaller stock of human capital. This argument is refuted by

the wage function which indicates that once one controls for the quality

of the job, experience and tenure have the same effect for both sexes.

It may of course be argued that the training received by women differs

from what men receive because they occupy different jobs, but this argument

would only establish the existence of the vicious circle.

        The final question is, naturally, is there a way of escape? There

is no clearcut answer. To judge from on-the-job training the differences

between men and women are relatively small, indicating that the the gap

in training and wages is closing on its own. The conclusions derived from

the simultaneous-equation system are much more pessimistic. What is

required is a structural change which will open to women the opportunities

enjoyed by men. Allowing women into jobs requiring the same degree of

skill may give rise to a chain of events that will narrow (though perhaps

not eliminate) the difference in turnover. In the short run, closing the

wage gap should, according to our estimates, cut the women's labor-force

separations by more than one quarter. In the long run, it may affect the
+                                   -54-                                      +



structural    equation, reducing women's sensitivity to demographic changes

and reducing their turnover even further.

     If the structural change in the jobs open to women does not take

place one can expect economists to continue to argue from their own

experience: the men, that if women only invested more in their careers

the wage gap would disappear, and the women, that this would make no

difference.
+                                                     -55-                                                           +




MATHEMATICAL APPENDIX




The gains from continuing the association between employer and employee

in the post-investment period are


(Al)          G = (1 -       F)(l       -
                                                Q)[(M   - R) +        E(flIfl > W             - M)   + E(OIO > R -


where
                                                                          W-M
              F(W - M) =          prob(rj        <   W -       M) =       f f()d
(A2)
                                                                          R-W
              Q(R - W) = prob(O < R - W) =                                I        q(O)dO


are the probabilities of firing and quitting, respectively. Denoting the

expected residuals by


                    - M) =                       > (W      -
                                                                M)]   -
                                                                              (W
                                                                                    -
                                                                                        M)


                              =    [1       -   F(W-M)]'
                                                                  W-M
                                                                      ![l -             F()]d
(A3)
                    -
                        W) = E[OlO > (R                    -
                                                                W)I - (R - W)


                              =    [1       -
                                                Q(R-W)]           R-W -                  Q(O)]dO



equation (Al) can be rewritten as


(A4)          G =   (1   -    F)(1          -   Q){[M      - W +
                                                                      E(fllfl           >   W -   M)] +
                                                     + [W       - R +
                                                                              E(OlQ >         R -    W)]}
                =   (1   -    F)   (1           Q) [(W - M) +                                 W)]


Maximizing G with respect to W,
 +                                                                -56-                                                                    +




  (AS)                    =
                                  q(l         -
                                                  F)M(W
                                                          -
                                                              M) -        £(l         -
                                                                                           Q)0(R
                                                                                                     - W)



 where f and              F are evaluated at the point (W -                                          M)         and q and Q at
 (R -       W).2      Denoting the hazard rate by X(Z) =                                         f(Z)/[l         -
                                                                                                                         F(Z)],
 equation (A5) can be rewritten as


                          -               ______              M0(R-W)
                                  q
                                          X(W - M)            X0(R - W)
 (A6)
                         = (1             -
                                              F)(l   -
                                                         Q)[X0(R
                                                                          -
                                                                                                M)   -
                                                                                                          A(W        -
                                                                                                                         M)ie(R
                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                       W)];

setting this expression to equal zero, one derives the necessary condition

for the optimum wage given by (4) in the text.

            The sufficient condition for a maximum isk3


 (A7)                         =                                   +               +                         +
                                                                                                     W)         ci] <01
since

                      3A(Z)
                                      =                               +
                                              X(Z)[!J0z
                      i (Z)           =                       -   1
(A8)
                                          X(Z)p(Z)

                      _______                 u(Z) f log f(Z)                             1
                                      —
                                      —

                                          1C         L        z               +




The    bracketed terms in (A7) are positive when £ and q increase with
(P1-   M) and CR - P1), respectively (i.e., £' > 0 and q' > 0).
'.2
       To obtain (A5), recall that [l -                                                                   -[1
                                                                          F(Z)]1z(Z)/Z                =          -
                                                                                                                         F(Z)],

                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                  by
       (A3).
'.
                       and £ are evaluated at                                 (P1 -       M);                        and q, at
                                                                                                          A0,
       (R   -   W).
+                                                        57
                                                                                                   +



However, one of the two terms may be negative without impairing the
validity of the second-order condition.t"' The conclusions of Section I,

however, only hold when both terms are positive.

        To derive the effect of an increase in productivity, M, one has to

compute


                         —       1rTh logf           +
                                                          1
(A9)
                 WM                        -
                                                M)
                                                         p1

        The wage increases with productivity,


                             =                                   > 0



whenever (A9) is positive. Similarly, an increase in the reservation

wage, R, increases the wage rate when


(AlO
                 2G  _Y°r logq
                 aWR -                           +   —
                                                     1
                                         - W)

is   positive. If both (A9) and (AlO) are positive, it can easily be shown

that 1 >        W/M   > 0        and     1 >    W/R       >   0, and hence (W -   M)    and (R -   W)

decline as M increases and as R decreases. Consequently, an increase

in productivity reduces the probability of firing, F, and the probability

of quits,        Q, while an increase in the reservation wage increases them.

&cample: Let r and 0 have a normal distribution, z ' N(O, ci), then


                 PZ(Z)
                             = A(Z)c - Z
(All)
                                       = a2 -    [Z/X(Z)] = a2[l - X/A(X)]         ,

where     x =   z/a is the standardized                   normal variable (X =    Z/a). Hence

t" In    the case of the exponential distribution, p/X =                     X2        and
     2G/aW2 = 0.
+                                                       -58-                                                          +


                   i (Z)
 (A12)                              =    -                  +        - XA(X)}          < 0
                   X(Z)                      X(X)
since the expression in brackets is positive Johnson and Katz, 1969, p. 279).

         The optimum wage satisfies G/W 0,                                         i.e.,



(Al3)                  -                     =          -   ____
                           X(X)]                 G[l
where     x =          and      y =                    are standardized normal variables, and
X = (W -               and Y            = (R -
            M)/c                                     W)/ci0.        Using our previous results,


                w =a2G
                       awaM             W
                                        a2G


(A14)                                                                X2 -
                                                 xx)[1 +                       XA,(X)J

                                         + X2 -                       +                    +
                                                       XA(X)J                                          - YA(Y)]

and it is easy to show that 1 > SW/3M > 0.

        Turning now to the separate maximization of employer gains, Gej

and employee gains, G, we get


                Ge =   (1-      F)(1 -           Q)i(W              M)
(AlS)
                C =    R + (1                F)(l -                  - W)

Maximizing Ge and G with respect to We and W, respectively,
yields the necessary conditions



                -x —(1          -       F)(l     -   Q)[l       -
                                                                    A0(R
                                                                           -
                                                                                   W)p(W           -
                                                                                                        M)]   =   0
(A16)

                   =       (1   -       F)(1     -                             -
                                                     Q)[1       -
                                                                    A(W            M)pe(R
                                                                                               -
                                                                                                       Ww)}
                                                                                                              = 0



The second-order conditions are
+                                                      _59-                                                         +



                                                         p (logq)
                ___ = -(1      -       F)(l                      -
                                                                            + 1 -         x+        <o
(A17)
                2G                                       p 1ogf
                ___ = -(1      -       F)(l    -                          + 1             +         0
                                                   Q)(D(w - M)                                X}<

Example:    Let ri and U have a uniform distribution,

                f() =    l/t                                                                        -½t <   n<
(Al8)
                q(6)= 1/s                                                                           -½s <   U   <



Hence

                                         W         M
                F(W - M) =

(A19)
                                         R -       W
                Q(R - W) =


and

                X (W - M) =        f/(l       -    F) =      l/[½t - (W         -
                                                                                    M)]
(A20)
                       - W)    =   q/(i       -    Q) =      l/[½s    -   (R    -
                                                                                    W)J


The expected residuals are


                p (W - M) =                        (W -      M)] =    l/2A
(A2l)
                       - W) =                      (R    -
                                                             Wfl = l/2X0


Inserting   (A20) and (A21) in (Al6) and solving yields


                We =   [½(t    -       2s) +      (M +       2R)J/3
(A22)
                W = [½(2t          —    s)    + (2M +        Rfl/3

and   solving   for the joint optimum, (A6), we get


(A23)           W = [½(t - s)                + (M +      R)}/2
+                                         -60-                                        +



When the random components r and 0 have the same dispersion, the

employer and the employee share equally in the returns to the joint

investment [(W = R        +        R)].       Since in this case the gains

[i.t(W - M) +           - W)}   are constant and independent of the wage rate,

the way to maximize the expected joint gains G is to minimize separation

rates (i.e., maximize (1 -         F)(l   -
                                               Q)J. Hence, when, for example, the
variance of r increases (i.e., t increases), the increase in the risk

of being fired due to a marginal change in wages               (Ar) declines.
Consequently, the optimum wage will be higher. Similarly, an increase in

the variance of 0 (i.e., an increase in s) results in qi4t rates being

less sensitive to changes in the wage and reduce the employee's share in

total returns (i.e., reduce W).

        The gains to each side                and jig)   are naturally not constant
and depend on W. The turnover rate is only one of the factors affecting

the decision of the maximizing individual (or firm). Not surprisingly,

the individual optimum (A22) differs from the joint optimum (A23). It

can easily be shown that the wage desired by the employee exceeds the

joint optimum, which in turn exceeds the wage desired by the employer

(W >    W   >   W),   where


(A24)
                 Ww_W=W_We=[½(t+s)+(M_R)]/6>0•
                                                     - 61       -


Table Al. The Simultaneoue Determination of Hourly Earnings., Labor Force Separation,


                                        LHE                         .                           LSP

                      Males               M-F difference                      Males                  M-F difference

                  b             t.            b             t           ..b               t            b         t

Constant       4.6417         59.41       -0. 0634          1.39         1.1035         5.28        -0. 0352    0.99
Sc             0.0289          6.82                         -            0.0102         2.85
EX             0.0137          5.64                         -           -0.0080         3.94
EX2           -0.0002          4. 39,                       -            0.0003         7.66
TE             0.020 1         5.26                         -            0.0000         0.00
TE2           -0. 0004         3.30                         -            0.0001         1.47
TJ             0.0439          3.17       0. 0524       2.61
TJ2           -0. 0035         2.35      -0. 0068       2.96
AGE
TO             0.0092          1.78      -0. 0 122      2.32             0.0123         3.22        -0.0037     0.95

0c2
Oc3
Oc

0c5
CH                                                                      -0.0063         0.31         0.1071     3.54
cy                                                                      -0.0028 .       1.43        -0.0122     4.21
CN                                                                      -0.0264         1.49         0.3863    14.64
                                                                        0.0307          '0.76        0.1921    3.59
FS                                                                      -0.0225 '       0.74'        0.1183    2.63
FM                                                                       0.0058     .
                                                                                        0.39    ,
                                                                                                     0.0532    2.44
FY                                                                      -0.0079         0.54         0.0343    1.89
                                                                                    '

MS             0.0736          2.72      -0.0538        1.54             0.0104         0.38         0.0922    2.66
GV            -0. 0333         1.46       0.0874        2.66             0.0385         2.27        -0.0847    3.38
UM             0. 3256        15.07      -0.0748        2.09             0.0265         1.73           -

HI            -0.0817          2.97           -             -            0.0491         2.34           -

RG           -0.1553           7.57       0.0807        2.75            -0.0120         0.78        -0.0121    0.55
RC            0.0087           0.31      —0.1291        3.87            -0.0109         0.65        -0.0357    1.52
LHE                                                                     -0.1915         4.62
LSP
OJT           0.6857            7.33
RQT           0.1722           9.23

                                    .0.47                                                     0.25
                                                      - 62       -



On-the-Job Training, and Job Requirenienta--Miee and Femaiee (Constrained Equations)


                             OJT                                                     RQT
     •
             Males                  M-F difference           .       Males                 M-F difference

         b            t              .b         t                b            t              b         t

     0.7432          13.31           0.0248    0.80       0.7421              1.68         —0.5617    2.90
     0.0079           1.92             -        -         0.1251             10.30            -        —



    -0.0013          0.87              -        -         0.0339             6.92          -0.0191    3.05


    -0.0010          0.67              -        -         0.0340             6.54          -0.0245    2.57


    -0.0120           3.18          -0.0013   0.26


    -0.0042           3.35


                                                          0.1781              1.32         -0.625     2.48
                                                        • -1.0015             7.48          0.0496    0.29
                                                        -0.5447               4.53         -0.5145    2.81
                                                        -1.0965               6.89         0.0007     0.00




     0.0154           0.90                      -       -0.0197               0.19          0.0639    0.48
     0.0228           1.38                      -       -0.0234               0.27         0.1915     1.51

    -0.0364           2.07                      -       -0.4050               499           0.3243    2.38


     0.0574           2.87      -0.0266        0.91      0.1154               1.47         -0.1248    1.14
     0.0781           2.98      -0.0264        0.79     -0.7414              9.01           0.7142    5.95


    -0.1961           4.19                               -2.0903              4.42          1.9727     3.88
                                                         -0.5268              1.10

     0.0542           3.22

                             0.08                                                 0.20
 +
                                       -63-                               +


 Table A2. The Decomposition of the Endogenous Variables


                           -
                               Women                      Men

                      fXf                        mXni            mXf
                        (1)             (2)       (3)             (4)

A. Hourly earnings (LHE)
Constant                                         4.6417          4.6417
Human capital         0.6580           0.7279    0.6956          0.6756
Control              -0.0207           0.0272    0.0869          0.0152
OJT                   0.4629           0.5087    0.5087          0.4629
RQT                   0.1283           0.2919    0.2919          0.1283
Total                 5.8068           6.1339    6.2247          5.9237
B. Labor force separation (LSP)
Constant              1.0683           1.0683    1.1035          1.1035
Human capital         0.1632           0.1545    0.1569          0.1750
Family               -0.0326       -0.0231       0.0100          0.0073
Control               0.1937           0.2143   -0.0142         -0.0206
LHE                  —1.1102       -1.1882      -1.1882         -1.1102
Total                 0.2824           0.2258    0.0680          0.1550
C. On-the-job training (OJT)
Constant              0.7680           0.7680    0.7432          0.7432
Human capital        -0.1216       -0.1415      -0.1366         -0.1175
Control               0.0437           0.0367    0.0565          0.0654
LSP                  -0.0554       -0.0133      -0.0133         -0.0554
RQT                   0.0404           0.0919    0.0919          0.0404
Total                 0.6751           0.7418    0.7417          0.6761
D. Job requirements (RQT)
Constant              0.1744           0.1744    0.7421          0.7421
Human capital         1.7521           1.8207    2.3481          2.1183
Occupations          -0.8389       -0.8368      -0.5249         -0.7456
Control               0.0460           0.0340   -0.3332         -0.2979
LSP                  -0.0332       -0.0079      -0.1413         -0.5905
OJT                  -0.3556       -0.3908      -0.3908         -0.3556
Total                 0.7448           0.7936    1.6950          0.8708
+                                    -64-                                  +



REFERENCES


Arrow, K.J. "The Theory of Discrimination." In Discrimination in Labor

     Markets. Edited by 0. Ashenfelter and A. Rees. Princeton, 1973.

Becker, Gary S. Human   Capital, 2nd   ed. (National Bureau of Economic Research:

     Human Behavior and Social Institutions No. 5.) New York and London:

     Columbia University Press, 1975.

Carmichael, Lorne. Firm Specific Human Capital and Seniority RuleB.

     (Conference Paper Series No. 101.) Cambridge, Mass.: National

     Bureau of Economic Research, 1981.

Duncan, Greg J., and Saul Hoffman. "On-the-Job Training and Earnings

     Differences by Race and Sex," Review of Economics and Statistics,

     61 (November 1979), 594-636.

Fuchs, Victor. "Recent Trends and Long-Run Prospects for Female Earnings,"

     American Economic   Review,   64 (May 1974), 236-42.

Hashimoto, Masanori. "Bonus Payments and Turnover," Journal     of Political
     Economy,   87 (October 1979), 1086-104.
Johnson, Norman L., and Samuel Kotz. Discrete Distribution8. Boston:

     Houghton Miff un, 1969.

Jovanovic, Boyan. "Firm-Specific Capital and Turnover," Journal of Political

     Economy, 87 (December 1979), 1246-60.

Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience3 and Earnings. (National Bureau of

     Economic Research: Human Behavior and Social Institutions No. 2.)

     New York and London: Columbia University Press, 1974.

        "Family Migration Decisions," Journal of Political Economy, 86

      (October 1978), 749-73.

        Union Effects: Wages, Turnover and Job Training. (Working Paper

     No. 808.) Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1981.
                                - 65   -




Mincer, Jacob, and Boyan Jovanovic. Labor Mobility and Wages. (Working
     Paper No. 357.) Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic

     Research, 1979

  —,    and Haim Ofek. "Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation and

     Restoration of Human Capital," Journal of Human Resources, 17

     (Winter 1982), 3-24.

        and Solomon Polachek. "Family Investments in Human Capital:

     Earnings of Women," Journal of Political Economy, 82 (No. 2,

     part II, March/April 1974), S76-S108.

Mortensen, Dale T. "Specific Capital and Labor Turnover," Bell Journal

     of Economics, 9 (Autumn 1978), 572-86.

Oaxaca, R.L., "The Persistence of Male-Female Earning Differentials."

     In Distribution of Economic Well-Being. Edited by F.T. Juster.

     (National Bureau of Economic Research; Studies in Income and

     Wealth, Vol. 41.) Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1977. Pp. 303-44.

Phelps, Edmund S. "The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism,"

     American Economic Review, 62 (September 1972), 659-61.

Salop, Joanne, and Steven Salop. "Self-Selection and Turnover in the

     Labor Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90 (Novembcr 1976),

     619-27.

Sandell, Steven H., and David Shapiro. "Work Expectations, Human Capital

     Accumulation, and the Wages of Young Women," Journal of Human

     Resources, 15 (Summer 1980), 335-53.
