                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  EXPORTING RAISES PRODUCTIVITY IN SUB-SAHARAN
                         AFRICAN MANUFACTURING PLANTS

                                       Johannes Van Biesebroeck

                                          Working Paper 10020
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10020


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




I would like to thank Marcel Fafchamps for his help to get me access to the data. Thanks also to Frank Wolak,
Lanier Benkard, Peter Reiss, Bruce Blonigen and participants at the 2002 NBER URC-ITI conference for
comments on a previous version. Jim Tybout and an anonymous referee provided many useful suggestions.
Financial support from the Littlefield Fellowship and the K.U. Leuven, where much of the work was carried
out, is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Johannes Van Biesbroeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Exporting Raises Productivity in Sub-Saharan African Manufacturing Plants
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
NBER Working Paper No. 10020
October 2003
JEL No. F14, O12, O33

                                            ABSTRACT

Proponents of trade liberalization argue that it will force firms to produce closer to the production
possibility frontier and that the frontier will move out faster. In particular, plants that export will
achieve a higher productivity level. However intuitive the argument, empirical evidence is meager.
This hypothesis is examined by calculating the effect of export status on productivity for a panel of
manufacturing plants in nine African countries. The results indicate that exporters in these countries
are more productive, replicating a similar finding for developed countries. More importantly,
exporters increase their productivity advantage after entry into the export market. While the first
finding can be explained by selection---only the most productive firms engage in exporting---the
latter cannot. The results are robust when unobserved productivity differences and self-selection into
the export market are controlled for using different econometric methods. Scale economies are
shown to be an important channel for the productivity advance. Credit constraints and contract
enforcement problems prevent plants that only produce for the domestic market to fully exploit scale
economies.

Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
and NBER
jovb@chass.utoronto.ca
1     Trade and productivity

It is a well established fact that plants that face foreign competition or have to satisfy demand-

ing foreign customers are forced to adapt. Previous studies have invariably found exporters

to differ substantially from nonexporters and I confirm that finding for plants in sub-Saharan

Africa. While most authors have explained the differences by self-selection—only the most

productive plants choose to start exporting—I find evidence for learning-by-exporting as well.

Even though exporters are more productive than other plants before they start selling abroad,

they manage to increase this productivity advantage following their entry into the export mar-

ket. Exposure to foreign competition or interaction with foreign clients seems to confer some

benefits. More formally, the production function depends positively on lagged export status

and the effect remains after controlling for the endogenous nature of the export participa-

tion decision. I establish and show the robustness of this finding using different econometric

methodologies, which yield qualitatively the same and quantitatively very similar results. It

is important to note that each methodology favored the self-selection over the learning-by-

exporting explanation for the positive correlation between productivity and export status

when applied to data from other countries.

    Opening up to trade is often advocated as a way of stimulating the economy, especially in

developing countries. It is an integral part of most IMF and World Bank structural reform

programs. Some authors have studied the competitive effects of increased import penetra-

tion. For example, Krishna and Mitra (1998) and Tybout and Westbrook (1995) demonstrate

that increased competition from imports lowers the price-cost margin. The coarse industry

classification in the African data set I use, makes it impossible to identify plants that face

competition from increased import penetration. Other authors have emphasized the posi-



                                                1
tive effect on aggregate productivity from resource reallocation following trade liberalization.

Pavcnik (2002) presents evidence of this process for Chile. Bernard and Jensen (1999b) show

for the United States that the reallocation of output share to more productive exporters im-

proves aggregate productivity. Moreover, increased foreign competition leads to closures of

less productive plants or induces plants to shift industry, with similar aggregate productivity

effects, see Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2002). To make a convincing case for such effects,

one needs to observe the universe of plants, which I don’t.

  Instead, I investigate the link between trade openness and productivity by looking at pro-

ductivity differences for exporters over nonexporters. The example of export-led growth in

East Asia underscores the potential for economic development through trade. Plants can ben-

efit from their exporting activities if they learn about and adopt international best practice

production methods, receive feedback from international clients and competitors, or benefit

from other knowledge spillovers or externalities. Theoretical models by Krugman (1979) and

Jovanovic and Lach (1991) incorporate such mechanisms. Alternatively, plants can improve

their product offerings by interacting with foreign clients. Fafchamps, El Hamine, and Zeufack

(2002) find evidence for this type of market learning in Morocco.

  The countries and plants that I study are introduced in Section 2, where I also show that

the simple correlation between productivity and export status holds in Africa, at all levels

of aggregation. In Section 3, I confirm the widely established fact that exporters differ in

important ways from nonexporters. They pay higher wages, operate at a higher scale, produce

with more capital, and have higher productivity. The differences are remarkably similar to

those reported for other countries. An important point of departure from previous studies is

the widening of the gaps after plants enter the export market. This is illustrated by focusing

on different points of a plant’s export cycle and on growth rates pre and post export market


                                               2
entry.

   Section 4 contains a more thorough investigation of the central question of the paper: Is

the productivity advantage of exporters already established before plants enter the export

market or is it increased further post-entry? Using a variety of econometric methods and data

from several countries, Bernard and Jensen (1999a), Isgut (2001), Clerides, Lach, and Tybout

(1998), and Delgado, Farinas, and Ruano (2002) concluded in favor of the self-selection and

against the learning-by-exporting hypothesis. Only the most productive firms are able to

compete internationally or have a sufficient cost advantage to overcome transportation costs.

Exporters are more productive than nonexporters, not because there are any benefits associ-

ated with export activities, but they are simply more productive from the outset. Only a few

studies—Kraay (1999), Girma, Greenaway, and Kneller (2002), and Bigsten et al. (2000a)—

reach the opposite conclusion. Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000) find evidence supporting

learning-by-exporting in Taiwan, but not in South Korea. I review the different methodolo-

gies and the arguments supporting causality conclusions with the corresponding results for

the African plants in Section 4.

   For African exporters, the evidence points to the learning mechanism as partial explanation.

Three different methodologies that concluded in favor of the alternative hypothesis (self-

selection by exporters) for other countries and one new approach are used to support this

conclusion. In Section 3, the time dimension of the panel is exploited to demonstrate that the

differences between exporters and nonexporters widen after entry into the export market. A

positive effect of lagged export status on productivity remains after controlling for self-selection

and the endogeneity of productivity in the firm’s input choices. This is established using

instrumental variables, in Section 4.1, by jointly estimating the model of export participation

developed in Roberts and Tybout (1997) with the production function, in Section 4.2, and


                                                 3
using semi-parametric techniques drawing on work by Olley and Pakes (1996), in Section 4.3.

    If there is one place one can expect firms to benefit from foreign activities, it is sub-Saharan

Africa. The domestic market in all countries is small and foreign sales are a prerequisite to

fully exploit scale economies. In Section 5, I show that approximately 50% of the productivity

premium attributed to exporters results from the higher scale of operation. Nonexporters

have more difficulties exploiting scale economies because of widespread contractual problems

and lack of credit. Domestic clients frequently postpone or default on payments. Sales to for-

eign clients or to multinational companies are less likely to generate such problems. Finally,

the production technology employed in most African firms is lagging best practice consider-

ably, providing ample scope for productivity improvements through imitation and adoption

of foreign technology. Tests for a structural break in the sample supports the conclusion that

exporters produce with a different technology than nonexporters.




2      Countries, plants and exports in Africa

Literature: The evidence on links between productivity and export status in Africa is rela-

tively meager. Given the amount of protection that still exists and the high dispersion of

productivity, the potential benefits of liberalization could be substantial. A few studies inves-

tigated trade effects on productivity at the plant-level data. For Cote d’Ivoire, Harrison (1994)

finds that foreign-owned plants improve productivity following trade liberalization, while the

effects on domestic plants are negative, but insignificant. Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998)

do not find any impact of lagged export status on costs for Morocco. They conclude that the

correlation between export status and productivity is caused by self-selection. For Cameroon,

Ghana, Kenya, and Zimbabwe, Bigsten et al. (2000a) find positive effects of exporting on


                                                 4
productivity and on productivity growth even after accounting for self-selection and firm het-

erogeneity. Kraay (1999) pioneered the methodology and found a positive effect of lagged

exports on productivity for Chinese firms as well. Given that these are the only two studies

to find evidence for learning-by-exporting, a robustness check is warranted.1

   Countries: The sub-Saharan African countries I study are Burundi, Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire,

Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. All nine are low-income countries

with a level of development varying from a GDP per capita of $446 in Ethiopia (in current

PPP in 1995) to $2195 in Zimbabwe. Some summary statistics on the countries are in Table

A.1 in the Appendix. Value added per employee in industry is substantially higher, even con-

verted using actual exchange rates.2 The share of manufacturing in GDP is relatively small

in each country, but it exceeds employment in the sector by a large margin. A fair estimate

is that manufacturing workers are 2 to 3 times more productive than the average worker.

   The share of manufacturing output that is exported ranges from 6% in Burundi to 60% in

Cote d’Ivoire, averaging 29% across countries. Most trade is overseas, as trade flows within

the region are small. Europe is an important trading partner for all countries, while Japan, the

United States and the Middle East are important for some countries. The last column in Table

A.1 shows that the share of manufactured products in total exports averages 23%. Only in

Burundi and Zambia is it smaller than the manufacturing share in GDP. It is true, nevertheless,

that exports are very concentrated. In all countries but Zimbabwe, one agriculture or mining

product accounts for more than 50% of all exports. Given that half of all gross fixed domestic

investment is made up of imported capital goods, it is vital for these countries to diversify

   1
     Tybout (2000) raises some concerns regarding their approach, see footnote 56. Another concern is that
they force all industries in all countries to operate with the same production technology. The data for this
paper includes their plants, but adds plants from five additional countries. A recent working paper by Girma,
Greenaway, and Kneller (2002) also finds evidence for the learning hypothesis in the U.K. using a matching
estimator.
   2
     Comparable employment statistics are only available for industry (which also includes mining and utilities).

                                                       5
the sources of foreign exchange revenues.3 The obvious solution is to expand manufacturing

exports. Over the last two decades this has been happening most successfully in Zambia,

Cameroon, and Zimbabwe.

   Another indication of the importance of manufacturing exports—and the subject of the

remainder of the analysis—is the positive correlation between productivity and export market

activity. In Table 1, this is shown to hold at each level of aggregation. Countries, industries,

or plants that are more prone to exporting also have a higher level of labor productivity. Of

course, this merely establishes a correlation and does not say anything about causality.

   Plants: The sample of manufacturing plants is constructed from firm surveys, carried out

between 1992 and 1996. In each country approximately 200 firms were interviewed in three

consecutive years.4 The data collection was coordinated by the Regional Program on En-

terprise Development at the World Bank. Firms were sampled from four broadly defined

manufacturing sectors: food, textile and clothing, wood and furniture, metal and equipment.

The sampling was stratified by plant-size to give each manufacturing employee equal proba-

bility to be included. For more information on the plants and the sampling scheme, see Van

Biesebroeck (2002). Total value added for the plants included in the sample accounts for

almost 40% of manufacturing GDP in the nine countries combined.5

   To estimate productivity one needs to observe output and inputs. Most of the analysis

uses value added as output, measured as total sales minus raw materials and intermediate

   3
     In the poorest four countries, the average dependency of domestic investment on imported capital rises to
67%.
   4
     In Cote d’Ivoire only two rounds of interviews were completed and in Burundi and Ethiopia only one.
Some firms exit the sample and others were added in later rounds to maintain the sample size. Some of the
sample attrition is the result of economic factors, e.g. bankruptcy, but an equally important reason for a firm
to leave the sample is non-economic. Firms moved or did not want to cooperate anymore. Initially, I ignore
entry and exit, but I control for it explicitly when investigating the robustness of the findings.
   5
     Because employees at large plants produce more output than employees working at smaller plants, the
share of the manufacturing workforce represented by the sampled firms is significantly smaller.



                                                      6
inputs. Labor input is the total number of employees and capital is the replacement value of

the plant and equipment at the end of the year. GDP deflators from World Bank (2000) are

used to make output, materials, and capital comparable across years. The labor productivity

statistics in the last column of Table A.2 are employment weighted averages of plant-level value

added per employee. These numbers correspond reasonably well to the aggregate statistics

for industry in the second column of Table A.1. The oversampling of larger, more productive

plants explains the uniformly higher productivity numbers. The only difference in the relative

ranking of countries is the higher aggregate productivity for Zambia—caused by its large

copper mining industry—and Cote d’Ivoire—possibly the result of inadequate price deflators

following the huge devaluation in the CFA franc. The findings for these plants should reflect

the experiences of an important part of the manufacturing sector in the respective countries.

  Participation on the export market varies tremendously across countries. Table A.3 con-

tains information on export participation, intensity, and destination for the sample of African

manufacturing plants. A number of stylized facts stand out. Participation rises almost mono-

tonically across countries with the level of development of the manufacturing sector. Larger

firms, those with more than 250 employees, are much more likely to engage in exporting. The

majority of exporters sell less than 20% of total sales abroad, but large firms tend to export

more. A sizeable share of exports, on average 41%, goes to overseas destinations.

  The correlations in Table 1 already illustrated that exporters have higher labor produc-

tivity and that among exporters the dollar value of exports is also positively correlated with

productivity. The differences between exporters and nonexporters are investigated in more

detail in the following section.




                                               7
3       Exporters are different

A number of studies have documented that the differences between exporters and nonexporters

go beyond size. Regressing plant characteristics on an export dummy with controls is a popular

way to measure those differences.6 Bernard and Jensen (1995) were the first to perform this

exercise for the United States. Bernard and Wagner (1997) did the same calculations for

Germany and Isgut (2001) for Colombia.7 Table 2 contains some of their main findings and a

column with comparable results for the African plants.

    The qualitative findings are identical in each of the four countries (region in the case of

Africa). Exporters pay higher wages, produce more output per worker, produce more capital-

intensively, sustained by a similarly increased investment rate, and operate at a larger scale.

Quantitatively, the coefficients on the export dummy for Africa exceed those of the comparison

countries, especially the more developed ones. Most of the coefficients are significant at the 1

percent significance level, even though the African sample is substantially smaller than in the

other studies.

    The coefficients on the export dummy are also large in an economic sense. Even after

controlling for size, exporters pay on average 34% higher wages. The pay differential is solely

due to remuneration of nonproduction workers, as was the case in Germany.8 Exporters

produce an extra 50% output per worker, in value added or total sales. The difference can be

the result of higher production, but can also stem from higher quality, and more expensive,

products. The largest difference between the two types of plants is in the scale of operation.

    6
     Controls include country specific time dummies, sector and location dummies, and the logarithm of em-
ployment to control for size (except in the last two regressions).
   7
     Results for the United Kingdom in Girma, Greenaway, and Kneller (2002) are very similar to those for
the United States and Germany and are omitted here.
   8
     Production and nonproduction workers can only be distinguished in a subset of the sample.




                                                    8
African exporters produce on average 300% more output and they employ three times as many

workers. In the United States and Germany exporters are only twice as large as nonexporters.

The enormous size differential is less surprising in less developed countries, where the domestic

market for manufactures is small. Most of the estimated size differentials for Colombia are

similar to those for the African countries.9

   The previous results establish that African exporters differ substantially from other plants,

with invariably larger differentials than other countries. It makes this sample a promising

place to find learning-by-exporting effects. Exploiting the time dimension of the panel data

set I can go one step further. If changes in export status are observed, the effect of the export

activity can be isolated by comparing productivity before and after. The question is whether

the differences between exporters and nonexporters already existed before exporters started

exporting and whether differences outlast exit from the export market. Of the 900 plant-years

with positive exports (23% of the sample), 128 observations are plants that just entered the

export market. 103 plants stop exporting before the end of the sample period.

   I extend the regression results from Table 2 by including a full set of dummies describing

the entire export experience of plants. The omitted category are plants that never export.

The pre-export dummy distinguishes plants that only start exporting later in the sample from

perennial nonexporters. A similar post-export dummy identifies previous exporters after their

exit from the export market. Three more dummies are turned on for plants in years that

are actively exporting. Plants are classified as “newly entered” or “about to quit” if they

start or stop exporting during the sample period. As “continuous exporters” if they export

   9
     Including the share of sales that is exported as explanatory variable, only produces a significant coefficient
in the last two regressions, that measure the size differential (estimates are omitted). Larger plants tend to
export a higher share of their output. The small size of the manufacturing sector in African economies makes
this almost unavoidable.




                                                        9
throughout.

   The results of the regressions are presented concisely in the tree panels of Figure 1. The

first thing to note is that each and every line is above the X-axis.10 Plants that are active on

the export market at any point in time, pay higher salaries, produce more output per worker,

and operate with more capital and at larger scale at every point in time, even when they are

not exporting. This is consistent with the selection and the learning hypothesis.

   The top panel displays the pattern over the export-cycle for the two size variables, sales and

employment. Some of the size differential already exists before entry in the export market,

it increase slightly with entry, grows tremendously for plants active on the export market for

a longer time, and tends to reduce leading up and following exit from the export market.

The middle panel shows a similar pattern for the two labor productivity and wage variables.

Differences increase while exporting and decrease before and after exit from the export market.

The only differences are the larger jumps on initial entry, at least relatively, and firms that

have been exporting for a longer time are not distinguishable from new exporters. In the

bottom panel, for investment and capital per worker, the initial jump for new exporters is

even larger, and the evolution prior to exit is different.

   The pattern of gradually increasing differentials when plants start exporting and decreases

when they stop are supportive of the learning-by-exporting hypothesis. In particular, for every

characteristic considered the difference between active exporters and nonexporters is larger

than the differences prior to entry on the export market. In addition, differentials decrease

prior to exit from the export market and decrease further (except for capital) post-exit. Few

differences are significant, but the pattern is very consistent. Even though many differences

  10
    The full regression results are in Table B.1 in the Appendix. All coefficients are significantly different from
zero, except for three dummies in the investment per worker regression.



                                                        10
are large in an economic sense, a longer or larger sample would be needed to find stronger

results.

   Equality of the coefficients can be tested pairwise or jointly, see Table B.1. From the tests

I can conclude that (a) exporters always differ from perennial nonexporters; (b) continuous

exporters are larger than any other group of plants; (c) intermittent exporters have signifi-

cantly lower labor productivity than continuous exporters before or after their export spells,

but hardly lower productivity when they are actively exporting (p-values of 0.22 and 0.28);

(d) plants primarily increase their capital intensity at the start of export spells.

   An alternative strategy is to look at correlations between growth rates and export status.

While plants might self-select into the export market based on their productivity level, this

is much less likely for productivity growth. This intuition is borne out by the data. First,

I regress the growth rates on a dummy indicating whether the plant is ever an exporter.

Most coefficients in the first row of Table 3 are positive, but only the value added per worker

regression reveals a significant effect. Over their entire export-cycle, exporters do not enjoy

consistently higher growth rates than perennial nonexporters. The results are very different

when I regress the same growth rates on a dummy for current export activity. In this case,

every single coefficient is positive. The effects are very large and highly significant for the labor

productivity and size variables. The higher growth rates are not simply firm fixed-effects, given

the results in the first row, but are associated with actual export activity.

   Including two dummies, one for current and one for past or future export activity, confirms

this finding. All coefficients in the last row of Table 3 are negative. Exporters that are currently

not active on the export market have lower growth rates than perennial nonexporters. When

they are actively exporting the differences are again positive (except for wage growth) and

very large, between 3.5% and 16.3%. Exporters are able to improve productivity, capital

                                                 11
                                                                                                               11
intensity and size, but only when they are actively exporting, not ex ante or ex post.                              I

interpret this as further corroborating evidence on the learning-by-exporting hypothesis: only

during export spells do plants grow faster.

   Given that the goal is to establish a link between productivity and exporting, one would

like to go beyond labor productivity. Exporters produce more output per worker, but to some

extent this is simply the result of capital deepening. Often the analysis proceeds in two steps.

First, productivity is estimated using index numbers (TFP) or econometrically. Subsequently,

productivity estimates are regressed on a set of dummy variables, characterizing the export

history of a plant. Bernard and Jensen (1999a) and Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000) adopt

this approach with TFP estimates for the United States, Taiwan, and South Korea. They

find that the productivity gap between exporters and nonexporters opens up almost entirely

in the years prior to entry in the export market. The gap hardly increases after entry. They

conclude in favor of the selection and against the learning hypothesis.

   TFP has the advantage that no estimation is required, but for the African plants a num-

ber of necessary assumptions are likely to be violated. For a subset of the African sample,

Söderbom and Teal (2000) illustrate that firms of different sizes face different factor prices and

they doubt that factor markets are competitive. Van Biesebroeck (2002) shows that returns to

scale are increasing and significantly different from unity. Using Monte Carlo simulations, Van

Biesebroeck (2003) illustrates that TFP is less robust to measurement error than econometric

productivity estimates, which is an additional concern for the African data set.

   Estimating productivity econometrically is one solution, but the endogeneity of export

status will still cause trouble. If exporting improves productivity, it allows plants to produce

more output from the same inputs, shifting the production frontier out. In the two-step

 11
      I did not include results with separate pre and post export dummies, because few coefficients are significant.


                                                         12
approach, output is first regressed on inputs, from which a productivity measure is calculated.

If export status is correlated with inputs, which was clearly shown to be the case in the

previous section, omitting the export dummy from the production function regression yields

inconsistent input coefficient and productivity estimates. The straightforward solution is to

fold the two steps into one and include the export dummy directly in the production function.12

   I estimate the following production function



               Qjt = Ajt Lαjtlc Kjt
                                 αkc
                                              with Ajt = eαx EXjt−τ + ωcit + ωjt + jt .                 (1)



The productivity term Ajt , is a function of export activity (EXjt ), aggregate productivity

growth for the country-industry (ωcit ), unobserved plant-level productivity (ωjt ), and random

measurement error or a transitory productivity shock (it ). While ωjt is known to the plant

and it conditions its input choices or export decision on it, this is not the case for jt . The

input coefficients vary across country, but I only report the average estimates.13 For the

moment, I estimate equation (1) using random effects, allowing for correlation of unobserved

productivity over time within units, but not controlling for correlation with input or export

choices. In the next section, I will control explicitly for both endogeneity problems.

   Results in the first and third column of Table 4 confirm the findings from Table 2. In the

full sample of nine countries, exporters are on average 28% more productive. Limiting the

sample to plants that are interviewed at least twice (only those are included when endogeneity

problems are controlled for in the next section), this rises to a 37% productivity advantage.

  12
      Aitken and Harrison (1999) follow the same approach to estimate productivity effects of FDI. Clerides,
Lach, and Tybout (1998) avoid the estimation of productivity altogether, using observable cost data, and look
for a link between average variable costs and export status.
   13
      Estimating the production function with input coefficients that also vary by industry did not yield any
significant differences (results are omitted).



                                                     13
These percentages overstate the learning-by-exporting effect for several reasons. The export

dummy picks up the self-selection effect, because export participation is endogenously deter-

mined. Using lagged exports partially remedies this effect and it reduces the productivity

advantages by a third to 22%, in the fifth column. To the extent that export participation

is correlated over time, this is only a partial fix. One mechanism that generates such persis-

tency is the existence of sunk costs of exporting, see for example Roberts and Tybout (1997).

Alternative solutions are considered in the next section.

  The dependency of input choices on productivity might contribute to the upward bias in the

export coefficient. Under fairly general assumptions, the labor coefficient will be affected more

severely and be biased upward with a corresponding downward bias in the capital coefficient,

see Olley and Pakes (1996). Given that exporters are more capital-intensive, it is likely to

induce an overestimate of the export effect. Three different solutions are proposed in the next

section. One of the methods I use, GMM-SYS, relies on two lags, which forces me to drop

plants from Cote d’Ivoire as well. For comparability, I included the estimates for six countries

in the last column. Lagged export status is still associated with higher productivity levels,

18% higher in this case.

  Including a full set of dummies characterizing the entire export history of plants generates

results very similar to those in Figure 1. Productivity of future exporters already exceeds

that of nonexporters by a large margin even before they enter the export market, evidence of

self-selection. When exporting starts, the difference increases and it is even larger for plants

that have been exporting for a longer time, evidence of learning-by-exporting. Leading up to

exit from the export market productivity decreases and this continues after the actual exit.

As before, few difference are statistically significant, but the pattern is remarkably similar.

  The before-after identification strategy provides evidence supporting both the self-selection

                                               14
and learning-by-exporting hypothesis. Future exporters are already more productive, operate

with more capital, and are larger in size than nonexporters before they start exporting. This

is not the end of the story. Comparing exporters during export spells and in years that they

do not export, consistently shows higher productivity levels and higher productivity growth

associated with the export activity. Using a similar identification strategy, Bernard and Jensen

(1999a) only found evidence pointing towards self-selection in the United States and likewise

for Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000) for South Korea.

    Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998) used two different identification strategies—exogeneity

assumptions on lagged inputs and augmenting the model of production with an export partic-

ipation equation—to find support only for the self-selection hypothesis. In the next section, I

adapt both of their methods and a fourth semiparametric approach, to control for unobserved

productivity differences and self-selection. This last method has the added benefit of control-

ling for exit. For the African plants, all methods support the existence of learning-by-exporting

effects.




4     Learning-by-exporting controlling for self-selection

4.1        Instrumental variables: GMM-SYS

Because the export status of firms is not randomly assigned, one should control for it. If

conditioning on observables is sufficient to control for selection, it suffices to regress produc-

tivity on EXjt−1 include those variables, as in Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000), Bernard

and Jensen (1999a), and Bigsten et al. (2000a), or simply include those variables directly in




                                               15
the production function (1).14 Alternatively, one can control for selection using instrumental

variables, which requires weaker assumptions. Only the instruments need to be independent

of the unobserved productivity, while before the export status itself had to be conditionally

independent. Similar arguments are used to control for the simultaneity of input choices and

unobserved productivity.

   Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998) estimate a variant of equation (1) using a generalized

method of moments estimator. They do not control for the potential simultaneity of (lagged)

exports and unobserved productivity, but note that the variance of the unobserved productiv-

ity was estimated very small in their maximum likelihood estimation. Neglecting self-selection

is likely to bias their findings towards finding learning effects. The results they obtain using

the GMM estimator are hardly more supportive of the learning-by-exporting hypothesis than

the ML results in Colombia, but they find some positive effects for a number of Moroccan

industries.

   I estimate equation (1) using the GMM-SYS estimator of Blundell and Bond (1998). Un-

observed productivity is assumed to evolve according to an autoregressive process



                              ωjt = ρωjt−1 + jt .                     |ρ| < 1



In its dynamic representation the production function in logarithms becomes



         qjt = αx (EXjt−1 − ρEXjt−2 ) + αlc (ljt − ρljt−1 ) + αkc (kjt − ρkjt−1 ) + ρqjt−1

  14
     The results in Bigsten et al. (2000a) still suffer from the two-stage omitted variable problem mentioned
earlier, because they first estimate productivity econometrically. Girma, Greenaway, and Kneller (2002) use
the same idea in a matching estimator with data for the U.K. and they find some support for the learning
hypothesis.




                                                     16
                   + (αcit − ραcit−1 ) + (jt − ρjt−1 ) .
                      |       {z       }   |     {z          }
                              ∗
                             αcit                ∗jt


The GMM-SYS approach simultaneously estimates equation (2) in levels and in first dif-

ferences. Twice lagged input and output variables figure as instruments in the differenced

equation and lagged first differences are the instruments for the level equation. Estimating

both equations controls for the persistent part of unobserved productivity, without throwing

away the information contained in the levels. Because there are two lags, only data for six

countries can be used. In Table 5, I report results with and without enforcing the coeffi-

cient restrictions in the first and fourth columns, respectively. Tests resoundingly reject the

coefficient restrictions on lagged coefficients and I will focus on the unrestricted results.

   Exogeneity of the export status can be tested with a Durbin-Hausman specification test.

The p-value for the test-statistic is 0.05 and I reject the exogeneity assumption. Four additional

variables are used as instruments for lagged export status: the location of the firm, ethnicity

of the owner, foreign ownership, and state ownership. The intuition is that firms located in

the capital will be more prone to exporting simply because transport infrastructure is better

developed. The ethnicity of the owner influences the extent of domestic and foreign contacts.

If the owner belongs to a domestic minority or speaks a foreign language, the firm is more

likely to export. Firms with some foreign ownership are, ceteris paribus, also more likely to

export. The Sargan test for overidentifying restrictions is reported to asses the validity of

the instruments, assuming at least one variable is a proper instrument. When the coefficient

restrictions are not enforced, in the fourth column, the validity of the instrument set is not

rejected.15 All coefficient estimates and tests are reported in the first and fourth column of

  15
   With the restrictions enforced, the p-value for the Sargan test is much lower, but it does not decline when
export status (in addition to inputs) is treated as endogenous. The lagged variables, not the instruments for
export status, seem to be the weak instruments.


                                                        17
Table 5 below.



4.2     Modeling export participation: MLE

The estimation method outlined in the previous section is fairly flexible, but because of the

twice lagged instruments it can only use a limited sample. The result is a positive, but only

marginally significant coefficient estimate on lagged export status. Another way of controlling

for the endogeneity of export market status is to model the participation decision explicitly and

jointly estimate it with the production function (1). This approach is more demanding in terms

of economic assumptions (and programming effort), but generates more precise estimates.

Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998) pioneered this approach to evaluate the impact of exporting

on firms in Colombia and Morocco. They jointly estimate an average variable cost equation

and a selection rule for entry into the export market. Unobserved effects that influence

exporting and productivity are incorporated and allowed to be correlated across equations.

They find that lagged export status is not significant in the cost function, while lagged costs

do predict export status. They conclude in favor of the self-selection hypothesis and against

learning-by-exporting.

   Kraay (1999) and Bigsten et al. (2000a) estimate a similar model for China and four African

countries.16 While Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998) use observable cost data as dependent

variable in the first equation, these studies use an econometric estimate of productivity as

dependent variable. This risks introducing omitted variable bias, as discussed on page 13.

  16
    Bigsten et al. (2000a) uses some of the same data as this paper, but limits the sample to only four
countries and uses a different approach to calculate productivity. Their implementation makes the restrictive
assumption that all countries share the same production function. Another point of difference is that they
assume a discrete distribution for the unobservable effects variables and estimate the three points of support,
instead of integrating out continuous random variables.




                                                      18
   The system of equations I estimate is given by


                      T
                      X
             qjt =           (αqτ qjt−τ + αxτ EXjt−τ ) + αlc ljt + αkc kjt + ω1j + 1jt                  (2)
                      τ =1
                      
                                  T                                     4
                                                                                   z
                                   X                                     X
                       1 if              (βqτ q̃jt−τ + βxτ EXjt−τ ) +         γz Zjt + ω2j + 2jt ≥ 0
                      
                      
                      
          EXjt =                   τ =1                                  z=1                             (3)
                      
                      
                       0 otherwise.
                      
                      



The input coefficients in the production function vary by country (c = 1...7). The four

dummy variables Z 1 − Z 4 are the exogenous determinants of export status that were used

as instruments in the previous section: location in the capital city, foreign ownership, ethnic

owner, state ownership. The right-hand side variable in the probit equation q̃jt−1 (and q̃jt−2 )

is lagged productivity, calculated by rearranging equation (2), deducting all observable right-

hand side variables from qjt−1 , and substituting in equation (3). Country-year and industry

are added to both equations. The short duration of the panel limits the number of lags I can

include to two (T ≤ 2).17 The remaining estimation issues are handled as in Clerides, Lach,

and Tybout (1998). Both error terms 1 and 2 are assumed to be i.i.d. normally distributed.

The unobserved productivity terms ω1 and ω2 are integrated out using Gaussian quadrature,

allowing for correlation between both terms. Lagged equations are added to the system to

solve the initial values problem. They contain only the exogenous variables in the system and

nuisance parameters. For the full likelihood function, see Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1996).

Results are in the second and fifth column of Table 5.

  17
    Using two lags the sample is the same as for the GMM-SYS estimation. Including only a single lag in
output (productivity) and export status, allows the use of plants from Cote d’Ivoire as well.




                                                        19
4.3     Semiparametric estimation: OP

Finally, I adapt the semiparametric estimator developed by Olley and Pakes (1996) to control

for unobserved productivity and export status. A benefit of this approach is the explicit

control for exit from the sample that is assumed to happen when productivity falls below a

threshold. In particular, Olley and Pakes (1996) argue that plants with more capital are likely

to wither greater reductions in productivity, making the exit threshold a decreasing function

of capital.18

   Underlying the approach is an investment function, it = It (kt , at , ωt ) which is monotonically

increasing in productivity (ω) for any given level of capital (k) and age (a). As a result, the

investment equation is invertible, producing an expression for productivity as an unknown

function of investment, capital, and age. In the first estimation step, this expression is sub-

stituted in the production function and the coefficient on labor (or any other variable input

coefficient) is recovered using nonparametric techniques, controlling for the dependency on in-

vestment, capital, and age. In the second step, the survival probability of a plant is predicted,

using a nonparametric probit regression. In the third and final step, coefficients on the state

variables—capital and age—are recovered, using semiparametric nonlinear least squares.

   For the current application, the investment function and survival probability will depend on

export status as well, while the dependency on plant age is ignored. Exporters might choose

a different investment level and have a different exit rule, even controlling for capital stock

and productivity, because of different market prospects. Hence, I specify it = It0 (kt , EXt , ωt )

and P rob(exit after period t) = P rob(ωt+1 ≤ ω t (kt , it , EXt ). Given that both relationships

conditions on the observable export status, no new derivations are necessary. The investment

  18
    Imperfections in the capital market or a profit function that is increasing in capital—e.g. a constant
returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function—will produce such a result.


                                                   20
function is still monotonic in productivity even though the functional relationship is likely to

differ for exporters and nonexporters. The nonparametric inversion is simply made export

status specific.19 The only difference with the Olley-Pakes estimator is to replace age by

export status in each step and to recover the coefficient on lagged export status in the third

step.20 Even though export status does not evolve deterministically as is the case for age, it

remains quite general to assume that it evolves according to a Markov process as a function

of lagged productivity and lagged export status, which is what the theory requires. Results

with this approach are in the third and sixth column of Table 5.



4.4     Results

The results using each of the three estimation methods are in Table 5. In the first three

columns, only one lag of export status and (where applicable) the dependent variable is

included. In the last three columns, two lags are included. For the GMM estimator, two

lags are always necessary, but in the first column the coefficient restrictions are enforced.

Country-year interactions and industry and location dummies are included as controls in each

equation, but not reported. Coefficients on labor and capital vary by countries, as before, but

only the average estimate and standard error are reported.

   The coefficient estimates of virtually all export dummies are positive, although only sig-

nificantly different from zero if a single lag is included. Engaging in exporting appears to

shifts the production function out by 20% to 38%, depending on the estimation method. The

  19
      Even plants that change export status do not pose a problem, as the investment function will be increasing
in export status, see the evidence in Table 2, while at the same time plants with higher productivity are more
likely to start exporting, from the evidence on self-selection. Both effects reinforce each other and will not
change the monotonic relationship between investment and productivity.
   20
      Note that this adjusted Olley-Pakes method estimates the coefficient of interest, the one on lagged export
status, in the third step. The nonparametric inversions in the first two steps control for current export status.



                                                       21
sign and magnitude of the export coefficient estimates are plausible and supportive of the

learning-by-exporting hypothesis. Test for the null hypothesis of no effect of exporting on

productivity, after controlling for self-selection, are rejected in the first three and the fifth

columns.21

   Comparing the first column in Table 5 with the last two columns in Table 4 produces the

counterintuitive result that the coefficient on the export dummy jumps when export status

is treated as endogenous and instrumented. This is generally the case in the literature on

treatment effects that uses instruments for identification. If the effect of treatment—engaging

in exporting—varies across plants, the point estimate of the treatment dummy will depend on

which observations drive the instrumental variables identification.22 The positive correlation

between exporting and productivity, in Table 4, is partly explained by self-selection of more

productive plants. Some firms enter the export market because of high initial productivity,

without deriving any benefit from that activity. The IV identification strategy measures the

productivity effect of exporting from firms that enter the export market for different reasons.

Some firms export simply because they are located close to necessary transport infrastructure

or because the owner has family or business partners abroad, even though their productivity

level by itself would never warrant entry into the export market. These firms did not have

high initial productivity, but face the same foreign competition. They stand more of a change

  21
     A longer sample could potentially provide stronger results. The only country for which more data (five
years in total) is available is Ghana. Unfortunately, this is also the country with the third lowest export
participation rate (second lowest for large firms), second lowest foreign sales intensity, and lowest overseas
sales of all countries. As a result, one would expect to find the lowest learning-by-exporting effects in Ghana.
In addition, the sample is relatively small in the fourth and fifth year. 120 Ghanaian firms are observed in
each of the first three waves, while only 44 extra firms are observed at least three times in the five year sample
period. Each of the four estimation methods produce results similar to those in Table 4 and 5. The lagged
export dummy is 0.23 (t-statistic of 1.33) using the random effect panel data estimator; 0.26 (0.40) with the
GMM-SYS estimator; 0.29 (1.20) with the MLE; and 0.27 (1.02) with the Olley-Pakes estimator.
  22
     In a similar econometric context, Card (2001) illustrates that when returns to schooling are estimated with
IV, individuals with low schooling or (unobserved) ability generally drive the identification. These individuals
are likely to have higher returns to schooling, making the estimated return with IV invariably exceed the OLS
estimate.

                                                       22
of benefiting from the foreign exposure and it is not implausible to find a higher coefficient

estimate for the export dummy. The instruments are constant over time for most plants and

fail to distinguish between the once and twice lagged effects in the fourth column. Standard

errors are substantially larger if the restrictions are not enforced.

  The second and fifth column in Table 5 contain the results of joint estimation of the

production function and export participation decision with maximum likelihood. The latter

results are in Appendix B. Even though many coefficients are still not estimated as precisely

as one would hope, most are now significantly different from zero at the 5% significance level.

The results lend support to both the self-selection and learning-by-exporting hypothesis. The

positive coefficients on lagged productivity (qt−j
                                               ˜ ) in the export participation equation, see

Table B.2 in the Appendix, confirm that more productive plants are more likely to enter the

export market. The significant and large coefficients on lagged export status in the same

equation indicate sunk costs of entry. Past export activity is one of the best predictors for

current export activity. The ethnicity and nationality of the firm owner have most predictive

power for the export status.

  The positive coefficients on the lagged export dummies in the production function point

to the presence of learning effects. Previous activity on the export market raises current

output, even controlling for the selection effect. The effects are slightly larger than the GMM

estimate and become even stronger when two lags of export history are included. It takes

time for positive effects to materialize. Firms that only exported last period are able to

produce 21% more output. If firms were exporting for both of the previous periods, the

productivity advancement increases to 55%, which is significantly higher. If these effects

seem (implausibly) large, one should keep in mind that the productivity dispersion in Africa




                                                23
exceeds similar measures for the U .S.23 The results in Table 5 also assume that all firms—

exporters and nonexporters—use a production technology with the same scale economies,

which are constant over the entire output range. In the next section, I investigate whether

exporters produce on a different point on a more flexible production frontier or with a different

technology altogether.

   The result with the semiparametric estimator, in the third and sixth column, confirm the

findings. As expected, the labor coefficient is estimated smaller than with the random effects

estimator. The export coefficient drops slightly from the random effects estimate, 20% versus

22% previously, but remains in the same ballpark. It is still estimated significantly different

from zero, although only when a single lag is included. Controlling for exit from the sample

did not have much impact on the results. Correlation between productivity and exit does not

seem to be a serious problem. Recall that the sample is not a census and that there are many

causes for firms to drop out.

   All three identification strategies that failed to find learning-by-exporting effects in other

countries point towards firms benefiting from previous export activity in Africa. A fourth

semiparametric method that controls for sample attrition and allows for a very flexible evolu-

tion of unobserved productivity differences gives basically the same results, supportive of the

learning hypothesis. A natural next step is to question what is causing the higher productivity

that exporters enjoy. I investigate two potential benefits, returns to scale and better contract

enforceability. Both effects are likely to interact.

  23
     Van Biesebroeck (2002) shows that the productivity ratio the 80th to the 20th percentile firm in the
different African countries of the sample ranges from 4.1 in Zimbabwe to over 9 in Ethiopia, Ghana, and
Zambia. The comparable ratio for U.S. manufacturing firms was 2.75 in 1987.




                                                   24
5     Sources of productivity advantage

5.1     Returns to Scale

The most intuitive and straightforward benefit for exporters is the ability to sell in a larger

market. The domestic market in each sample country is relatively small and returns to scale

are estimated to be increasing. In a survey of manufacturing in developing countries, Tybout

(2000) mentions that the potential scale economies in developing countries are smaller than

commonly expected. He cites, based on studies for Asia, Latin America and Northern Africa,

returns to scale between 1.05 and 1.10, which are slightly lower than the 1.10 to 1.15 estimates

I obtain in Africa, see Table 4. He is right to argue that such mild economies of scale are

unlikely to be the cause of the stalled development process, but profit maximizing firms can

be expected to try to exploit them, for example by starting to export.

    It was shown before that exporters are clearly larger and that the size gap increases with

entry into the export market. The size of the productivity advantage attributed to exporters

depends crucially on the assumption regarding returns to scale. If the production function

is estimated with constant returns to scale (CRS) enforced, the productivity advantage of

exporters increases substantially. The first two columns in Table 6 shows an export advantage

of 45% under CRS, relative to 22% under VRS. Without economies of scale, the export dummy

absorbs some of the size effect. Approximately half of the productivity advantage of exporters

can be attributed to the realization of scale economies.

    One might object to an interpretation of scale economies realized by exporters as a pro-

ductivity advantage. A more flexible specification of the production technology should allow

scale economies to vary by plant size. This is the case for a translog production function.

Estimation results are in the third column of Table 6. Country-specific quadratic and in-

                                              25
teraction terms are included, but not reported. Inputs are normalized by country to have

mean zero, which gives the linear coefficients the same interpretation as for the Cobb-Douglas

technology. Average scale economies for the sample are still estimated to be increasing, at

1.13, but evaluating the function separately for the average exporter and nonexporter shows a

clear difference. Returns to scale are estimated higher for nonexporters, 1.17 versus 1.08, and

the difference is statistically different at a 1% significance level. Exporters choose to operate

higher up on the production frontier, where remaining scale economies are diminished.

   One could go one step further and argue that the two groups of plants do not operate

with the same technology. Exporters differ in many respects from nonexporters. They have

a higher capital-labor ratio, invest more frequent, have higher value added as a percentage of

sales, introduce new technology more frequent, and are more likely to have a formal training

program for employees.24 Adoption of production technology could provide another channel

for exporters in developing countries to improve productivity. For example, Barro and Sala-

i-Martin (1997) built a model where countries copy new technologies from more advanced

trading partners, leading to convergence in income between countries.

   I estimate the production function separately for exporters and nonexporters and test for

a structural break in the sample between the two categories. The last two columns of Table

6 contain these results. Exporters do not only differ from nonexporters in productivity level,

but also in input elasticities, or returns to scale. Returns to scale are not significantly different

from one for exporters, indicating that these firms have exhausted all scale economies. Non-

exporters, on the other hand, produce at a point on the production function with significantly

increasing returns to scale. Allowing different coefficients in the production function highlights

the differences between the two groups of plants. It confirms the higher capital intensity (the

  24
       See Van Biesebroeck (2002) for evidence from the same data set.


                                                      26
capital coefficient is 27% of the sum of both inputs, versus 17% for nonexporters) and pro-

ductivity growth (+12% versus -2%) for exporters. The Chow test for structural break, which

assumes equal variation of the residual for both types, decidedly rejects that exporters and

nonexporters share the same technology. The χ2 -distributed test statistic is 2.86, while the

critical value for a 1% significance level is 1.94. The Wald test, which allows for different

variations, confirms this result. The F-statistic is 22.08, while the 1% critical value is 13.28.25



5.2     Trade credit and contract defaults

The results in Section 3 revealed that exporters are substantially larger and that their size

advantage was largely established while exporting, not before entry on the export market.

Many of the firms in the sample report to be operating at a lower scale than they would like.

When asked directly, 16% of the owners or managers mention that insufficient demand is the

principal limit to expansion, second only to credit availability. Almost a third of the owners

lists it as one of the three most important problems. It is a particularly acute problem for

the group of smallest enterprises if they do not export, while small exporters hardly mention

it.26 The largest problem by far, for these firms, is the limited availability of formal credit, see

the first line in Table 7. Domestically oriented firms are more likely to report being growth

and/or credit constraint.27

   Some evidence indicates that both problems are related. In order to increase sales, firms of-

ten extend trade credit to their clients. The statistics in Table 7 list the outstanding amounts

  25
     Interestingly, if the sample is similarly split between large (more than 100 employees) and small firms, the
only significant difference is the estimated returns too scale, while the relative importance of capital and labor
as well as the average productivity growth are nearly identical.
  26
     Lack of demand is one of the main problems for 34% of nonexporters that employ less than 50 workers,
against only 10% for similarly-sized exporters.
  27
     In contrast, the third most important problem, inappropriate infrastructure, is equally important for firms
of different size and independent of export orientation.


                                                       27
of credit at the time of interview as a percentage of total sales. Exporters, especially smaller

ones, award substantially more trade credit and also receive slightly more. For formal credit,

the big distinction is between small and large firms, while export status hardly matters. To

underscore the importance of trade credit, I list the importance of various forms of credit

as percentage of sales, as well as the (weighted) average credit period, in Table B.3 in the

Appendix. While the total amount of trade credit is of the same order of magnitude as the

amount of formal credit, it turns over much more rapidly. The risks involved are correspond-

ingly greater.

  More than 75% of all firms give trade credit, but the difficulty enforcing contracts in Africa

makes this a particularly risky expansion strategy. Payments are often late, leading to disputes

and renegotiations.28 Almost two thirds of all firms report having had late or nonpayment

problems with domestic clients in the last year. The large number of problems reported,

between 4 and 12 a year on average, make clear that it is a widespread phenomena. Sales to

foreign firms, on the other hand, are significantly less likely to lead to disputes. Exporters

report that only 8% of all client related payment problems are with foreign firms, even though

they make up more than 30% of the sales in the sample.29 When a problem with a foreign

firm arises it is three out of four times the first, and possible also the last, business contact.

In contrast, when payment problems arise with domestic firms, the two firms already had

an established business relationship in five out of six cases. It is not surprising then that

exporters extend trade credit more easily to their clients. Most importantly, small exporters

use trade credit liberally, aiding expansion and realizing scale economies. A bill of lading is

one institution that facilitates this practice by exporters. Once the goods are shipped off to

 28
      See Bigsten et al. (2000b).
 29
      Statistically, payment by foreign firms turns out to be as reliable as payment by family members.




                                                      28
the client, the seller’s bank arranges payment directly with the buyer’s bank, taking over the

exporter’s contract risk.

   One can wonder to what extent these contractual considerations weaken the self-selection

or learning effects, by reducing the correlation between productivity and export status. To

address this explicitly, I reestimate the model with production function and export participa-

tion decision from Section 4.2, including three extra lagged variables as determinants of the

export decision.30 Results for a limited number of coefficients are in the “endogenous export

participation” columns of Table 8. Firms are slightly more likely to start exporting if one or

two years ago they experienced contractual problems with clients, reported to be constraint

by lack of demand, or extended a lot of trade credit. The contractual variables are estimated

imprecisely, especially in the equation with only one export lag. With two lags, all variables

enter with positive sign, as expected, albeit still not significantly different from zero. The

effect of lagged export status is slightly reduced, but still large and positive. The coefficient

drops only slightly from 0.35 to 0.29, when only one export lag is included. There seems

to be some selection into the export market based on these ”problem” variables, but not a

strong effect. The self-selection effect based on unobserved productivity remains robust after

controlling for contractual problems.

   Because exporting helps firms to realize scale economies, there is an effect over and beyond

the self-selection. They might start exporting to reduce their exposure to client defaults, but

the higher scale of operation will show up as productivity gains if returns to scale are constant

across firms or if exporters produce at a different point on the same production frontier, as

the translog estimates in the third column of Table 6 suggest. If exporters operate with a

  30
    The contractual problem variables are only available in the first year. Therefore, I limit the sample to
firms that participated in the first wave.



                                                    29
different technology, self-selection can have further beneficial effects of inducing firms to adopt

a technology with higher productivity growth.

   Assuming that exporting solves the contractual, lack of demand, and excessive trade credit

problem, one can verify whether firms that start exporting for exogenous reasons also suffered

from the same contractual problems. If this is the case, some of the effects attributed to

learning-by-exporting may fundamentally come from foreign sales solving domestic contracting

problems, rather than shifting out the (technological) production frontier. A two step approach

addresses this question. First, export status is predicted using the exogenous variables from

the GMM and MLE approaches in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, including country and industry

dummies. This isolates the exogenous tendency for firms to start exporting and abstract from

any self-selection effects. In the second stage, the predicted export probability is regressed

on the three contractual variables. If these coefficients have positive signs, it means that

firms that started exporting for exogenous reasons, the very firms that drive identification of

the learning-by-exporting effects in the GMM and MLE approaches, suffered from the three

contractual problems. If exporting adequately solves those, the learning effects might simply

pick up the resolution of the contractual problems.

   Results in the last two columns of Table 8 confirm that previous contractual problems,

lack of demand, or large trade credit given, are positively related to future export status.31

At least some of the learning effects might indicate resolution of contractual problems, rather

than higher production efficiency.

  31
     The usual procedure in a cross-section would be to run the reverse regressions and see whether contract
problems and the two other variables can be predicted by the exogenous component of the export status.
Running these separate regressions also yielded positive coefficients. I do not report these results as they
involve predicting past variables using future behavior, which are hard to interpret.




                                                    30
6     Conclusions

Exporters of manufacturers in sub-Saharan Africa have a higher level of productivity than non-

exporters. This replicates similar findings for a number of other countries. In contrast with

the other studies, the productivity gap in Africa cannot solely be attributed to self-selection

of more productive firms into the export market. Exporters increase their productivity ad-

vantage after they start exporting. They not only have a higher productivity level, but also

a higher rate of productivity growth. The productivity advantage for exporters remains after

controlling for the endogeneity of the export decision using instrumental variables or explicitly

estimating the export participation decision jointly with the production function. A fourth

semiparametric method that controls in addition for sample selection supports the same con-

clusion. All of this points to the presence of some learning-by-exporting effects.

    To explain the productivity gap, returns to scale are particularly important. Exporters have

exhausted scale economies, while nonexporters are producing at a point on the production

function with significant increasing returns to scale. I can reject the hypothesis that both types

of firms produce with the same technology, which is consistent with the acquisition of more

advanced technologies by exporters from interacting with foreign clients and competitors. In

particular, exporting can solve the perceived lack of demand that many firms face. Domestic

expansion is limited by the lack of formal. The higher risks associated with trade credit—

accounts-collectable problems with domestic firms are widespread—makes extending credit to

clients a risky expansion strategy. Exporting can provide a solution by providing access to

a more reliable client base and through the specific institutions that deal with credit risks

associated with foreign trade. This effect has not been documented before and warrants

further investigation.



                                               31
References
 Aitken, B. J. and A. E. Harrison (1999, June). Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct
    Foreign Investment? Evidence from Venezuela. American Economic Review 89 (3), 605–
    18.
 Aw, B. Y., S. Chung, and M. J. Roberts (2000, January). Productivity and Turnover in the
   Export Market: Micro-level Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan (China).
   World Bank Economic Review 14 (1), 65–90.
 Barro, R. J. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1997, March). Technological Diffusion, Convergence, and
    Growth. Journal of Economic Growth 2 (1), 1–26.
 Bernard, A., J. B. Jensen, and P. Schott (2002). Survival of the Best Fit: Competition from
    Low Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of US Manufacturing Plants. mimeo.
 Bernard, A. B. and J. B. Jensen (1995). Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manufac-
    turing, 1976-1987. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 67–119.
    Washington DC.
 Bernard, A. B. and J. B. Jensen (1999a). Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect,
    or Both? Journal of International Economics 47 (1), 1–26.
 Bernard, A. B. and J. B. Jensen (1999b). Exporting and Productivity. NBER Working Paper
    No. 7135.
 Bernard, A. B. and J. Wagner (1997). Exports and Success in German Manufacturing.
    Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 133 (1), 134–57.
 Bigsten, A., P. Collier, S. Dercon, M. Fafchamps, B. Gauthier, J. W. Gunning, A. Isaksson,
    A. Oduro, R. Oostendorp, C. Pattillo, M. Söderbom, F. Teal, and A. Zeufack (2000a).
    Exports and Firm-level Efficiency in African Manufacturing. WPS 16.
 Bigsten, A., P. Collier, S. Dercon, M. Fafchamps, B. Gauthier, J. W. Gunning, A. Isaksson,
    A. Oduro, R. Oostendorp, C. Pattillo, M. Söderbom, F. Teal, and A. Zeufack (2000b,
    April). Contract Flexibility and Dispute Resolution in African Manufacturing. Journal
    of Development Studies 36 (4), 1–17.
 Blundell, R. W. and S. R. Bond (1998). Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
    Dynamic Panel Data Models. Journal of Econometrics 87, 115–43.
 Card, D. (2001, September). Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Per-
    sistent Econometric Problems. Econometrica 69 (5), 1127–60.
 Clerides, S. K., S. Lach, and J. R. Tybout (1996, August). Is Learning By Exporting Impor-
    tant? Micro-Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco. NBER Working
    Paper No. 5715.
 Clerides, S. K., S. Lach, and J. R. Tybout (1998). Is Learning By Exporting Important?
    Micro-Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco. Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 113 (3), 903–947.
 Delgado, M. A., J. C. Farinas, and S. Ruano (2002). Firm Productivity and Export Markets:
    a Non-parametric Approach. Journal of International Economics 57, 397–422.

                                            32
Fafchamps, M., S. El Hamine, and A. Zeufack (2002). Learning to Export: Evidence from
   Moroccan Manufacturing. mimeo.
Girma, S., D. Greenaway, and R. Kneller (2002). Does Exporting Lead to Better Perfor-
   mance? A Microeconometric Analysis of Matched Firms. mimeo.
Harrison, A. E. (1994, February). Productivity, Imperfect Competition, and Trade Reform.
   Theory and Evidence. Journal of International Economics 36 (1-2), 53–73.
Isgut, A. E. (2001, June). What’s Different about Exporters? Evidence from Colombian
   Manufacturing. Journal of Development Studies 37 (5), 57–82.
Jovanovic, B. and S. Lach (1991, June). The Diffusion of Technology and Inequality among
   Nations. NBER Working paper No. 3732.
Kraay, A. (1999). Exportations et Performances Economiques: Etude d’un Panel d’Entre-
   prises Chinoises. Revue d’Economie Du Developpement 0 (1-2), 183–207.
Krishna, P. and D. Mitra (1998). Trade Liberalization, Market Discipline and Productivity
   Growth: New Evidence from India. Journal of Development Economics 56, 447–62.
Krugman, P. (1979, April). A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and the World
   Distribution of Income. Journal of Political Economy 87 (2), 253–66.
Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes (1996). “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
   Equipment Industry”. Econometrica 64 (6), 1263–97.
Pavcnik, N. (2002, January). Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement:
   Evidence from Chilean Plants. Review of Economic Studies 69 (1), 245–76.
Roberts, M. and J. Tybout (1997, September). The Decision to Export in Colombia: An
  Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs. American Economic Review 87, 545–64.
Söderbom, M. and F. Teal (2000). Skills, Investment, and Exports from Manufacturing
    Firms in Africa. Journal of Development Studies 37 (2), 13–43.
Tybout, J. R. (2000, March). Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do
  They Do, and Why? Journal of Economic Literature 28, 11–44.
Tybout, J. R. and M. D. Westbrook (1995). Trade Liberalization and the Dimensions of
  Efficiency Change in Mexican Manufacturing Industries. Journal of International Eco-
  nomics 39, 53–78.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2002, April). Comparing the Size and Productivity Distribution of
   Manufacturing Plants in sub-Saharan Africa and the United States. mimeo, University
   of Toronto.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2003, July). Robustness of Productivity Estimates. mimeo, University
   of Toronto.
World Bank (2000). African Development Indicators. computer file.




                                          33
    Figure 1: The pattern for the evolution of difference between several characteristics.

                      not exporting                     exporting spell                     not exporting

        sales (S)                                     continuous exporter
  employment (L)
                                      newly entered
                        pre-export                                          about to quit
                                                                                            post-export
                      never exporting (benchmark)
                                                                                                  time


 labor productivity
     (S/L or VA/L)                    newly entered continuous exporter
           wages
             (W)        pre-export                                          about to quit
                                                                                            post-export

                      never exporting (benchmark)
                                                                                                  time

                                      newly entered                                         post-export
                                                                                             (only K/L)
     capital/worker                                   continuous exporter
             (K/L)
investment/worker                                                           about to quit
              (I/L)     pre-export                                           (only K/L)
                                                                                            post-export
                                                                            about to quit    (only I/L)
                      never exporting (benchmark)                            (only I/L)
                                                                                                  time




                                                       34
                Table 1: Export status is correlated with productivity level


Correlation between LP and ...     unit of                number of        partial       (p-value)
                                   observation           observations    correlation
                       a
aggregate export share             country                    9             0.434         (0.244)
export share in manufacturing      country                     7            0.523         (0.229)
export share by (country-)industry industry                   92            0.356         (0.001)
export participation               plantb                    3772           0.256         (0.000)
value of exports for exporters     plantb                    1054           0.293         (0.000)
Source: World Bank (2000);
a GDP/capita (instead of LP);   b   Excludes plants in the highest and lowest productivity percentile.




             Table 2: OLS regressions of plant characteristics on export status

                                    sub-Saharan Africa United States         Germany          Colombia
                                            (1)             (2)                (3)               (4)
Average wage ( W
               L
                 )                          0.341∗∗            0.093∗∗         0.017           0.173∗∗
Production wage                            -0.016              0.074∗∗        -0.018           0.112∗∗
Nonproduction wage                          0.288∗∗            0.054∗∗         0.023∗          0.141∗∗
Shipments per worker ( LS )                 0.527∗∗            0.149∗∗        0.194∗∗          0.463∗∗
Value added per worker ( VLA )              0.560∗∗            0.158∗∗        0.216∗∗          0.461∗∗
Capital per worker ( K
                     L
                       )                    0.501∗∗            0.093∗∗        0.122∗∗          0.486∗∗
Investment per worker ( LI )                0.498∗∗            0.036∗∗        0.076∗           0.481∗∗
Nonproduction/total workers                 0.006              0.124∗∗        0.040∗∗          0.044∗∗
Shipments (S)                               3.124∗∗            1.100∗∗        0.957∗∗          1.237∗∗
Employment (L)                              2.126∗∗            0.936∗∗        0.717∗∗          1.972∗∗
Number of observations (max)                3,800             190,000          4,200           70,000
(1) Statistics are the coefficient estimates of an export dummy in a plant-level regression, controlling for
country-years, industry, location and log employment (except in shipment and employment regressions).
(2) Bernard and Jensen (1995) Table 7; (3) Bernard and Wagner (1997) Table 3; (4) Isgut (2001) Table 5.
∗ and ∗∗ denote significance at the 5 percent and 1 percent significance level.




                                                    35
          Table 3: OLS regressions of growth rates on dummies for export status.


                               W         S           VA          K        I
                               L         L            L          L        L
                                                                                     S          L

Ever an exporter            -0.022    0.058      0.102∗       0.016     0.037     0.064      0.016
Current exporter             0.007    0.098∗∗    0.174∗∗      0.108     0.075     0.114∗∗    0.040∗

Current exporter            -0.003 0.092∗∗       0.163∗∗       0.085     0.061     0.105∗∗    0.035∗
Future or past exporter     -0.085 -0.054       -0.096        -0.207∗   -0.094    -0.072     -0.046
Observations                 1754     1933       1933         1933        603     1933       1933
Regressions as in Table 2, with growth rates as dependent variables, controlling for employment
growth in the first five columns. The first two rows are separate regressions, while in the last two rows,
both dummies are included together. **: significant at the 1% level, *: at the 5% level.


                           Table 4: Exporters are more productive

                            All observations         Interviewed twice or more           Three interviews
                            (nine countries)              (seven countries)               (six countries)
                            (1)       (2)             (3)      (4)       (5)                    (6)

Current export status     0.281      0.618           0.373     0.618
                          (.056)     (.095)          (.075)    (.115)
Lagged export status                                                     0.220                0.178
                                                                         (.073)               (.077)
Pre-export                           0.508                  0.528
                                     (.118)                 (.167)
Newly entered                        0.552                  0.574
                                     (.119)                 (.125)
About to exit                        0.320                  0.083
                                     (.129)                 (.189)
Post-export                          0.296                  0.219
                                     (.127)                 (.134)
Labor (average)           0.925      0.894           0.900 0.871         0.913                0.970
                          (.069)     (.070)          (.079) (.079)       (.079)               (.075)
Capital (average)         0.170      0.167           0.223 0.220         0.228                0.177
                          (.037)     (.037)          (.043) (.043)       (.043)               (.038)
Observations               3851       3851            3170   3170         1935                 1410
Firms                      1922       1922            1230   1230         1230                  705
R2                        0.842      0.842           0.848 0.848         0.847                0.832
Cobb-Douglas production function estimated with random effects, allowing for country-specific
input coefficients. Country-year, industry, and location dummies are included as controls.



                                                36
Table 5: Production function estimates, controlling for self-selection and unobserved produc-
tivity.


                              GMM          MLE            SP     GMM        MLE           SP
                                (1)         (2)           (3)      (4)       (2)          (3)
 Labor (average)               1.067       0.246         0.729    0.212     0.255        0.782
                              (0.10)      (0.06)        (0.06)   (0.20)    (0.06)       (0.08)
 Capital (average)             0.054       0.026         0.095    0.033     0.036        0.018
                              (0.02)      (0.03)        (0.05)   (0.01)    (0.03)       (0.07)
 qjt−1                         0.611       0.351                  0.613     0.735
                              (0.06)      (0.03)                 (0.21)    (0.03)
 qjt−2                                                           -0.011     0.447
                                                                 (0.02)    (0.04)
 EXjt−1                        0.285       0.379         0.196    0.255     0.210        0.211
                              (0.15)      (0.15)        (0.10)   (0.26)    (0.17)       (0.18)
 EXjt−2                                                          -0.014     0.334        0.026
                                                                 (0.14)    (0.17)       (0.16)
 Observations                  705         1930         1935      705       705          705
 For all tests the p-values   are reported:
 H0 : EXt−i = 0, ∀i            0.07         0.01        0.02     0.51       0.01         0.25
 H0 : EXt−i exogenous          0.04                              0.05
 Sargan test                   0.01                              0.20
 Production function (1) estimated by (1) GMM system estimator enforcing constraints;
 (4) GMM-SYS not enforcing constraints, see Section 4.1; (2) Maximum likelihood, see Section 4.2;
 (3) Semiparametric three-step estimator, see Section 4.3.




                                                   37
               Table 6: Testing for differences in technology and scale economies.


                             all firms                       all firms            exporter nonexporter
                       CD-VRS CD-CRS                      Translog-VRS                Translog-VRS
EXt−1                    0.219        0.451                    0.195
                        (.074)       (.068)                   (.074)
Labor (average)          0.913        0.750                    0.898               0.738           0.969
                        (.079)         —                      (.084)               (.202)         (.116)
Capital (average)        0.228        0.250                    0.236               0.270           0.202
                        (.043)       (.042)                   (.046)               (.115)         (.063)
Time trend (average)    -0.010       -0.025                   -0.002               0.121          -0.019
                        (.076)       (.078)                   (.076)               (.221)         (.017)
Quadratic terms           No           No                       Yes                 Yes            Yes
RTS for exporters        1.14         1.00                     1.08                 1.01
RTS for nonexporters     1.14         1.00                     1.17                               1.17
Number of observations   1933         1933                     1933                  499          1434
Estimation is with random effects as in Table 4 with country, industry, and location dummies.
Both the linear and quadratic (not reported) coefficients on inputs and time vary by country.




                                  Table 7: Contracts and credit.


                                                      exporters                         nonexporters
                                                  smalla      large                 small        large
One of main problems is lack of credit             0.51        0.39                  0.58         0.41
One of main problems is lack of demand             0.19        0.26                  0.30         0.28
One of main problems is infrastructure             0.14        0.15                  0.15         0.16
(Number of firms)                                 (204)       (696)                (2394)        (557)

Trade credit received                             0.103           0.181             0.080          0.085
Trade credit given                                0.677           0.180             0.144          0.108
Formal loans received                             0.126           0.203             0.143          0.218
(Number of firms)                                 (366)           (534)            (2676)          (275)

Late or non-payment by a clientb                  0.664           0.657             0.587          0.657
Number of non-payments (if any)b                    5               12                4              6
Last problem was with a foreign client            0.082           0.086
(Number of firms)                                 (135)           (210)            (1147)          (134)
a   The small firm-large firm sample split is at 100 employees.   b   in last year, excluding foreign clients.




                                                 38
                  Table 8: Effect of contractual problems on export status.

                            Endogenous export participationa              Exogenous exportersb
Dependent variable           EXt                 EXt                  Pˆr(EXt = 1) Pˆr(EXt = 1)
EXt−1                        1.895               2.054
                            (.368)              (.448)
EXt−2                                            0.401
                                                (.230)
(Contractual variables)  (t − 1)                (t − 2)                   (t − 1)           (t − 2)
Contract problem?        -0.150                  0.047                     0.023             0.052
                         (.236)                 (.220)                    (.011)            (.010)
Lack of demand?          -0.054                  0.195                     0.029             0.025
                         (.181)                 (.191)                    (.012)            (.010)
Trade credit given (log) 0.484                   0.262                     0.028             0.020
                         (.540)                 (.276)                    (.016)            (.013)
Number of observations     862                    692                       862               692
a Export participation jointly estimated with the production function using MLE, as in (2) and (5) of
Table 5 and Table B.2, adding the three contractual variables. (Other variables hardly changed and
are not reported)
b In a first stage (not reported), export status is predicted using the same instruments as in Table 5.

In the second stage (results reported), the predicted probability of exporting is regressed on the three
variables of interest.




                                                39
Appendix A: Summary statistics
             Table A.1: Summary statistics for the nine sub-Saharan countries (1995)
                    GDP per capita VA per employee                     manuf. share             export share
                                                                                                         EXm c
                       (PPP)       in industry (USD)b                    in GDP            in manuf.     EXtot
Ethiopia                      446                      1690                   0.07              0.23a        0.30c
Tanzania                      485                       983                   0.07              0.21         0.16
Burundi                       759                      2450                   0.13              0.06         0.09
Zambia                        936                      5507                   0.10              0.20         0.08
Kenya                        1112                      1704                   0.09              0.32         0.16
Ghana                        1511                      1089                   0.06              0.20d        0.30e
Cote d’Ivoire                1588                      5915                   0.16              0.60         0.36
Cameroon                     1755                      7904                   0.10              0.21         0.14
Zimbabwe                     2195                      7042                   0.19              0.45         0.37
Source: World Bank (2000), a UN International Trade Statistics Yearbook, 1992
Notes: b Industry comprises manufacturing, mining, and utilities;
c Share of manufactured goods in total exports; d in GDP; e 1997


              Table A.2: Summary statistics for the sample of manufacturing plants
                    years                          # of           # of               coverage              LP
                                                  plants      observations           of GDPa             (USD)
Ethiopia            1996                           207            207                   0.79              5493
Tanzania            1992,    1993, 1994            241            485                   0.31              3057
Burundi             1993                           105            105                   0.65              6169
Zambia              1992,    1993,     1994        262            532                   0.12              5689
Kenya               1992,    1992,     1994        267            609                   0.17              5993
Ghana               1991,    1992,     1993        209            497                   0.14              3845
Cote d’Ivoire       1994,    1995                  188            303                   0.52             10930
Cameroon            1992,    1993,     1994        234            557                   0.63              9627
Zimbabwe            1992,    1993,     1994        203            556                   0.26              7618
Notes:   a   Total value added in the first interview year as a percentage of manufacturing GDP.

                Table A.3: Trade statistics for the sample of manufacturing plants
                   export participation      share of sales exported   share exported overseasb
                    all firms       large firms        unweighted   weighteda          unweighted       weighteda
Ethiopia              0.02             0.15                0.40        0.60
Tanzania              0.09             0.60                0.24        0.27                0.43           0.82
Burundi               0.17             1.00                0.28        0.37
Zambia                0.09             0.48                0.19        0.24                0.22           0.38
Kenya                 0.22             0.68                0.31        0.32                0.24           0.26
Ghana                 0.11             0.30                0.31        0.21                0.54           0.20
Cote d’Ivoire         0.44             0.87                0.54        0.49                0.53           0.57
Cameroon              0.28             0.94                0.31        0.37                0.36           0.41
Zimbabwe              0.49             0.86                0.20        0.17                0.27           0.22
Notes:   a   sales weighted,    b   of total exports

                                                            40
Appendix B: Additional tables

              Table B.1: OLS regressions with more detail on the export status

                                    W        S        VA      K         I
                                    L        L         L      L         L
                                                                                S        L
       pre-entry            0.303         0.564 0.605 0.287 0.232 2.153 1.313
                            (0.10)        (0.11) (0.12) (0.17) (0.27) (0.18) (0.12)
       newly entered        0.364         0.617 0.675 0.623 0.800 2.277 1.377
                            (0.10)        (0.11) (0.12) (0.17) (0.25) (0.19) (0.13)
       continuous exporter  0.390         0.608 0.632 0.557 0.531 3.631 2.494
        (CE)                (0.06)        (0.06) (0.07) (0.10) (0.15) (0.09) (0.06)
       about to quit        0.323         0.379 0.408 0.544 0.006 1.947 1.301
                            (0.11)        (0.13) (0.14) (0.19) (0.33) (0.21) (0.14)
       post-exit            0.284         0.367 0.282 0.691 0.296 1.865 1.239
                            (0.11)        (0.12) (0.13) (0.18) (0.30) (0.20) (0.14)
       H0 : CE = pre         0.40          0.71   0.84   0.13   0.27   0.00   0.00
       H0 : CE = post        0.34          0.06   0.01   0.49   0.45   0.00   0.00
       H0 : CE = pre = post  0.47          0.16   0.04   0.22   0.43   0.00   0.00
       H0 : CE = new = quit 0.82           0.22   0.28   0.92   0.17   0.00   0.00
       H0 : new = pre        0.65          0.73   0.68   0.14   0.11   0.59   0.68
       H0 : quit = post      0.80          0.94   0.50   0.57   0.51   0.74   0.72
       Similar regressions as in Table 2, with more detail on export status.
       Statistics for the hypothesis tests are p-values for two sided tests.


   I illustrate with the first column how to read Table B.1. Continuous exporters pay 39%
higher salaries than perennial nonexporters, which is statistically significant as the t-statistic is
6.5
(= 0.39/0.06). In fact, the difference between all groups of plants and nonexporters are
significantly different from zero. Plants that start exporting during the sample period already
paid 30% higher salaries before they actually sold anything abroad, which rises to 36% after
exporting starts. The difference between current exporters and plants that will only start
exporting later is not significant, as the p-value for the test (H0 : CE = pre) is 0.40. The
difference pre and post export market entry is also not significant, with a p-value of 0.65.
Even after exporters exit from the export market they keep paying higher salaries than non-
exporters, 28% higher, which is lower but not significantly different from their competitors
that remained active in the export market (the p-value is 0.34). The wage gap with nonex-
porters declines slightly, to 32%, prior to exit from the export market, again an insignificant
difference. Testing whether continuous exporters are different from nonexporters that will
enter the export market later or have just quit (H0 : CE = pre = post) or from exporters that
have just started or will shortly seize (H0 : CE = new = quit), gives negative answers with
respective p-values of 0.80 and 0.65.


                                                 41
    Table B.2: Maximum likelihood estimates of export participation decision

         Dependent variable: exporter=1, nonexporter=0
         capital city            0.168              -0.251
                                (0.57)              (0.61)
         state owner             0.097              -0.654
                                (1.20)              (1.03)
         ethnic owner            0.233               0.718
                                (0.68)              (0.59)
         foreign owner           1.312               1.693
                                (0.62)              (0.57)
         q̃jt−1                  0.216               0.073
                                (0.24)              (0.29)
         q̃jt−2                                      0.723
                                                    (0.38)
         EXjt−1                  2.855               2.664
                                (0.56)              (1.23)
         EXjt−2                                      0.465
                                                    (0.74)
         H0 : EXt−τ = 0, ∀τ        0.00                   0.01
         H0 : q̃t−τ = 0, ∀τ        0.18                   0.05
         Jointly estimated with production function, columns SP in Table 5.




                      Table B.3: Importance of trade credit.

                        amount outstanding             total credit period (days)
                          (as % of sales)              averagea       median
Net trade credit               0.103
  Net with suppliers           0.160                      6.4            1
  Net with clients            -0.057                      9.7            2
Gross trade credit             0.296
  Gross credit extended        0.200                      9.8            2
  Gross credit received        0.097                      5.9            1
Formal credit                  0.384
  Loans                        0.155                     1970          1080
  Overdrafts                   0.229
Informal loans                 0.015                     315            60
Informal borrowing             0.005                     153            60
a   weighted by credit amount



                                          42
