NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOMEOWNERSHIP AND UNEMPLOYMENT :
THE ROLES OF LEVERAGE AND PUBLIC HOUSING
Paul Flatau
Matt Forbes
Patric H. Hendershott
Gavin Wood
Working Paper 10021
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10021
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the 2003 AREUEA Annual and MidYear Meetings, both in
Washington, DC. This study is part of a larger Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute (AHURI)
project: What Drives Housing Outcomes in Australia? Understanding the Role of Aspirations, Household
Formation, Economic Incentives and Labour Market Interactions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Paul Flatau, Matt Forbes, Patric H. Hendershott, and Gavin Wood. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Homeownership and Unemployment: The Roles of Leverage and Public Housing
Paul Flatau, Matt Forbes, Patric H. Hendershott, and Gavin Wood
NBER Working Paper No. 10021
October 2003
JEL No. J64, R2
ABSTRACT
Oswald hypothesizes that regions and countries with high homeownership rates will
experience higher natural rates of unemployment and that rising homeownership in OECD countries
since the 1960s provides a key explanation for the rise in the natural rate of unemployment over the
same time period. Recent tests of the Oswald thesis have found the opposite. This study differs from
earlier ones both by considering different states of ownership (degrees of leverage) and types of
tenancy (private, public, and rent-free) and by examining data from Australia, rather than the U.S.
We demonstrate that the recent anti-Oswald results are the result of (1) highly leveraged owners
having a greater incentive to remain employed and to become reemployed more rapidly that outright
owners and (2) those paying below-market rents having a lower incentive to avoid unemployment or
become reemployed than those paying market rents. The only positive Oswald result is that females
who are outright owners have significantly slower exits from unemployment. Overall, homeownership
does not increase unemployment.
Finally, in line with expectations but in contrast to some earlier studies, our results indicate a
significant impact of the predicted replacement ratio (unemployment benefits to wage if reemployed)
on unemployment behavior. Persons with a higher predicted ratio are significantly more likely to
become unemployed, and unemployed females with a higher predicted replacement ratio have longer
unemployment spells than those with lower predicted ratios.
Paul Flatau
Economics Department
Murdoch University
Murdoch, WA 6150
Australia
plta@central.murdoch.edu.au

Patric H. Hendershott
Cnetre for Property Research
University of Aberdeen Business School
Aberdeen AB24 3UF, Scotland
and NBER
phh3939@uslink.net

Matt Forbes
Economics Department
Murdoch University
Murdoch, WA 6150
Australia

Gavin Wood
Economics Department
Murdoch University
Murdoch, WA 6150
Australia
wood@central.murdoch.edu.au

1. Introduction
Andrew Oswald (1996, 1997) has argued forcefully, based upon analysis of time series and crosssection data for OECD countries and regions within selected OECD countries, that homeownership
causes unemployment. He concludes that if the rate of homeownership rises by five percentage
points, unemployment will rise by one percentage point, an effect so large that it would place
homeownership at the center of explanations for the rise in the natural rate of unemployment since
the 1960s in OECD countries. Oswald (1996, p.2) suggests ‘[M]ass unemployment exists because
of a secular change that has happened in all but a few Western housing markets – the rise of
homeownership and the decline of private renting’.1
Two straight-forward rationales have been offered for the Oswald result. First, homeowners
face higher selling and buying costs compared to renters when they consider a move to a new
location to accept a job offer. As a result, homeowners may be more likely to become unemployed
(may be less willing to accept job transfers to or job opportunities in distant locations) and may
remain unemployed longer (have a greater reluctance to search in distant locations requiring a
move). Second, homeowners may, through their voting power in local government, enforce
restrictive planning and land development laws depressing employment options and thus
increasing unemployment.
Oswald’s claim about the size and direction of the relationship between unemployment and
homeownership has attracted the attention of both housing and labor economists. A number of
studies have mimicked Oswald’s aggregate regional analysis, analyzing data from different regions
and adding additional covariates. Nickell and Layard (1999) add covariates in an analysis of the
original OECD country data. Green and Hendershott (2001) and Partridge and Rickman (1997)

1

The rise in secular unemployment since the 1960s has been far more prominent in Western Europe than in the U.S. a
fact that has prompted considerable debate among labor and macroeconomists (see Nickell, 1998).

3

both analyze US state data, adjusting for age composition and other factors, and Pehkonen (1997)
examines Finnish data. All of these studies find confirmation of Oswald’s result, with the
magnitude of the response ranging from a one to two percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate for a ten percentage point increase in the homeownership rate.
Three studies have tested the Oswald thesis using US micro datasets.2 Goss and Phillips
(1997) examine the impact of housing equity levels on the duration of unemployment using the
1986 Panel Study of Income Dynamics and find that homeownership reduces the duration of
unemployment as compared with other tenures with the effect stronger for mortgagees as
compared with outright owners.3 Coulson and Fisher (2002) find that homeowners have
significantly lower probabilities of being unemployed and typically earn significantly higher wages
than renters. They also find that homeownership exerts a significant negative influence upon the
length of the unemployment spell. Green and Hendershott (2002) examined the duration of
unemployment of roughly 2500 Americans who became unemployed during the 1985-92 period.
In a two-component analysis, they first estimate a probit explaining homeownership and then relate
the duration of unemployment to predicted homeownership. Rather than Oswald’s predicted
positive relationship, they, too, find a negative relationship.
How can we rationalize these seemingly counter intuitive results? While the logic of
Oswald’s argument seems impeccable if we are comparing outright owners and private renters,
some owners are highly leveraged and some renters occupy public housing or live rent-free with
relatives. Homeowners with weak housing equity positions may require quick re-employment to

2

Van Leuvensteijn and Koning (2000) study a number of Oswald’s sub-hypotheses regarding labour force mobility
using micro-panel data from the Netherlands.
3
Goss and Phillips’ (1997) study was published shortly after Oswald’s (working) paper was released and undertaken in
ignorance of it. Nevertheless, the authors’ tests do in practice represent tests of the Oswald thesis.

4

enable them to continue making their mortgage payments.4 Thus they may specify lower
reservation wages than equivalently qualified renters, leading to the greater possibility of shorter
durations of unemployment (Goss and Phillips, 1997).
The presence of public housing with tenants paying long-term below-market rents and of
free-renters also confounds the analysis. Hendershott and Hu (1982) showed that significantly
leveraged owners with below-market financing rates should be reluctant to move if that requires
giving up their below-market financing (see Quigley, 1987, for empirical support). Similarly,
public housing tenants and free-renters should be reluctant to give up their below-market rents. A
large literature has found UK public tenants to be less mobile between regions and to experience
higher levels of unemployment (Engleman, 1977; Bover, Muellbauer, and Murphy, 1989; Hughes
and McCormick, 1981, 1985, 1987; McCormick, 1983; Minford, Ashton, and Peel, 1988).
The present study employs an Australian micro dataset that is particularly strong both on
the labor market position of the respondents and their housing status. This allows more refined
tests of more sophisticated versions of the Oswald thesis in a different country setting. We also
employ the predicted ratio of unemployment benefits to wages if employed as an explanatory
variable in the analyses, a variable missing from earlier analyses. We provide strong evidence that
our counter-Oswald results are due to the behavior of leveraged owners and public housing tenants.
In fact, when we compare outright owners (rather than leveraged owners) with private renters
(rather that public renters), we find strong evidence, particularly for females that renters are slower
to become reemployed than owners. More specifically, female outright owners and public housing
occupants are equally less likely to exit unemployment as rapidly as private renters and owners
with mortgages.

4

Moreover, homeowners with large mortgages can be subject to negative equity problems resulting in significant
housing lock-in effects (see Archer, Ling and McGill, 1996, Caplin, Freeman and Tracy, 1997 and Henley, 1998).

5

Four tests are employed to deduce the impact of homeownership, public housing and
leverage on unemployment. The first two tests focus solely on the relationship between the
aggregate housing tenure type ‘homeownership’ and unemployment. First, we estimate a probit
explaining the probability of being unemployed using (actual or predicted) homeownership as a
determinant (the choice between the two options being made on a prior test for exogeneity of
homeownership). Second we estimate a hazard equation explaining the factors influencing duration
of a spell of unemployment. Our final two tests move beyond this broad specification to consider,
in turn, the role of leverage in influencing the incidence and duration of unemployment of
homeowners and the impact of multiple housing tenures (outright owners, mortgages, public
renters, private renters and free renters on unemployment outcomes).
The remainder of the paper contains four sections. In Section 2, we present the models to
be estimated. These include probits for being unemployed and a hazard for the duration of
unemployment. Section 3 elaborates on the data used in the study. The data used in this study are
drawn from the pooling of four consecutive Australian cross-section surveys from the mid to late
1990s (the 1994-97 Surveys of Income and Housing Costs, SIHC). These data provide rich
housing, labor market and income data and importantly include a tracking of the respondent’s labor
force position over an eight-month period. The latter feature injects a longitudinal module into the
data and is used in our unemployment spell analysis. Section 4 provides our results on
unemployment and the duration of unemployment. We briefly summarize and look toward future
work in Section 5.

2. The Models
Homeownership can correlate with the probability of becoming unemployed or the duration of
unemployment either because homeownership really matters or because it is correlated with other
6

unobservable factors that help determine both tenure choice and the probability or duration of
unemployment. For example, the user cost of a household with a long expected holding period is
lower than that of one with a shorter expected length of stay due to the longer amortization of upfront stamp duties (taxes) and back-out brokerage fees. One reason for long expected lengths of
stay is a greater desire to retain proximity to family members and friends. If such owners become
unemployed, they will tend to remain unemployed longer than renters who become unemployed,
but it is due to their wish to remain proximate to family rather than being caused by their tenure
status.
There is, therefore, no guarantee that homeownership is an exogenous determinant of
unemployment and we need to directly test for exogeneity in the homeownership effect on both the
probability of unemployment and its duration. Our test is a simple extended regression test in
which actual homeownership and a prediction error term (the difference between actual
homeownership and predicted homeownership) are entered in relevant preliminary models.
Because the null hypothesis of a zero coefficient on the error term is rejected, we use predicted
homeownership in our final equation (i.e., an unemployment probit, and an unemployment spell
hazard model).
The probability of being a homeowner is expressed as:

Probit:

Oi = P (β1 Yi + β2 Ji + µi )

(1)

where i, represents the decision-making unit and Oi indicates tenure choice, taking a value 1 if the
unit is a home owner and 0 otherwise. Explanatory variables include real income (Y) and a matrix
(J) of demographic identifiers (importantly age ranges, but also country of birth, race, gender,
marital status), human capital variables (education outcomes) and location dummies (divided into
7

capital city and rest of the state dummies). As elsewhere, house prices and rents in Australia differ
markedly across geographic location and thus geographic locators provide proxies for housing cost
determinants of tenure choice.
While otherwise unremarkable, one feature of our tenure choice model needs to be
emphasized. We assume that the tenure choice decision-making unit is the ‘income unit’ rather
than the ‘household’, the common approach in most tenure choice models. The income unit (a unit
of analysis used in social policy analyses in the Australian context) is defined as one person or a
group of related persons who reside within a single residential dwelling whose command over
income is assumed to be common.5 The household comprises all persons in a given dwelling.
In most cases, households and income units are one and the same entity. A single person,
living alone, is both an income unit and a household; so too the couple with or without dependent
children, in which case income is aggregated and where it is inappropriate to combine the attributes
of the couple (e.g., age) we simply take the attributes of the head (the person with the highest
income) of the couple (thus the predicted ownership of head and spouse will be equal). Households
and income units are different (and the predicted probabilities of ownership will differ) when
unrelated people live together in the same dwelling or when children grow up but remain in the
family home even when they are no longer (notionally) dependent on their parents. The former are
assumed to split the rent unless the data indicate otherwise; the latter are assumed to be living rent
free. Each unrelated person in a household is making an independent housing tenure decision as is
the young adult still living at home.

5

Following the practice of the Australian Bureau of Statistics’ (ABS) —the data manager of the survey data used in
this study— income sharing is assumed to take place between married (registered or de facto) couples and between
parents and dependent children (see ABS, 1999, p. 16). The ABS defines dependent children ‘as all persons aged under
15 years and persons aged 15-24 years who are full-time students, live with a parent or guardian and do not have a
spouse or offspring of their own living with them’ (see ABS, 1999, p. 15).

8

Probability of Being Unemployed
The probability of an individual being unemployed is expressed as

Probit

Ui = P (γ1 O*i + γ 2Ri + γ3´ St + γ4´ θt + µi)

(2)

where O*i is predicted/actual homeownership, Ri is the predicted replacement ratio, S is a matrix of
socio-demographic determinants of unemployment and θt is a matrix of quarterly time dummies
that account for time-related shocks (recall that our data are pooled cross-section). To determine
whether or not predicted or actual homeownership should be used for estimation purposes, we
include in a preliminary model actual homeownership and the prediction error term. The latter term
is equal to the actual housing tenure state (1 for the home owner and 0 for the non-home owner)
less the predicted probability of being a homeowner (from the tenure choice probit model —
equation 1). For the homeowner, the term is positive and increases as the predicted probability of
being a renter rises (1 – Ôi ). For the non-home owner, the term is negative and in this case the
absolute value increases as the error rises (0 – Ôi ).
A key economic determinant of the probability of being unemployed is the predicted
replacement ratio of the individual. This ratio is measured as the weekly unemployment benefit an
individual is predicted to receive relative to their predicted weekly wage. The higher the
replacement ratio, the lower is the opportunity cost of being unemployed (the smaller is the relative
loss in wages) and consequently the higher the expected probability of being unemployed.
Estimates of expected earnings are based on a standard human capital OLS regression (estimated

9

separately for women and men), which includes age categories to proxy for potential labor force
experience and educational qualifications.6
As opposed to Coulson and Fisher (2002) and Green and Hendershott (2002), we have
measures of unemployment benefits in the data and use these estimates to predict an
unemployment benefit to all persons, which accounts for non-wage income and the sociodemographic determinants that enter the administrative rules that apply to unemployment benefits
in Australia. All other things being equal, unemployment benefits are higher for those over age 21,
those with more children and those with lower wealth and private income. Income and assets tests
reduce the level of the benefit until the payment drops to zero. A rental subsidy applies to
unemployed private renters. This is unlike the contributory U.S. unemployment insurance benefit
system where benefits are positively related to past earnings. Another crucial difference between
the two systems is that in the U.S. there is benefit exhaustion whereas in Australia there is no direct
benefit exhaustion but an emphasis on the unemployment benefit recipient complying with job
search and work-for-benefit guidelines as the spell of unemployment lengthens. The vector θt
includes quarterly time dummies that will be used to capture shocks in real economic activity that
affect the time path of unemployment.
The probit model of unemployment is based on the individual unit of analysis and includes
all persons in the labor force. We delete persons aged 65 and over and dependent children aged 1524. The probit model is then estimated separately for men and for women. The inverse Mills ratios
(φ/Φ) from these equations will be used in the unemployment duration hazard functions to correct
for sample selection bias.

6

Our results are not reported in this paper. Educational qualifications exert their anticipated strong positive impact on
wages, as does potential labor market experience (age classifications).

10

II.

Duration of Unemployment
Under Oswald’s thesis, homeownership leads to higher unemployment. Given the key

transmission mechanism through which homeownership is expected to lead to higher
unemployment — the relative immobility of homeowners — we would expect longer durations of
unemployment as well. In this section, we model the duration of unemployment using a hazard
analysis. But before discussing our hazard model, we make clear how we measure spells of
unemployment; an obvious requirement but one that is not always met in studies of
unemployment.
Two questions need to be answered regarding spells of unemployment. First, when does a
spell of unemployment begin and end? Second, how do we deal with the missing information
problem evident in all data sets when spells of unemployment begin prior to the opening of a data
set’s window or end after that window is closed?7 The latter problem is one of censorship bias that
cannot be overcome but can be ameliorated through sound statistical techniques, while the former
is an issue in the meaning and characterization of unemployment spells themselves.
The population divides itself into three states: employed, unemployed and not in the labor force (or
NILF). This means that a spell of unemployment can begin as a result either of an individual
entering unemployment from the state of employment (full time, FtE, or part time, PtE) or from the
NILF labor force position. A person who enters unemployment from employment is a job loser.
Some data sets can distinguish between voluntary job quits and involuntary retrenchments but the
SIHC cannot. Likewise, an individual can exit from unemployment to the NILF state or to
employment. An exit to employment can be further broken down to an exit to part-time
employment or an exit to full-time employment (over 35 hours per week of employment). There
are good grounds for placing emphasis on the last of these transitions (that to full-time
7

A dataset’s window refers to the period of direct reporting of (by) a respondent’s actions and outcomes.

11

employment) because it represents, for most unemployed people, the best possible labor market
transition.
An exit to the NILF state, on the other hand, can be difficult to interpret. For some, the
transition from unemployment to the NILF category represents the least desired transition as it
reflects a discouraged job seeker effect (i.e., the individual is losing the desire and attachment to
work to continue the search process). An exit to the NILF state could, however, represent a period
of retooling through full-time education and training or a decision to undertake full-time care for
dependent children or aged parents. Each of these transitions may be the most desired transition.
Transitions from and to unemployment are illustrated in Figure 1a. The right and left
censoring of unemployment spells is illustrated in Figure 1b. A spell may begin before the data
window of the relevant data set and is referred to as a left-censored spell. Only retrospective
questions put to respondents would ever enable researchers to determine the beginning of the spell
(and that does not occur with the dataset used in the present circumstance). The origin of spells is,
however, known when it begins after the start of a survey’s data window (i.e., a non-left-censored
spell). When a spell of unemployment has not ended prior to the end of a survey’s data window the
spell is right censored. We do not know when such spells will end.

Figure 1a Labor Force Transitions

NILF

NILF
Unemployment

PtE

PtE

FtE

FtE
12

Figure 1b Unemployment spell types

Unemployment

A

B

C
8 month window
Spells can be left censored (begin before the 8th month- e.g., spell A) or right
censored (they do not end by month 8 – e.g., spell C) or be neither left or right
censored (they begin and end within the eight month period – e.g., spell B.
Our procedure is to estimate models of unemployment spells that distinguish between three
different forms of spell endings; namely, all spell endings (including NILF, FtE and PtE transitions
from unemployment), spells ending in employment (FtE and PtE transitions from unemployment)
and spells ending in full-time employment. We also add a permutation to this third model in which
the individual was employed in the first month of the data window, thereby focusing solely on job
loss transitions.
We adopt a hazard model of the following general form

Hazard

Hi = H (η1 O*i + η 2Ri + η3´ St + η4´ θt + η5 λi + µi)

(3)

where H is the hazard function, where O*i is predicted/actual homeownership, Ri is the predicted
replacement ratio, S is a matrix of socio-demographic determinants of unemployment and θt is a
matrix of quarterly time dummies that account for time-related shocks, λi is the inverse Mills ratio
from the unemployment probit.

13

The hazard function gives the probability that an individual leaves a particular state at a
particular point in time conditional on being in that state prior to that point. In the present context,
the hazard function gives the probability of exiting unemployment at a given point in time, given
that individual had been unemployed up to that point. We shall utilize Cox’s proportional hazards
model, where we model the hazard function using the following functional form:

h (t, X) = h (t,0) exp(b’X)

(4)

where h (t,0) is the baseline hazard rate. The baseline hazard rate reflects the influence of spell
duration on the hazard rate and is independent of the set of determinants. Correspondingly, the
second component of the hazard function exp(b’X) is independent of time but is dependent on the
set of regression coefficients and the associated X determinants. The assumed constancy of hazards
over time is the basis for the ‘proportional hazards’ model label.
III.

Housing Tenure and Leverage
We distinguish between five housing tenure states: (1) outright owners, (2) owners with

mortgages, (3) private market renters (the default category in the regressions), (4) public renters
and (5) free renters.8 The latter category includes young people who still reside with their parents
(and are not defined as dependent children) in a rent-free state. We estimate unemployment
incidence and unemployment duration models incorporating these differentiated tenure positions.
Our models use both actual tenure states as dummy variables and predicted tenure states utilizing
the results of a multinomial logit model of tenure choice. The omitted tenure category is the private
rental category (tenants paying market rents).

8

We note that the research on public housing fails to compare public housing with homelessness and with charitybased housing. It could be argued that this group, typically absent from major datasets (including our own), is as
relevant a comparison tenure for public housing as are private renters and owners.

14

Just as missing variables threatens to confound the impact of observed ownership on
unemployment duration, so, too, with observed public housing. Bover, Muellbauer, and Murphy
(1989) point out that public housing typically represents ‘housing of last resort’. They suggest that
it would be natural to expect that a number of unobservable (in most datasets) characteristics such
as low motivation, low ability, bad luck, poor health are likely to be correlated with public housing.
This means that part of the regional mobility and unemployment differentials found between
housing tenures may be due to unobserved heterogeneity effects as compared to housing tenure
effects per se.
We extend the Oswald framework in one last important respect. Among homeowners, we
anticipate that the degree of leverage affects labor market behavior. Those with high leverage will
typically have greater out of pocket housing costs than private renters occupying an equivalent
dwelling, while those with low leverage will have lower costs.9 The greater are housing expenses,
the greater the pressure on the homeowner to return to work. To test this hypothesis, we repeat the
above probability of unemployment and duration of unemployment estimations on homeowners
only (and then on owners with mortgages only), using their leverage (and predicted leverage) as an
explanatory variable. We expect that the greater the leverage, the greater the probability and/or the
duration of unemployment.

3. The Data
The dataset used in this study is the Australian Survey of Income and Housing Costs (SIHC)
Confidentialised Unit Record Files for the four consecutive years 1994-97 years. Roughly 13,500
persons in private resident dwellings are surveyed in each of the four years leading to a sample of

9

The mortgage rate being paid includes a premium to cover expected inflation. Rents do not need to include such a
premium because landlords should expect to receive capital gains to compensate for inflation. In a zero inflation world,
out of pocket costs of owners using extreme leverage still need not exceed those of renters.

15

56,370 individual respondents in the pooled 1994-1997 SIHC. These annual surveys were
conducted broadly under the same sampling conditions and in a period of stable economic growth
in Australia. We have inflated nominal values in each of the SIHC data sets to their 1997
equivalents using the Consumer Price Index values for Australia in the relevant years.
The sampling frame of the SIHC is all those aged 15 and over living in private residences.
Excluded are those people resident in non-private residences (e.g., hotels, boarding schools,
boarding houses and institutions), the homeless, those living in remote areas of the Northern
Territory, and members of permanent defense forces. We delete from the data all income units
whose head is aged 65 and over and dependent children over 15 (full-time students aged 15 to 24
who themselves do not have spouses or dependent children of their own). Just over eight percent of
the respondents in the labor force are unemployed.
The SIHC data set is cross-sectional. However, respondents to the SIHC are drawn from
Australia’s Monthly Population Survey (MPS), which tracks an individual’s labor force outcomes
during an eight- month window. The MPS labor force data for each individual is linked by the
ABS to the rich SIHC questionnaire containing housing-related questions (housing tenure,
dwelling structure and location, estimated house value, housing loans and repayments, housing
costs, and year of purchase), labor market questions (e.g., wages, labor force position), sociodemographic information (e.g., age, education, country of birth, family type) and detailed income
data.
An overview of housing and labor force variables of the SIHC data for our modeling
purposes is contained in Tables 1 and 2. Owners comprise 51.2 per cent of income units after
taking into account the exclusion of those aged 65 and dependent children. While not displayed in
Tables 1 and 2, homeownership rises with age and education level. Around half of owner-occupier
income units are outright owners and the other half owners with mortgages. The mean loan-to16

value ratio for owners with mortgages is 0.43; around 12 per cent of owners with mortgages have
loan-to-value ratios exceeding 80 percent. Private renters comprise close to one-third of income
units in the sample while public renters represent five per cent of all income units. Income units
neither owning nor paying rent to a landlord comprise a relatively large 11 per cent of all income
units (the rent-free category).
The unemployment rate for female homeowners stands at 3.9 per cent while that for male
owners is 4.1 per cent. For both women and men the unemployment rate for owners with
mortgages is lower than that for outright owners. In the case of males, the difference is relatively
large; outright owners having almost twice the unemployment rate of leveraged owners. Private
renters exhibit unemployment rates four times those of homeowners. The unemployment rate for
female public renters is twice that of private renters, while for males the ratio of unemployed to
employed is closer to three to one. Those in rent-free accommodation exhibit unemployment rates
similar to those in the private rental category.
An important economic determinant of unemployment outcomes in our models is the
predicted replacement ratio (the ratio of unemployment benefits to earnings). We use actual weekly
earnings and benefits to model predicted weekly earnings and benefits and so the predicted
replacement ratio. The replacement ratio is imputed to both employed and unemployed persons in
our sample. Weekly earnings for women are two-thirds the earnings for men (much of this is a
lower hours effect). Because unemployment benefits are roughly equal for women and men, it is
not surprising that predicted replacement ratios are higher for women than men. Ratios are also
higher for unemployed persons than employed persons. The distributional results presented in
Table 2 indicate that the vast majority of persons are predicted to face replacement ratios lower
than 0.5.

17

4. Results
I.

Probability of Unemployment

We begin with tests of the simple owner-versus-renter hypothesis analogous to tests of Coulson
and Fisher (2002) and Hendershott and Green (2002) to determine if the results for Australia are
similar to those for the U.S. Table 3 reports separate results for males and females on the effect of
homeownership on unemployment after controlling for the range of confounding influences.
Model 1 presents probit model results for the case in which we treat homeownership as an
exogenous variable (actual homeownership) while model 2 includes both actual homeownership
and the homeownership error term to test for exogeneity in homeownership. Because the error term
is significant, homeownership is treated as an endogenous variable and we include predicted
homeownership in our final unemployment probit model (Model 3). (The coefficient on predicted
homeownership is roughly three times that in model 1.) Our predicted homeownership variable is
derived from a tenure choice probit model whose results are reported in Appendix Table 1. These
results reveal a positive relationship between homeownership on the one hand and age, (income
unit) income, and education on the other hand. Those born outside Australia tend to have lower
rates of homeownership (all other things being equal). Couple income units have higher rates of
homeownership than singles and homeownership rates rise with the presence of dependent
children.
As is evident in Table 3, predicted ownership has a large negative effect on the probability
of unemployment for both women and men, indicating that the probability of unemployment falls
as the predicted probability of homeownership rises. The same is true, we note in passing, for our
model 1 results, which treated homeownership as an exogenous variable. This runs counter to the
Oswald thesis. The precise quantitative impact of a particular variable on the probability of
unemployment is gauged by utilizing the marginal effect (DF/dx column) estimates, which give the
18

impact of a marginal change in the independent variable on the probability of being unemployed.
When the variable is a zero-one dummy, the marginal effect is the impact of going from 0 to 1.
(All marginal effect calculations are at the means of variables.) For males, the relevant marginal
effect on predicted ownership is -0.235, while for females the relevant marginal effect value is 0.192. In other words, a one percentage point increase in the predicted probability of being a home
owner (say from 0.59 to 0.60) decreases the probability of a male being unemployed by 0.235
percentage points (i.e., a drop of 0.00235 in the predicted probability of being unemployed; the
mean probability is 0.065 or 6.5 per cent). A one percentage point increase in the predicted
probability of a female being a home owner decreases the probability of female being unemployed
by 0.192 per cent.
To provide some context to these marginal effect values, consider the impact of the
predicted replacement ratio on the probability of being unemployed. For males, a one percentage
point increase in the ratio of predicted benefits to predicted wages (say from 0.27 to 0.28) increases
the probability of a male being unemployed by 0.213 percentage points (i.e., an increase of
0.00213 in the predicted probability of being unemployed). This marginal effect is approximately
of the same magnitude as that of the predicted probability of homeownership. Hence,
homeownership and the replacement ratio have roughly similar economic effects on the probability
of unemployment. In the case of women, the replacement ratio marginal effect is less than half that
for males though still significant (the marginal effect is 0.095 for women as compared with 0.213
for men). In addition to homeownership and replacement ratio effects, our results show that the
probability of being unemployed is related to income unit type effects, geographical location
effects and country of birth effects.
In Table 4, we have repeated the above estimations replacing homeownership with the full
range of housing tenure states (the omitted tenure category is private renters). The alternative
19

endogenous model replaces actual housing tenure states with predicted housing tenure states.
Predictions of the appropriate housing tenure state are based on the results from a multinomial logit
model (see Appendix Table 2). An income unit (and, therefore all relevant persons in that income
unit) is allocated to that housing tenure state whose predicted probability value from the
multinomial logit model is the highest among all the predicted values. So, for example, if the
predicted probability for outright ownership was 0.52 and the predicted probabilities for each of
the remaining housing tenures were below this value, the income unit would be assigned to the
outright ownership tenure category. Before presenting our results we note that on the basis of this
allocation method, the two housing tenure categories with the lowest proportion of income units;
namely, public renters and the other rental (rent-free) category are even more under-represented in
terms of the distribution of predicted tenure states, giving us quite small samples in these two
tenures. The housing tenure variables in Table 4 are all dummy variables and so the stated
marginal effects refer to the impact on unemployment of the discrete 0 to 1 jump (from private
renting to the housing tenure in question).
For males, outright homeownership reduces the probability of unemployment by about half
as much as does ownership with a mortgage, although both effects are significant. The marginal
effect for male owners with a mortgage is -0.073. Hence, male owners with mortgages are 7.3 per
cent less likely than private renters to be unemployed. In stark contrast, the probability of being
unemployed rises sharply for public renters with the stated marginal effect for men being 0.148.
The other rental category (the rent free category) also displays a marginally higher unemployment
propensity than private renters.
Similar tenure effects are found among women. Both female outright owners and female
owners with mortgages display significantly lower probabilities of being unemployed than private
renters. The marginal effect for female owners with a mortgage is -0.066 and -0.051 for female
20

outright owners. These estimates are roughly comparable to the male marginal effects although the
difference between the two effects is much smaller in the case of females. Female public renters
have a significantly higher probability of being unemployed as compared with female private
renters, but the public renter effect is much smaller than in the case of men.
Generally our results using predicted housing tenure confirm those found using actual
housing tenure states. There is, however, one important difference. We find significant public
housing impacts in the case of actual tenure but when we move to predicted public housing we find
no significant effect. The under-prediction of public housing together with the relatively small
sample of predicted public renters may lie behind this result.
In Table 5 we restrict ourselves to homeowners only and consider the role of leverage by
entering the actual and predicted loan-to-value ratio as a continuous variable in models for all
homeowners and for owners with a mortgage. Predicted loan-to-value ratios are based on an OLS
model including income, age, education, and other socio-demographic variables (see Appendix
Table 3). For males, both the actual and predicted loan-to-value ratios have significant negative
effects on the probability of unemployment among all homeowners. The marginal effect for men
(actual leverage) is -0.013, which means that a one percentage point increase in the loan-to-value
ratio (e.g., from 0.49 to 0.50), reduces the probability of being unemployed by 0.013 points. When
we move to owners with mortgages alone we find no significant leverage effect. What this
suggests is that those holding mortgages behave differently than those without mortgages
controlling for observable forces but that when one mortgagee is compared to another, those men
with higher leverage ratios do not exhibit a lower probability of unemployment. There is only one
significant leverage effect in the case of women: actual leverage among female mortgagees is
opposite to that for men and counter to the arguments on leverage we have presented. Higher
actual leverage increases the probability of unemployment.
21

II.

The Duration of Unemployment

We have defined the completion of a spell of unemployment in three different ways with the exit to
full-time employment the most stringent and meaningful definition of a spell ending. For this latter
spell ending type we also undertake an additional analysis where we restrict spells to workers who
we know were employed at the beginning of the 8-month window. While this definition of a spell
limits spells to workers whom we know lost jobs in the relevant period, it comes at some cost as it
squeezes the maximum dimensions of the data window (by one month) over which we can view
the progress of the spell. It also reduces the number of potential spells.
We begin with a descriptive picture of spell duration by presenting unemployment spell
survival curves by housing tenure type for males and females. The survival curve plots the
cumulative proportion of those who remain in unemployment (i.e., they ‘survive’ in the state of
unemployment) at different monthly points. The first set of survival curves presented in figure 2
(figures 2a to 2f) refer to spells that have no restriction placed on them in terms of when the spell
begins but are distinguished according to each of the three spell ending types (NILF +
employment, employment, and full-time employment). The final set of survival curves (figures 2g
and 2h), refer to unemployment spells of job losers.
There are three striking features of the survival curves presented in figure 2. The first is the
steepness of the survival curve in the first two or so months of the 8-month window. This early
steepness indicates that most spells of unemployment end quickly.10 After a short period, the
hazard rate drops off rapidly and so the cumulative survival curve flattens out. The second striking
feature is the prominent role played by housing tenure. At one end of the survival curve spectrum
lie the survival curves for owners with a mortgage, which typically reveal more rapid early exit

10

The caveat here is that figures 2a to 2g include left censored spells and so the rapid decline includes unemployment
spells beginning before the data window ending in the first month as well as fresh spells beginning in the data window
ending rapidly.

22

from the unemployment spell than the other housing tenures. At the other end of the spectrum lie
the survival curves for public renters, which almost always reveal relatively slow exit from
unemployment. In between these two boundaries typically lie the survival curves of the remaining
three tenure categories: owners without mortgages, private renters and the other tenure (rent-free)
category.
The third key feature of the survival curves displayed in figure 2 is the shift as we move
between the various definitions of when an unemployment spell ends and when a spell begins, with
these shifts displaying a strong gender connection. For instance, when we utilize the broadest
definition of an unemployment spell end, that of any exit from unemployment, the cumulative
survival curve for women is very steep suggesting rapid exit from unemployment. But, relative to
men, the survival curves for women become relatively flat as we move to stricter employmentrelated definitions of spell endings. Why the difference? Because women, much more than men,
make the unemployment to out of the labor force transition and this transition is ignored in the case
of the employment-related spell ending types. (We ignore the transition to the NILF category in the
employment-related definitions of a spell exit so that the spell of unemployment continues until an
employment-related transit occurs.)
Moreover, for men, the largest gap between the survival curves for owners with mortgages
and public renters occurs in the case of exit to full-time employment (refer to figures 2e and 2g).
This pattern does not hold for women. Women in the private rental and other rental categories
display more rapid exit from unemployment (to full-time employment) than owners with
mortgages (see figures 2f and 2h). This is evidence in favor of the Oswald thesis.
The survival curves displayed in figures 2a to 2h do not control for confounding factors.
We, therefore, move to formal modeling of unemployment spells. Our results are presented in
Tables 4 and 5 with the sequencing of models following that of the unemployment probits. For
23

space reasons, we only report the estimated coefficients of the key variables of interest (housing
variables and the replacement ratio) and include hazard ratios for ready interpretation. For
continuous variables, the hazard ratio gives the percentage increase (if the ratio is greater than one;
decrease if less than one) in the hazard rate for a unit increase in the covariate. If the variable is
dichotomous, the hazard ratio gives the risk of exit relative to the default. A hazard ratio greater
than one indicates that unemployed people with the designated characteristic exit the
unemployment state more quickly than the indicated alternative state. If the hazard ratio is less than
one, unemployed people with the given characteristic have a greater chance of ‘survival’ in
unemployment than the default category with the degree of lower risk given by the hazard ratio
value.
Table 6 presents hazard model estimates of the impact of homeownership and the predicted
replacement ratio on the spell of unemployment.11 The ‘risk’ of a female homeowner exiting the
unemployment spell into employment is insignificantly different from that for female nonhomeowners (see Model B, C and D results in Table 6). Notice, however, in terms of the Model A
results, that the risk of a female homeowner exiting an unemployment spell altogether, regardless
of the type of exit specified, is significantly higher than that of the non-homeowner; female
homeowners have a 12.9 per cent higher risk. That is, female homeowners have a higher
propensity to exit the labor force during a spell of unemployment than do female non-homeowners,
confirming the relationship evident in the survival curves.
The ‘risk’ of a male homeowner undertaking the transition to full-time employment is
significantly higher than for male non-homeowners (see Table 6 Model C). The hazard ratio for
men for this model is 1.222, which means that male homeowners have a 22.2 percent higher ‘risk’
11

In the duration analysis, we restrict attention to models using actual homeownership, actual housing tenure and actual
leverage given space limitations and focus on the impact of the different spell endings. We note, however, that in
preliminary analyses (not reported), we included both actual homeownership and the homeownership error term in our
Table 6 hazard models but found that the home ownership error term was insignificant across the various models.

24

of exiting unemployment within the eight-month window than do male renters (of all rental types);
a result that strongly contradicts the Oswald thesis. One interesting feature of the results from other
models presented in Table 6 is the fall in the male homeowner relative risk of exiting
unemployment as a less strict definition of a spell end is utilized. In the case of a definition of a
spell ending when a male unemployed person obtains full-time employment, the relative risk for
males is 1.222 while for more inclusive exits the relative risk drops below 1.13. We attempted to
estimate a hazard model on the basis of job loser spells and a full-time employment exit definition
of a spell but that model did not produce meaningful results.
Table 7 reports hazard model results utilizing all five housing tenure categories and, for
homeowners, the loan-to-value ratio. These results are analogous to those in Tables 4 and 5. The
same basic models are estimated, with outright owner, an owner with a mortgage, public housing,
and other (rent-free) tenure categories (private renting is the dropped category) in the housing
tenure models and the loan-to-value ratio as a continuous variable in a model restricted to
homeowners.
As can be seen from the Table 7 Model C results for men, public renters are likely to exit
employment far less rapidly than private renters (hazard ratio of 0.515 – 48.5 per cent lower risk).
On the other hand, owners with mortgages are likely to exit unemployment to employment and
especially to full-time employment far more quickly than are private renters (hazard ratios of 1.199
and 1.444). There is no significant impact for outright owners (no Oswald effect).
To test the role of leverage in influencing the exit from unemployment behavior of
homeowners we restrict the sample to homeowners and include the loan-to-value ratio as an
explanatory variable (the LVR sub-model in Table 7). We find that an increase in the loan-to-value
ratio significantly increases the ‘risk’ of an exit from unemployment to employment and especially
full-time employment for male homeowners. We conjecture that these results are due to the
25

potential loss of one’s own home owing to an inability to make mortgage payments while
unemployed.
The effects are weakened considerably when we move to the most inclusive exit (Model
A), including exit to out of the labor force. When we move to the restricted model of job loser
spells of unemployment (Model D) the results on male public renters and outright owners remain.
While the coefficient on the owner with mortgage variable is not significant, the loan-to-value ratio
exerts its strong effect on increasing the hazard of exit from unemployment among homeowners.
Turning to the case of unemployment spells among women, we find that female private
renters and owners with mortgages are indistinguishable in terms of the full-employment exit
hazard model results (Model C). However, both female outright owners (hazard ratio 0.586) and
public owners (hazard ratio 0.575) have a sharply lower risk of exit from unemployment than the
private rental group. The Oswald effect holds with a vengeance for outright female owners. This
effect carries through to the more stringent Model D results, which restrict the sample of
unemployment spells to job loser spells, but the public renter effect does not. Finally, a higher
replacement ratio significantly slows female exits to full time unemployment.12

5. Summary
This paper represents another test of the Oswald hypothesis that higher homeownership causes higher
unemployment. The key explanation offered by Oswald for this outcome is that homeowners who lose their
job face high housing-related transaction costs if they take the option of moving to another region to obtain
employment. There is obvious truth in this. However, it is also true that a range of housing-related channels
link housing and labor markets. One of these is that homeowners with large mortgages might be more
willing to accept wage cuts and/or ratchet up work effort (productivity) in order to remain employed or to

12

Male exits are slowed, but not significantly. However, the coefficient is significant for the homeowners-only model.

26

exit unemployment quicker than renters (or owners without large mortgages) because of the requirement to
meet mortgage repayments to save their house. This housing-labor link suggests that we should expect
significant differences within the homeowner group in terms of labor market behavior.
Likewise, Oswald’s thesis ignores the role of public housing and rent-free housing. Public renters
and rent-free ‘renters’ may be ‘locked in’ to their present abodes and face high costs of their own (but of a
different nature to those experienced by homeowners) if they consider accepting a job offer particularly
when it involves a move to another locality. Transaction costs are not the key driver as in the case of
homeowners; rather the key to the poor labor market outcome is the potential loss of secure low-rent
tenancies that are, in the main, location-specific. What this implies is that unless account is taken of
homeowner leverage and multiple rental categories, we are unlikely to obtain an accurate and
comprehensive overview of how housing affects the labor market.
Our analysis of the probability of being unemployed and of the duration of unemployment spells is
based on the pooling of four consecutive annual surveys of the SIHC during the mid-1990s all conducted
broadly under the same sampling conditions and in a period of stable economic growth in Australia. In the
duration analysis we distinguish carefully between the labor force states that a person may exit to (the
competing risks they face). We therefore, distinguish between an exit from unemployment to employment
(and then make the further part-time versus full-time employment distinction) and from unemployment to
out of the labor force.
A variety of estimations are performed. In terms of the probability of being unemployed, in no case
do we find evidence in support of the Oswald hypothesis that owners have worse employment outcomes
that private renters, and in most cases we find evidence of the opposite – higher homeownership causes
lower unemployment. Further, owners have significantly quicker exits from unemployment than do private
renters, male to full time employment and females out of the labor force. More importantly, however, we
show that the key to the counter Oswald results for males is that owners with mortgages display the lower
probability of being unemployed and experience higher relative risks of exit from a spell of unemployment.

27

In fact, outright owners, especially females, have significantly slower exits from unemployment, especially
to full time employment. This is the only support we find for the Oswald hypothesis.
Just as the degree of leverage affects homeowners’ probability of becoming unemployed and their
duration if unemployed, the type of renter status affects renters’ probabilities and durations. Both public
housing tenants and those living rent-free are more likely than private renters to become unemployed, and
public renters who become unemployed have longer durations than do private or rent-free renters.
Finally, our results indicate a significant impact of the predicted replacement ratio (unemployment
benefits to wage if reemployed) on unemployment behavior. Persons with a higher predicted ratio are
significantly more likely to become unemployed and unemployed females with higher predicted ratio have
longer unemployment spells than do those with lower predicted ratios. Unemployed males with high
replacement ratios have longer unemployment spells but significantly so only in the homeowners-only
model.

28

References
Archer, W.R., Ling, D.C., and McGill, G.A. (1996), The Effect of Income and Collateral
Constraints on Residential Mortgage Terminations, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 26,
235-261.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), (1999), 1997-98 Survey of Income and Housing Costs,
Australia, Confidentialised Unit Record File (CURF), Technical Paper, Catalogue Number
6541.0.30.001, ABS, Canberra.
Bover, O. and Muellbauer, J. and Murphy, A. (1989), Housing, Wages and UK Labour Markets,
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 51, 97-136.
Caplin, A.C., Freeman, C., and Tracy, J. (1997), Collateral Damage: Refinancing Constraints and
Regional Recessions, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 29, 496-516.
Coulson, N.E. and Fisher, N. M. (2002), Tenure Choice and Labor Market Outcomes, Housing
Studies, 17, 35-49.
Engleman, S.R. (1977), The move into council housing: The effect on quit rates, Urban Studies,
14, 161-168.
Gardner, J., Pierre, G., and Oswald, A.J. (2001), Moving for a reason, mimeo, Warwick
University.
Goss, E.P. and Phillips, J.M. (1997), The Impact of Home Ownership on the Duration of
Unemployment, Review of Regional Studies, 27, 9-27.
Green, R.K. and Hendershott, P.H. (2001), Homeownership and Unemployment in the US,
Urban Studies, 38, 1509-1520.
Green, R.K. and Hendershott, P.H. (2002), Homeownership and the Duration of Unemployment:
A Test of the Oswald Hypothesis, paper presented at AREUEA Annual Meetings, January 2002.
Hendershott, P.H. and Hu, S. (1982), Accelerating Inflation, Nonassumable Fixed Rate
Mortgages, and Consumer Choice and Welfare, Public Finance Quarterly, 158-184.
Henley, A. (1998), Residential Mobility, Housing Equity and the Labour Market, The Economic
Journal, 108, 414-427.
Hughes, G.A. and McCormick, B. (1981), Do Council Housing Policies Reduce Migration
between regions?, Economic Journal, 91, 919-937.

29

Hughes, G.A. and McCormick, B. (1985), Migration Intentions in the UK: Which Households
Want to Migrate and which Succeed?, Economic Journal, 95, Conference Supplement, 76-95.
Hughes, G.A. and McCormick, B. (1987), Housing Markets, Unemployment and Labour market
Flexibility in the UK, European Economic Review, 31, 615-641.
McCormick, B. (1983), Housing and Unemployment in Great Britain, Oxford Economic Papers,
35, 283-305.
Minford, P., Ashton, P. and Peel, M. (1988), The Effects of Housing Distortions on
Unemployment, Oxford Economic Papers, 40, 322-345.
Nickell, S. (1998), Unemployment: Questions and Some Answers, Economic Journal, 108, 802816.
Nickell, S. and Layard (1999), Labor Market Institutions and Economic Performance, in
Ashenfelter, Orley and Card, David, (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3C,
Handbooks in Economics, vol. 5, Amsterdam; New York and Oxford: Elsevier Science, NorthHolland, 3029-84.
Oswald, A.J. (1996), A Conjecture on the Explanation for High Unemployment in the
Industrialised Nations: Part I, mimeo, Warwick University.
Oswald, A.J. (1997), Theory of Homes and Jobs, mimeo, Warwick University.
Partridge, M.D. and Rickman, D.S. (1997), The Dispersion of US State Unemployment Rates:
The Role of Market and Non-market Equilibrium Factors, Regional Studies, 31, 593-606.
Pehkonen, J. (1997), Unemployment and Homeownership, Applied Economic Letters, 6, 263265.
Quigley, J. (1987), Interest Rate Variation, Mortgage Prepayments, and Household Mobility,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 49, 636-643.
Van Leuvensteijn, M., and Koning, P. (2000), The Effects of Homeownership on Labor Mobility
in the Netherlands: Oswald’s Theses Revisited, Research Memorandum No. 173, CPB
Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, The Hague.

30

Table 1 Summary Statistics
Income Units*
All

Persons
No.

%

Owners

No.

%

No.

%

56370

100.0

Respondents Aged 65 and over

8416

14.9

6325

17.8

4853

24.5

Respondent Dependent Children (aged Over 15)

3610

6.4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Data Set
N

35600 100.0 19836 100.0

Exclusions

Data Set After Exclusions
N

44344

29275

14983

Housing Tenure
Outright Owners

12703

28.6

6985

23.9

6985

46.6

Owners with Mortgages

14165

31.9

7998

27.3

7998

53.4

All Owners

26868

60.6

14983

Private Renters

11929

26.9

9594

32.8

51.2 14983 100.0
n.a.

n.a.

Public Renters

1903

4.3

1431

4.9

n.a.

n.a.

Other Tenures (Rent-free)

3644

8.2

3267

11.2

n.a.

n.a.

31182

70.3

22207

75.9 12324

82.3

2784

6.3

2307

7.9

570

3.8

10378

23.4

4761

16.3

2089

13.9

Labor Force
Employed
Unemployed
Not in the Labor Force
Unemployment Rate (Persons)
Outright Owners

Female

Male

4.44

5.84

Owners with Mortgages

3.52

2.95

All Owners
Private Renters

3.89

4.14

12.52

13.43

Public Renters

24.94

33.79

Other Tenures (Rent-free)

14.12

15.94

7.69

8.58

All

31

Table 2 The Distribution of Loan-to-Value Ratios, Real Weekly Earnings, Real Weekly
Unemployment Benefits, and the Predicted Replacement Ratio, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC.
10th

50th

90th

Mean Percentile Percentile Percentile
Owners with mortgages (income units)
Loan-to-value ratio

0.44

0.06

0.41

0.83

Actual weekly wages (employed) $

477

325

454

678

Actual weekly unemployed benefits (unemployed) $

130

56

127

216

Predicted replacement ratio (employed)

0.27

0.14

0.25

0.42

Predicted replacement ratio (unemployed)

0.33

0.14

0.30

0.56

Actual weekly wages (employed) $

720

472

705

996

Actual weekly unemployed benefits (unemployed) $

124

53

454

166

Predicted replacement ratio (employed)

0.18

0.10

0.17

0.28

Predicted replacement ratio (unemployed)

0.23

0.14

0.23

0.31

Females

Males

32

Table 3 Probit Model: Probability of Being Unemployed, Males and Females, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC
Males

Females

Model 1
Coef.
Constant
Homeowner

-1.696
-0.611

Model 2
Sig.

Coef.

Model 3
Sig.

0.000

-1.458

0.000

0.000

-1.844

0.000

Coef.
-1.473

-1.842

Predicted homeowner
Homeownership error term

1.448

0.000

Model 1
Sig.

DF/dx Coef.

0.000

0.000

Model 2
Sig.

Coef.

Model 3
Sig.

-1.456

0.000

-1.335

0.000

-0.631

0.000

-1.778

0.000

-0.235
1.343

0.000

Coef.

Sig.

DF/dx

-1.505

0.000

-1.673

0.000

-0.192

Predicted replacement ratio

2.200

0.000

1.571

0.000

1.675

0.000

0.213

0.887

0.000

0.797

0.000

0.828

0.000

0.095

Couple

0.030

0.856

0.515

0.003

0.521

0.003

0.059

-0.334

0.124

0.002

0.993

-0.093

0.670

-0.011

-0.187

0.178

-0.076

0.591

-0.099

0.482

-0.012

-0.040

0.610

-0.106

0.187

-0.123

0.122

-0.013

Married or defacto

0.023

0.891

0.245

0.159

0.259

0.138

0.031

0.210

0.332

0.539

0.015

0.568

0.009

0.059

Separated, widowed, divorced

0.077

0.174

0.489

0.000

0.506

0.000

0.089

0.161

0.005

0.551

0.000

0.508

0.000

0.079

No. of dep. children in the income unit

0.008

0.739

0.074

0.002

0.075

0.002

0.010

-0.045

0.135

0.017

0.583

0.015

0.634

0.002

Youngest child less than 1 year old

-0.132

0.123

-0.359

0.000

-0.357

0.000

-0.035

0.381

0.001

0.216

0.066

0.203

0.080

0.027

Youngest child 1 year old

-0.005

0.953

-0.242

0.005

-0.258

0.003

-0.027

0.068

0.533

-0.085

0.450

-0.089

0.419

-0.010

Youngest child 2 years old

-0.136

0.145

-0.339

0.000

-0.346

0.000

-0.034

-0.010

0.930

-0.134

0.258

-0.115

0.322

-0.012

Youngest child 3 years old

-0.119

0.261

-0.269

0.013

-0.256

0.016

-0.027

0.206

0.073

0.117

0.317

0.136

0.236

0.017

Youngest child 4 years old

-0.207

0.075

-0.368

0.002

-0.372

0.002

-0.036

0.134

0.258

0.046

0.701

0.043

0.721

0.005

Youngest child 5 years old

-0.176

0.128

-0.304

0.010

-0.316

0.007

-0.032

0.182

0.137

0.109

0.380

0.129

0.291

0.016

Youngest child 6 to 9 years old

-0.178

0.031

-0.284

0.001

-0.277

0.001

-0.029

0.181

0.029

0.149

0.078

0.153

0.069

0.019

Youngest child 10 or older

-0.045

0.530

-0.071

0.325

-0.069

0.338

-0.008

0.069

0.377

0.094

0.236

0.095

0.228

0.012

Sydney

-0.070

0.305

-0.079

0.251

-0.078

0.259

-0.009

-0.079

0.314

-0.068

0.395

-0.062

0.433

-0.007

Country NSW

0.276

0.000

0.344

0.000

0.339

0.000

0.053

0.222

0.010

0.264

0.003

0.258

0.003

0.035

Melbourne

0.145

0.025

0.232

0.000

0.228

0.000

0.033

0.133

0.076

0.216

0.005

0.201

0.008

0.026

Country Victoria

0.188

0.018

0.312

0.000

0.303

0.000

0.047

0.086

0.388

0.176

0.081

0.158

0.115

0.020

Brisbane

0.032

0.662

0.069

0.363

0.064

0.389

0.009

0.012

0.889

0.037

0.671

0.025

0.770

0.003

Country Queensland

0.240

0.001

0.284

0.000

0.279

0.000

0.042

0.230

0.006

0.254

0.003

0.247

0.003

0.033

Adelaide

0.276

0.000

0.357

0.000

0.343

0.000

0.054

0.181

0.030

0.251

0.003

0.237

0.005

0.032

Sole parent

33

Table 3 Probit Model: Probability of Being Unemployed, Males and Females, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC
Males

Females

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Country South Australia

0.009

0.928

0.092

0.375

0.066

0.525

0.009

0.268

0.016

0.321

0.004

0.314

0.005

0.045

Perth

0.086

0.222

0.176

0.014

0.171

0.015

0.024

0.018

0.826

0.109

0.198

0.101

0.231

0.012

Country Western Australia

0.084

0.380

0.108

0.268

0.101

0.299

0.014

-0.065

0.595

-0.057

0.649

-0.059

0.633

-0.007

Hobart

0.182

0.069

0.237

0.020

0.226

0.026

0.034

0.009

0.940

0.070

0.565

0.082

0.491

0.010

Country Tasmania

0.401

0.000

0.508

0.000

0.493

0.000

0.087

0.306

0.002

0.401

0.000

0.375

0.000

0.056

0.291

0.004

0.960

0.014

0.864

0.002

0.161

0.075

0.100

0.275

0.125

0.170

0.016

Born - Europe and former USSR

0.087
0.173

0.000

0.257

0.000

0.256

0.000

0.037

0.206

0.000

0.254

0.000

0.240

0.000

0.032

Born - Middle East and N.Africa

0.773

0.000

0.711

0.000

0.690

0.000

0.139

0.738

0.000

0.683

0.000

0.641

0.000

0.117

Born - S.E. Asia

0.409

0.000

0.380

0.000

0.370

0.000

0.061

0.452

0.000

0.430

0.000

0.429

0.000

0.067

Born - N.E. Asia

0.132

0.359

0.075

0.606

0.091

0.529

0.012

0.438

0.002

0.354

0.017

0.344

0.020

0.051

Born - Southern Asia

-0.202

0.195

-0.225

0.154

-0.238

0.129

-0.025

0.594

0.000

0.578

0.000

0.591

0.000

0.104

Born - North America

-0.355

0.184

-0.501

0.072

-0.503

0.069

-0.044

-0.610

0.058

-0.612

0.062

-0.568

0.077

-0.042

0.425

0.007

0.258

0.103

0.247

0.114

0.038

0.189

0.392

0.083

0.715

0.120

0.590

0.015

-0.124

0.484

-0.164

0.363

-0.174

0.334

-0.019

0.071

0.692

0.028

0.880

0.038

0.834

0.005

Born - Oceania

Born - Sth and Cntr America & Carib.
Born - Africa (excl. N. Africa)

Not generally sig.

Time dummies
Dependent Variable: Currently Unemployed =1, Employed =0

N= 19223 Males and 14744 Females. Sample: In the labor force, aged under 65, and excluding dependent children over 15.
Marginal effects for dummy variables are calculated as discrete changes as the variable moves from 0 to 1.
Model 1: Males

Model 2: Males

Model 3: Males

Model 1: Females

Model 2: Females

Model 3: Females

Log Lhood =-5083.6

Log Lhood =-4962.6

Log Lhood =-5018.9

Log Lhood =-3614.5

Log Lhood =-3520.4

Log Lhood =-3573.0

LR chi2(52) = 1089.6

LR chi2(52) = 1331.5

LR chi2(51) = 1219.0

LR chi2(51) = 767.2

LR chi2(52) = 955.3

LR chi2(51) = 850.2

Prob>chi2 = 0.0000

Prob>chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000 Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Pseudo R2=0.0968

Pseudo R2=0.1183

Pseudo R2 = 0.1083

Pseudo R2 = 0.0959

Pseudo R2 = 0.1195

Pseudo R2 = 0.1063

Obs. P 0.086

Obs. P 0.086

Obs. P 0.086

Obs. P 0.077

Obs. P 0.077

Obs. P 0.077

Pred. P 0.068 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.063 (at x-bar) Pred. P 0.065 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.060 (at x-bar) Pred. P 0.055 (at x-bar) Pred. P 0.057 (at x-bar)

34

Table 4 Probit Model: Probability of Being Unemployed, Males and Females, Tenure Effects, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC
Males

Females

Model 1
Coef.
Constant

Model 3
Sig.

-1.592

DF/dx

0.000

Coef.
-1.612

Model 1
Sig.

DF/dx

0.000

Coef.

Model 3
Sig.

-1.487

0.000

DF/dx Coef.

-0.371
-0.656

0.000

-0.041

-0.522

0.000

-0.051

0.000

-0.073

-0.624

0.000

-0.066

Public renter

0.728

0.000

0.148

0.336

0.000

0.050

Other renter

0.042

0.340

0.005

0.074

0.164

0.009

Predicted replacement ratio

1.592

0.000

0.202

0.738

0.000

0.087

Outright owner
Owner with a mortgage

Sig.

-1.688

0.000

DF/dx

Predicted outright owner

-0.394

0.000

-0.045

-0.461

0.000

-0.048

Predicted owner with a mortgage

-0.826

0.000

-0.101

-0.615

0.000

-0.071

Predicted public renter

0.130

0.432

0.019

0.166

0.133

0.023

Predicted other renter

0.342

0.000

0.057

0.680

0.000

0.132

Predicted replacement ratio

1.778

0.000

0.233

0.896

0.000

0.110

Other controls (see Table 3)
Dependent Variable: Currently Unemployed =1, Employed =0
N = 19,223 Males and 14,744 Females. Sample: In the labor force, aged under 65, homeowner and excluding dependent children over 15.
Marginal effects for dummy variables are calculated as discrete changes as the variable moves from 0 to 1.
Model 1: Males

Model 3: Males

Model 1: Females

Model 3: Females

Log likelihood =-5011.3

Log likelihood =-5113.3

Log likelihood =-3603.1

Log likelihood =-3653.9

LR chi2(54) = 1234.09

LR chi2(54) = 1030.1

LR chi2(54) = 789.88

LR chi2(54) = 688.23

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Pseudo R2=0.1096

Pseudo R2 =0.0915

Pseudo R2 = 0.099

Pseudo R2 = 0.086

Obs. P 0.086

Obs. P 0.086

Obs. P 0.077

Obs. P 0.076

Pred. P 0.065 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.068 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.059 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.062 (at x-bar)

35

Table 5 Probit Model: Probability of Being Unemployed, Leverage of Homeowners, Males and Females, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC
Males
All Homeowners
Coef.
Sig.

Females
Owners with a mortgage All Homeowners
DF/dx Coef.
Sig.
DF/dx
Coef.
Sig.

Owners with a mortgage
DF/dx Coef.
Sig.
DF/dx

Model 1
Constant

-2.845

Loan-to-value ratio

-0.175

0.034

-0.013

0.095

0.423

0.005

0.058

0.509

0.004

0.262

0.040

0.016

4.735

0.000

0.352

5.352

0.000

0.290

1.468

0.000

0.105

1.450

0.000

0.090

Constant

-2.510

0.000

-2.968

0.000

-2.337

0.000

-2.879

0.000

Predicted loan-to-value ratio

-0.933

0.000

-0.068

-0.314

0.313

-0.017

-0.224

0.266

-0.016

-0.012

0.972

-0.001

Predicted replacement ratio

4.614

0.000

0.336

5.340

0.000

0.288

1.379

0.000

0.098

1.422

0.001

0.089

Predicted replacement ratio

0.000

-3.214

0.000

-2.683

0.000

-3.028

0.000

Other controls (see Table 3)

Model 3

Other controls (see Table 3)
Dependent Variable: Currently Unemployed =1, Employed =0
N (Homeowners) = 11,448 Males and 9,008 Females. N (Owners with a mortgage) = 6,722 Males and 5,233 Females.
Sample: In the labor force, aged under 65, homeowner and excluding dependent children over 15.
Marginal effects for dummy variables are calculated as discrete changes as the variable moves from 0 to 1.
All Homeowners
Model 1: Males

Owners with a mortgage
Model 1: Males

All Homeowners
Model 1: Females

Owners with a mortgage
Model 1: Females

Log likelihood =-1843.8

Log likelihood =-828.4

Log likelihood =-1389.3

Log likelihood =-735.8

LR chi2(50) = 252.14

LR chi2(50) = 129.1

LR chi2(49) = 199.96

LR chi2(47) = 148.24

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Pseudo R2 =0.064

Pseudo R2 =0.0723

Pseudo R2 = 0.067

Pseudo R2 = 0.0915

Obs. P 0.041

Obs. P 0.029

Obs. P 0.039

Obs. P 0.036

Pred. P 0.033 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.023 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.032 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.027 (at x-bar)

All Homeowners

Owners with a mortgage

All Homeowners

Owners with a mortgage

Model 3: Males

Model 3: Males

Model 3: Females

Model 3: Females

Log likelihood =-1834.0

Log likelihood =-828.3

Log likelihood =-1389.13

Log likelihood =-737.9

LR chi2(50) = 278.78

LR chi2(50) = 129.5

LR chi2(49) = 200.74

LR chi2(47) = 144.07

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

Pseudo R2 =0.0706

Pseudo R2 =0.0725

Pseudo R2 = 0.067

Pseudo R2 = 0.0889

Obs. P 0.041

Obs. P 0.029

Obs. P 0.039

Obs. P 0.036

Pred. P 0.033 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.023 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.032 (at x-bar)

Pred. P 0.027 (at x-bar)

36

Figure 2a Unemployment spell survival functions, males, Australia, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC. Spells defined to end
with any exit from unemployment.
1
0.9
0.8

Hazard rate

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Month
Owners without a mortgage

Owners with a mortgage

Private Renters

Public Renters

Other Renters

37

Figure 2b Unemployment spell survival functions, females, Australia, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC. Spells defined to end
with any exit from unemployment
1
0.9
0.8

Hazard rate

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Month
Owners without a mortgage

Owners with a mortgage

Private Renters

Public Renters

Other Renters

Figure 2c Unemployment spell survival functions, males, Australia, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC. Spells
end on re-employment.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Hazard rate

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Month
Owners without a mortgage

Owners with a mortgage

Private Renters

Public Renters

Other Renters

38

Figure 2d Unemployment spell survival functions, females, Australia, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC.
Spells end on re-employment.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Hazard rate

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Month
Owners without a mortgage

Owners with a mortgage

Private Renters

Public Renters

Other Renters

Figure 2e Unemployment spell survival functions, males, Australia, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC.
Spells end on full-time re-employment.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Hazard rate

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Month
Owners without a mortgage

Owners with a mortgage

Private Renters

Public Renters

Other Renters

39

Figure 2f Unemployment spell survival functions, females, Australia, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC.
Spells end on full-time re-employment.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Hazard rate

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Month
Owners without a mortgage

Owners with a mortgage

Private Renters

Public Renters

Other Renters

40

Figure 2g Unemployment spell survival functions, males, Australia, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC. Job
Losers in data window. Spells end on full-time re-employment.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Hazard rate

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Month
Owners without a mortgage

Owners with a mortgage

Private Renters

Public Renters

Other Renters

Figure 2h Unemployment spell survival functions, females, Australia, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC. Job
Losers in data window. Spells end on full-time re-employment.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Hazard rate

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Month
Owners without a mortgage

Owners with a mortgage

Private Renters

Public Renters

Other Renters

41

Table 6 Cox Proportional Hazard Models: Unemployment Spells and Home Ownership Effects, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC
All spells (a)
Model A
All exits (c)
Coef.

Job loss in data window spells (b)
Model B
Model C
Model D
Exits to employment (d) Exits to FT-employment (e) Exits to FT-employment (e)
Hazard
Hazard
Hazard
Hazard
Sig. Ratio Coef.
Sig. Ratio Coef.
Sig. Ratio Coef.
Sig.
Ratio

Women
Homeowner

0.122

0.013

1.129

0.090

0.185

1.094

-0.067

0.557

0.935

-0.110

0.671

0.896

Predicted replacement ratio

0.048

0.810

1.049

-1.356

0.000

0.258

-2.567

0.000

0.077

-4.224

0.001

0.015

0.116

0.027

1.123

0.121

0.050

1.129

0.200

0.009

1.222

0.085

0.500

1.089

-0.426

0.302

0.653

-1.517

0.003

0.219

-1.286

0.048

0.276

0.973

0.465

2.647

Other controls (see Table 3 and inverse mills ratio)

Men
Homeowner
Predicted replacement ratio

Other controls (see Table 3 and inverse mills ratio)
Sample: Aged under 65 excluding dependent children over 15.
Model A
Males

Females

Model B
Males
Females

Model C
Males
Females

Model D
Males

Females

Event spells

2579

2659

1860

1495

1163

596

386

159

Right censored spells

1650

1134

1959

1779

2253

2397

498

442

Total spells

4229

3793

3819

3274

3416

2993

884

601

29014.9 22891.2

40421.5

41150.8

17893.6

8937.4

4871

1858.4

LR chi2(52)

90.6

127.5

111.2

160

149.8

217.6

57.3

79

Prob > chi2

0.001

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.284

0.001

Log likelihood

(a) Includes left uncensored and left censored spells of unemployment and all transitions into unemployment (i.e., transitions from both employment and not in the labor force included).
(b) Spells of unemployment of those who were employed in the first month of the data window. All left censored spells of unemployment excluded.
(c) The spell ends when a transition is made from unemployment to any other labor force state.
(d) The spell ends when a transition is made from unemployment to employment (both part and full-time employment.
(e) The spell ends when a transition is made from unemployment to full-time employment.

42

Table 7 Cox Proportional Hazard Models: Unemployment Spells and Housing Tenure Effects, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC
Job loss in data window
All spells (a)
Model A
All exits (c)
Coef.

spells (b)
Model B
Model C
Model D
Exits to employment (d) Exits to Ft-employment (e) Exits to FT-employment (e)
Hazard
Hazard
Hazard
Hazard
Sig. Ratio Coef.
Sig. Ratio Coef.
Sig. Ratio Coef.
Sig.
Ratio

WOMEN
All tenures
Outright owner

0.139

0.027

1.149

-0.023

0.789

0.977

-0.535

0.001

0.586

-0.553

0.095

0.575

0.106

0.076

1.112

0.073

0.374

1.075

0.144

0.282

1.155

0.174

0.550

1.190

Public renter

-0.028

0.711

0.972

-0.328

0.004

0.720

-0.554

0.008

0.575

-0.063

0.895

0.939

Other renter

0.106

0.136

1.112

0.029

0.744

1.029

-0.104

0.412

0.902

-0.744

0.014

0.475

Predicted replacement ratio

0.050

0.805

1.051

-1.171

0.000

0.310

-1.979

0.001

0.138

-4.139

0.001

0.016

Owner with a mortgage

Other controls (see Table 3 and inverse mills ratio)

Homeowners (LVR model)
Loan to value ratio
Predicted replacement ratio

-0.086

0.449

0.917

-0.015

0.922

0.985

0.556

0.029

1.744

0.770

0.109

2.160

0.080

0.839

1.083

-1.826

0.002

0.161

-2.927

0.006

0.054

-3.843

0.058

0.021

Other controls (see Table 3 and inverse mills ratio)

MEN
All tenures
Outright owner

0.068

0.295

1.070

-0.079

0.305

0.924

-0.170

0.087

0.844

-0.287

0.080

0.751

Owner with a mortgage

0.124

0.074

1.132

0.181

0.021

1.199

0.367

0.000

1.444

0.178

0.251

1.195

-0.170

0.050

0.844

-0.473

0.000

0.623

-0.664

0.000

0.515

-0.644

0.025

0.525

0.090

0.146

1.094

-0.010

0.895

0.990

-0.058

0.535

0.944

-0.435

0.030

0.647

-0.318

0.434

0.728

-1.165

0.026

0.312

-0.755

0.234

0.470

1.452

0.289

4.270

Public renter
Other renter
Predicted replacement ratio

Other controls (see Table 3 and inverse mills ratio)

Homeowners (LVR model)
Loan to value ratio

-0.037

0.788

0.964

0.327

0.034

1.387

0.690

0.000

1.995

0.802

0.007

2.230

Predicted replacement ratio

-0.812

0.441

0.444

-3.246

0.007

0.039

-3.598

0.015

0.027

-0.138

0.958

0.871

Other controls (see Table 3 and inverse mills ratio)

43

Sample: Aged under 65 excluding dependent children over 15.
All housing tenures

Model A
Males

Females

Model B
Males
Females

Model C
Males
Females

Model D
Males
Females

Event spells

2579

2659

1860

1495

1163

596

386

159

Right censored spells

1650

1134

1959

1779

2253

2397

498

442

3819

3274

3416

2993

884

601

28985.6 22880.8

17846.9

8910.9

4854.7

1846.0

4229

3793

40413.5

41148.1

LR chi2(55)

98.3

130.2

138.7

170.0

196.7

241.6

72.8

92.6

Prob > chi2

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.054

0.000

Total spells
Log likelihood

Homeowners (LVR models)
Event spells

Males

Females
859

1089

Males

Females
614

579

Males

Females
408

Males

Females

195

178

67

473

353

595

646

681

933

209

233

1332

1442

1209

1225

1089

1128

387

300

11461.1

14784.1

8172.2 7747.2

5330.5

2540.5

1934.9

673.5

LR chi2(52)

56.8

61.0

75.4

78.1

103.8

90.8

51.5

53.6

Prob > chi2

0.300

0.184

0.019

0.011

0.000

0.001

0.453

0.178

Right censored spells
Total spells
Log likelihood

(a) Includes left uncensored and left censored spells of unemployment and all transitions into unemployment (i.e., transitions from both employment and not in the
labor force included).
(b) Spells of unemployment of those who were employed in the first month of the data window. All left censored spells of unemployment excluded.
(c) The spell ends when a transition is made from unemployment to any other labor force state.
(d) The spell ends when a transition is made from unemployment to employment (both part and full-time employment.
(e) The spell ends when a transition is made from unemployment to full-time employment.

44

Appendix Table 1 Probability of an Income Unit Being a Home Owner, 1993-94 to 1996-97
SIHC, Probit Model

Constant
Earned Income of the Income Unit

Coef.

Std. Err.

Sig.

-3.042

0.124

-24.44

DF/dx

1.17E-05

3.92E-07

29.87

1.560E-07

Sydney

0.035

0.043

0.83

0.014

Country NSW

0.219

0.048

4.57

0.087

Melbourne

0.333

0.042

7.91

0.132

Country Victoria

0.449

0.054

8.38

0.176

Brisbane

0.230

0.047

4.89

0.092

Country Queensland

0.225

0.046

4.87

0.090

Adelaide

0.375

0.047

8.02

0.148

Country South Australia

0.282

0.064

4.37

0.112

Perth

0.411

0.045

9.07

0.162

Country Western Australia

0.158

0.061

2.57

0.063

Hobart

0.270

0.066

4.11

0.107

Country Tasmania

0.418

0.058

7.25

0.164

Couple income unit

0.717

0.087

8.23

0.280

Single female income unit

0.124

0.030

4.16

0.050

Sole parent male income unit

0.160

0.089

1.80

0.064

Sole parent female income unit

0.159

0.045

3.56

0.063

Age - 20 to 24

0.652

0.124

5.26

0.251

Age - 25 to 29

1.210

0.122

9.94

0.423

Age - 30 to 34

1.634

0.122

13.41

0.517

Age - 35 to 39

1.850

0.122

15.13

0.551

Age - 40 to 44

2.062

0.123

16.80

0.577

Age - 45 to 49

2.218

0.123

18.03

0.590

Age - 50 to 54

2.405

0.124

19.41

0.588

Age - 55 to 59

2.655

0.125

21.27

0.590

Age - 60 to 64

2.779

0.125

22.15

0.587

Higher degree

-0.143

0.066

-2.18

-0.057

45

Appendix Table 1 Probability of an Income Unit Being a Home Owner, 1993-94 to 1996-97
SIHC, Probit Model
Coef.

Std. Err.

Sig.

DF/dx

Postgraduate diploma

0.206

0.061

3.39

0.082

Bachelor degree

0.114

0.033

3.42

0.045

Undergraduate diploma

0.094

0.055

1.71

0.037

Associate diploma

0.178

0.038

4.63

0.071

Skilled vocational

0.201

0.024

8.54

0.080

Basic vocational

0.078

0.054

1.45

0.031

Married or defacto

0.265

0.087

3.05

0.105

Separated, widowed, divorced

0.215

0.032

6.83

0.086

Number of dependent children in the unit
Country of birth - Oceania

0.062

0.011

5.76

0.025

-0.354

0.055

-6.40

-0.137

Country of birth - Europe + former USSR

-0.036

0.026

-1.38

-0.014

Country of birth - Middle East + N.Africa

-0.188

0.079

-2.38

-0.074

Country of birth - S.E. Asia

-0.146

0.057

-2.58

-0.058

Country of birth - N.E. Asia

-0.268

0.085

-3.16

-0.105

Country of birth - Southern Asia

-0.253

0.093

-2.73

-0.099

Country of birth - North America

-0.379

0.126

-3.02

-0.146

Country of birth - Sth/Cntr America+Carib.

-0.498

0.125

-4.00

-0.188

Country of birth - Africa (excl. N. Africa)

-0.374

0.103

-3.62

-0.144

Dependent Variable Home Owner =1, Not Home Owner=0
Quarterly time dummies included in a preliminary equation but were insignificant and dropped from the
final probit used to predict homeownership.
N=29279 Income Units. Sample: Reference Person Aged under 65.
Log likelihood = -12331.3

Obs. P 0.5118

LR chi2(40) = 15910.4

Pred. P .478067 (at x-bar)

Prob > chi2 = 0.0000
Pseudo R2 = 0.3921

46

Appendix Table 2 Multinomial Logit Model of Tenure Outcomes, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC.
Owner with a
Outright Owner

Mortgage

Public Renter

Other tenure

Coef.

Sig.

Coef.

Sig.

Coef.

Sig.

Coef.

Sig.

-6.463

0.000

-5.813

0.000

-2.880

0.000

-0.229

0.088

1.440E-05

0.000

1.970E-05

0.000

-3.540E-05

0.000

-8.500E-06

0.000

Sydney

0.161

0.109

-0.307

0.000

-1.379

0.000

0.112

0.267

Country NSW

0.562

0.000

-0.069

0.487

-1.480

0.000

0.319

0.005

Constant
Earned Income of the Income Unit

Melbourne

0.641

0.000

0.258

0.002

-1.596

0.000

0.370

0.000

Country Victoria

0.959

0.000

0.352

0.001

-1.576

0.000

0.339

0.007

Brisbane

0.288

0.009

0.058

0.536

-1.459

0.000

-0.147

0.194

Country Queensland

0.358

0.001

-0.148

0.117

-2.331

0.000

-0.137

0.224

Adelaide

0.776

0.000

0.521

0.000

-0.453

0.000

0.097

0.391

Country South Australia

1.046

0.000

0.408

0.004

-0.296

0.101

0.843

0.000

Perth

0.567

0.000

0.434

0.000

-1.342

0.000

-0.092

0.407

Country Western Australia

0.303

0.034

-0.044

0.725

-1.427

0.000

0.180

0.230

Hobart

0.502

0.001

0.313

0.017

-0.559

0.002

-0.165

0.305

Country Tasmania

0.969

0.000

0.376

0.002

-0.937

0.000

0.048

0.733

Couple income unit

1.303

0.000

1.120

0.000

0.850

0.005

-0.654

0.003

Single female income unit

0.387

0.000

0.255

0.000

0.468

0.000

0.057

0.238

Sole parent male income unit

0.321

0.125

0.389

0.030

1.023

0.000

-0.519

0.121

Sole parent female income unit

0.607

0.000

0.454

0.000

1.377

0.000

-1.110

0.000

Age - 20 to 24

0.447

0.358

2.156

0.000

0.879

0.000

-0.612

0.000

Age - 25 to 29

1.635

0.000

3.106

0.000

1.591

0.000

-0.918

0.000

Age - 30 to 34

2.746

0.000

3.748

0.000

1.960

0.000

-0.889

0.000

Age - 35 to 39

3.532

0.000

4.003

0.000

2.248

0.000

-0.894

0.000

Age - 40 to 44

4.281

0.000

4.230

0.000

2.431

0.000

-0.724

0.000

Age - 45 to 49

4.872

0.000

4.357

0.000

2.762

0.000

-0.695

0.000

Age - 50 to 54

5.581

0.000

4.511

0.000

3.253

0.000

-0.420

0.002

Age - 55 to 59

6.201

0.000

4.584

0.000

3.335

0.000

-0.392

0.010

Age - 60 to 64

6.773

0.000

4.287

0.000

3.709

0.000

-0.006

0.972

Higher degree

-0.426

0.002

-0.440

0.001

-2.877

0.000

-0.291

0.170

0.120

0.380

0.340

0.005

-1.408

0.001

0.007

0.968

Postgraduate diploma

47

Appendix Table 2 Multinomial Logit Model of Tenure Outcomes, 1993-94 to 1996-97 SIHC.
Owner with a
Outright Owner

Mortgage

Public Renter

Other tenure

Coef.

Sig.

Coef.

Sig.

Coef.

Sig.

Coef.

Sig.

0.089

0.237

0.111

0.092

-1.513

0.000

0.117

0.125

-0.047

0.693

0.141

0.199

-1.110

0.000

0.282

0.046

Associate diploma

0.183

0.032

0.253

0.001

-0.734

0.000

0.064

0.493

Skilled vocational

0.214

0.000

0.287

0.000

-0.492

0.000

-0.099

0.119

Basic vocational

0.032

0.797

0.112

0.301

-0.151

0.318

-0.182

0.089

Married or defacto

0.078

0.695

0.530

0.004

-0.077

0.793

-0.129

0.535

-0.111

0.135

0.413

0.000

-0.021

0.823

-0.673

0.000

0.186

0.000

0.171

0.000

0.334

0.000

0.039

0.407

Bachelor degree
Undergraduate diploma

Separated, widowed, divorced
Number of dependent children in the unit
Country of birth - Oceania

-0.964

0.000

-0.577

0.000

-0.183

0.310

-0.601

0.000

Country of birth - Europe + former USSR

-0.112

0.048

-0.094

0.086

-0.179

0.057

-0.160

0.046

Country of birth - Middle East + N.Africa

-0.389

0.026

-0.309

0.057

-0.197

0.390

-0.166

0.445

Country of birth - S.E. Asia

-0.402

0.003

-0.115

0.304

0.345

0.033

-0.099

0.437

Country of birth - N.E. Asia

-0.381

0.042

-0.629

0.000

-1.127

0.004

0.258

0.147

Country of birth - Southern Asia

-0.760

0.000

-0.356

0.051

-0.066

0.853

-0.192

0.448

Country of birth - North America

-0.864

0.003

-0.681

0.005

-1.866

0.071

-0.075

0.794

Country of birth - Sth/Cntr America+Carib.

-1.252

0.000

-0.538

0.025

0.296

0.378

0.125

0.634

Country of birth - Africa (excl. N. Africa)

-1.224

0.000

-0.470

0.015

-0.563

0.210

-0.115

0.645

Quarterly time dummies

Mixed Significance

Generally Insignificant Generally Insignificant Generally Insignificant

Private Renter is the omitted tenure type category.
N=29279 Income Units. Sample: Reference Person Aged under 65.
Log likelihood = -30533.327
LR chi2(240) = 24094.53
Prob > chi2 = 0.0000
Pseudo R2 = 0.2829

48

Appendix Table 3 Ordinary Least Squares Model of the Loan-to-Value Ratio, 1993-94 to
1996-97 SIHC.
Owners with a
All Owners
Coef.

Sig.

Coef.

Sig.

0.461

0.000

0.765

0.000

2.910E-07

0.000

-3.860E-09

0.966

Sydney

-0.073

0.000

-0.074

0.000

Country NSW

-0.075

0.000

-0.043

0.004

Melbourne

-0.053

0.000

-0.033

0.009

Country Victoria

-0.072

0.000

-0.041

0.013

Brisbane

-0.033

0.003

-0.019

0.187

Country Queensland

-0.059

0.000

-0.022

0.129

Adelaide

-0.025

0.021

-0.002

0.906

Country South Australia

-0.073

0.000

-0.028

0.182

Perth

-0.046

0.000

-0.053

0.000

Country Western Australia

-0.062

0.000

-0.048

0.013

Hobart

-0.034

0.020

-0.026

0.185

Country Tasmania

-0.095

0.000

-0.071

0.000

Couple income unit

-0.035

0.155

-0.051

0.145

Single female income unit

-0.009

0.361

-0.023

0.093

0.020

0.397

-0.006

0.859

-0.001

0.927

-0.017

0.344

Age - 20 to 24

0.267

0.001

0.038

0.738

Age - 25 to 29

0.138

0.086

-0.086

0.451

Age - 30 to 34

0.047

0.561

-0.153

0.179

Age - 35 to 39

-0.063

0.433

-0.238

0.037

Age - 40 to 44

-0.145

0.069

-0.296

0.010

Age - 45 to 49

-0.233

0.004

-0.371

0.001

Age - 50 to 54

-0.296

0.000

-0.414

0.000

Age - 55 to 59

-0.344

0.000

-0.458

0.000

Age - 60 to 64

-0.382

0.000

-0.513

0.000

Higher degree

-0.020

0.124

-0.037

0.035

0.006

0.594

-0.018

0.254

Bachelor degree

-0.009

0.214

-0.021

0.030

Undergraduate diploma

-0.011

0.333

-0.038

0.017

Associate diploma

-0.018

0.027

-0.047

0.000

Skilled vocational

-0.014

0.006

-0.028

0.000

Constant
Earned Income of the Income Unit

Sole parent male income unit
Sole parent female income unit

Postgraduate diploma

Mortgage

49

Appendix Table 3 Ordinary Least Squares Model of the Loan-to-Value Ratio, 1993-94 to
1996-97 SIHC.
Owners with a
All Owners
Coef.

Sig.

Coef.

Sig.

Basic vocational

0.027

0.055

0.042

0.027

Married or defacto

0.058

0.021

0.024

0.509

Separated, widowed, divorced

0.045

0.000

0.018

0.176

-0.013

0.000

-0.014

0.000

Country of birth - Oceania

0.054

0.000

0.044

0.013

Country of birth - Europe + former USSR

0.019

0.000

0.038

0.000

Country of birth - Middle East + N.Africa

0.045

0.018

0.082

0.002

Country of birth - S.E. Asia

0.044

0.002

0.047

0.009

Country of birth - N.E. Asia

-0.024

0.282

0.006

0.861

Country of birth - Southern Asia

0.114

0.000

0.138

0.000

Country of birth - North America

0.064

0.048

0.081

0.055

Country of birth - Sth/Cntr America+Carib.

0.150

0.000

0.176

0.000

Country of birth - Africa (excl. N. Africa)

0.072

0.002

0.050

0.078

Number of dependent children in the unit

Mortgage

Quarterly time dummies

Generally Significant Generally Insignificant

Sample: Reference Person Aged under 65.

All Owners

Owners with a Mortgage

N=14972

N=7997

F(60,14911) = 105.56

F(60,7936) = 34.45

Prob > F = 0.0000

Prob > F = 0.0000

Adjusted R2 = 0.2953

Adjusted R2 = 0.2067

50

