                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE WTO PROMOTES TRADE, STRONGLY BUT UNEVENLY

                                          Arvind Subramanian
                                            Shang-Jin Wei

                                         Working Paper 10024
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10024


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




The authors are grateful to James Anderson, Alina Carare, Peter Clark, K. Michael Finger, Carsten Fink,
Hans-Peter Lankes, Gary Hufbauer, Patrick Low, Aaditya Mattoo, Hildegunn Nordas, Caglar Ozden, Arvind
Panagariya, Roberta Piermartini, Dani Rodrik, Robert Teh Jr., Luke Willard, Alan Winters, seminar
participants at the IMF, and especially Andy Rose for helpful suggestions and discussions. Ethan Ilzetzski,
Azim Sadikov, and Li Zeng provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Arvind Subramanian and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly But Unevenly
Arvind Subramanian and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 10024
October 2003
JEL No. F1

                                           ABSTRACT

Contrary to the recent literature that concludes that the GATT/WTO has been completely ineffective
in promoting world trade, this paper furnishes robust evidence that the institution has had a powerful
and positive impact on trade. The impact has, however, been uneven. GATT/WTO membership for
industrial countries has been associated with a large increase in imports estimated at about 44
percent of world trade. The same has not been true for developing country members, although those
that joined after the Uruguay Round have benefited from increased imports. Similarly, there has
been an asymmetric impact between sectors. These results are consistent with the history and design
of the institution.

Arvind Subramanian
Research Department
Room 10-700N
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street
Washington, DC 20431
asubramanian@imf.org

Shang-Jin Wei
Research Department
Room 10-700M
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
swei@imf.org
                                              3


                           I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION


The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and its successor, the World Trade
Organization (WTO), were set up to promote world trade. That trade increased courtesy of
this institution may seem self-evident. To the doubters, Bhagwati (1991) has this succinct
riposte:

“A common criticism is that the GATT in truth is the General Agreement to Talk and Talk: It
has delivered nothing. This is nonsense.” (p. 5.)

However, in one of the first and very few empirical analyses of this question, Rose (2002a
and 2002b), after an impressively meticulous and comprehensive scrutiny, has argued that
there is no evidence that the WTO has increased world trade. To quote Rose (2002a):

“My quantitative examination indicates that there is little reason to believe that the
GATT/WTO has had a dramatic effect on trade. In particular, once standard gravity effects
have been taken into account, bilateral trade cannot be strongly and dependably linked to
membership in the WTO or its predecessor the GATT.” (p. 23.)

In this paper, we attempt to reconcile the apparent inconsistency between the well-entrenched
belief in the benefits of the WTO and the conclusion of Rose’s analysis. We will furnish
evidence that Rose’s analysis is incomplete and can be misread seriously. The
incompleteness is on two grounds.

On econometric grounds, Rose’s analysis needs to be refined methodologically in one
important respect to incorporate the results of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), who show
that a gravity equation grounded in theory always needs to include country fixed effects. On
economic grounds, it needs to be further elaborated to take account of the asymmetric
manner in which the WTO has effected trade liberalization in the post-war period. Once
these are done, we find robust evidence that the WTO (and its predecessor, the GATT) has
promoted world trade. We estimate that the WTO may have increased world imports by
about 44 percent or about US$3 trillion in 2000 alone.

Interestingly, our results on the WTO’s trade impact are exactly in line with what they should
be, given the liberalization asymmetries. We emphasize three types of asymmetries: between
developed and developing countries; between developing countries that joined the WTO
before and after the Uruguay Round; and between sectors where the WTO has been effective
in bringing down trade barriers and those—notably agriculture, and textiles and clothing—
where it has been less effective. Rose (2002a and 2002b) notes these asymmetries but does
not pursue them empirically. Instead he focuses on the average behavior of WTO members,
which could obscure the great unevenness in the patterns of trade liberalization across
members, across time, and across products. The verdict on the ineffectiveness of the WTO is
overturned once one refines the econometric specification and takes account of these
asymmetries.
                                                4


              A. First Asymmetry: Developed Versus Developing Countries

It is well-recognized that the WTO, and more especially its predecessor the GATT, has been
a two-tier organization, with far greater liberalization obligations imposed on its developed
than its developing country members. As Table 1 shows, developed countries, under
successive rounds of trade negotiations, have successfully reduced their tariff barriers. These
numbers suggest that industrial countries, under the aegis of the GATT, reduced their
average tariffs from over 15 percent in 1947 to about 4.5 percent today.

This, combined with the fact that the rules have required that developed countries not impose
nontariff barriers (especially quantitative restrictions), has meant that the WTO should have
been a motor of overall trade liberalization by industrial countries. Of course, during the
post-war era industrial countries did seek recourse to nontariff barriers, in violation of the
spirit if not the letter of WTO rules. They included voluntary export restraints (in cars and
steel), explicit quantitative restrictions (agriculture and clothing), and antidumping. Although
many of these barriers were sectoral in nature, their imposition could have offset the effects
of the tariff liberalization. Whether they did so is an empirical question that we allow the data
to settle.

In contrast, and since the early days of the GATT, developing countries have had far fewer
obligations to liberalize. This reluctance of developing countries to take on obligations to
liberalize under the WTO was codified under the principle of special and differential
treatment (S&D), which has defined the terms of developing country participation or rather
virtual non-participation. In terms of developing countries’ own liberalization, S&D
consisted of two elements.1

First, developing countries have not, until the Uruguay Round, really participated in tariff
liberalization in the various rounds. This is reflected in Table 2 which illustrates that until the
Uruguay Round developing countries had “bound” less than a third of their tariff lines
compared to nearly 85 percent for industrial countries.2 That is, developing countries had no
commitments as regards their tariffs for over two-thirds of their imports. And even on the
30 percent of the bound lines, the commitments to liberalize were weak because the bound
rate was well above the applied, the prenegotiation rate, typically by over 10 to 15 percentage
points.


1
  S&D also had another pillar, the grant of preferential market access by developed countries
to their developing country trading partners, which led to the institution of GSP and similar
schemes (see Wolf, 1986, for an excellent analysis of the rationale and consequences of
S&D).
2
 When a country “binds” its tariffs in the GATT/WTO (or undertakes tariff “bindings”), it
commits not to raise its tariffs above the level at which the tariff is “bound.” Note that these
numbers relate to the late 1980s; for much of the post-war period, the proportion of bindings
was even smaller.
                                                 5


Second, the permissiveness of the GATT toward developing countries extended not just to
tariff liberalization but also the basic rules on nontariff barriers, particularly their use of
quantitative restrictions for balance of payments reasons that was sanctioned under Article
XVIII:B of the GATT.3

Indeed, a number of the large developing countries invoked the right to use quantitative
restrictions on their imports for the major part of the post-war period; in some instances this
right extended to over five decades. This is illustrated in Table 3. In practice, the right to use
quantitative restrictions generally coincided with their actual use. This use of quantitative
restrictions was a crucial aspect of special and differential treatment.

         B. Second Asymmetry: New Versus Old Developing Country Members

The second, temporal asymmetry, in the WTO derives from the above. As the Uruguay
Round progressed, it became clear that one of its objectives was to narrow the gap between
developed and developing countries in terms of their respective obligations to liberalize trade
barriers. This objective was particularly important in defining the terms of accession of new
WTO members, namely those that joined after the Uruguay Round negotiations had
commenced. The Chinese accession in 2001 is a case in point. The accession came at the end
of a 13-year process in which the list of liberalization obligations imposed on China grew
steadily. China was given a shorter phase-in period to complete the liberalization obligations
than earlier developing country members. At the end of the phase-in period, China’s trade
regime will be more open than most of the existing developing country members of the WTO
today. The Chinese case has its special features, but the more demanding nature of
liberalization obligations could have applied to other new WTO members as well.

    C. Third Asymmetry: Protected Versus Liberalized Sectors in Developed Countries

Third, there has been asymmetry in the liberalization between different sectors. While
developed countries brought down their trade barriers, they exempted a number of key
sectors—agriculture, textiles and clothing—from their liberalization efforts. In fact, this
exemption was reflected not just in the fact that tariffs remained high in these sectors. The
rules on the prohibition of quantitative restrictions were themselves bent to allow their use in
these sectors. The Multi-Fiber Arrangement, which was a vast system of bilateral quantitative
restrictions imposed by developed countries on their imports from developing countries, was
a violation of the basic rules of the GATT. The same was true of agriculture. Table 4
confirms that the food, clothing, and footwear sectors are indeed highly protected sectors,
with average tariffs well above the average for the industrial sector as a whole, and with
significant peak tariffs, particularly in agriculture.

These three asymmetries are well-known. The question is whether they actually show up in
the data on the patterns of trade. Furthermore, once these asymmetries are taken into account,

3
 For a fuller discussion of the history and consequences of Article XVIII:B, see Eglin (1987)
and WTO (2003).
                                               6


would the data reveal that the WTO has promoted trade substantially and in the way it has
been designed? The objective of this paper is to examine systematically this question. It is
organized as follows. Section II presents the econometric model and estimation
methodology, and briefly describes the data and their sources. Section III discusses the
results. Section IV offers some concluding remarks.


                       II. ECONOMETRIC SPECIFICATION AND DATA

                              A. Model and Estimation Issues

We adopt an extended gravity model that has enjoyed empirical success in terms of its ability
to explain a relatively large fraction of variations in the observed volume of trade. In theory,
the gravity model can be justified by a variety of theories, including monopolistic
competition (Helpman and Krugman, 1995) and a Heckscher-Ohlin model with
specialization (Anderson, 1979; Deardorff, 1998; and Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003).

Empirically, it has been used to analyze the effects of regional trade blocs (see Frankel, 1997
and the references cited therein) and currency unions (Frankel and Rose, 2000; Glick and
Rose, 2002; Rose, 2000; and Persson, 2001) among other subjects. In contrast to a majority
of earlier studies (and to Rose, 2002a), we adopt the version of the gravity model suggested
by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) that includes country fixed effects in the regression.
More precisely, our specification is of the following form:


LogImport(j,k,t) = Z(j,k,t) γ + ∑ αi Mi + ∑ θh Xh+ β1FTA(j,k,t) + β2GSP(j,k,t) +
                   β 3WTO-DVED(j,k,t) + β4WTO-DING(j,k,t) + ej,k,t

where Z(j,t) is a list of variables, including log GDP, log per capita GDP, log land area of
importers and exporters, greater circle distance between j and k, dummies for common
language and colonial links, shared borders, and currency, and a dummy for landlocked and
island countries. Essentially, the list includes all the covariates in Rose (2002a).4

Mi’s are a list of importer dummies (that take the value of one if i=j, and zero otherwise).
Xi’s are a list of exporter dummies (that take the value of one if h=k, and zero otherwise). The
Mi’s and Xi’s are essentially dummies that serve to proxy for “multilateral resistance” in
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003).5 These dummies were not included in most of the
regressions in Rose (2002a).

4
 Because we include importer and exporter fixed effects (see below), we drop other country-
specific and time invariant covariates.
5
  Trade between two countries depends not just on the policy and physical barriers between
them but also on the barriers between these countries and the rest of the world (hence the
term “multilateral resistance”). Importer and exporter dummies proxy for the latter kind of
barriers. One of our robustness checks involves taking the Anderson and Van Wincoop
                                                                                 (continued…)
                                                7



FTA(j,k,t) is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if j and k belong to a common free
trade area or common market in year t.6

GSP (j,k,t) is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if the importing industrial country
grants preferences under the generalized scheme of preferences (GSP) to exporting country k
in year t and where j and k are not members of a free trade area or common market in year t.

WTO-DVED(j,k,t) is a dummy variable for importer j that is a developed country WTO
member and where j and k are not in a common free trade area or customs union and where j
does not grant GSP preferences to k in year t.

WTO-DING(j,k,t) is a dummy variable for importer j that is a developing country WTO
member and where j and k are not in a common free trade area or customs union and where j
does not grant GSP preferences to k in year t.

ej,k,t is a normally distributed random error term that has a zero mean and a constant variance.

There are several important differences between our specification and that in Rose (2002a)
that are worth making clear at the outset. First, we focus on imports by j from k as the
regressand, whereas Rose focused on the average of j’s imports from k and j’s exports to k.
All theories that underlie a gravity-like specification yield predictions on unidirectional trade
rather than total trade. Hence, our specification is more closely grounded in theory.

Moreover, the trade effects of the WTO and the GSP really relate to imports. When a country
j grants GSP preferences to k, or when j liberalizes its imports under the WTO, there is
reason to expect j's imports from k to increase but there is no theoretical reason why j's
exports to k should also increase by the same proportion. Even if Abba Lerner symmetry
were to hold—that is, removal of import barriers serves to raise exports as well as imports—
it would only do so at the level of a country’s aggregate rather than bilateral trade.

The argument in favor of trade (exports plus imports) rather than imports could be based on
the view that the WTO also regulates export taxes and export subsidies. In practice, export
taxes have rarely, if ever, been the subject of liberalization negotiations, in part because
industrial countries have seldom used them. Export subsidies, on the other hand, have been
the focus of WTO rules and negotiations, but elimination of these subsidies would tend to
reduce exports. The impact of the WTO on a measure of trade (regressand) that included
exports would even in theory be ambiguous.


(2003) results to its logical conclusion and incorporating time-varying importer and exporter
fixed effects.
6
 The FTAs included in our analysis are those reported in Rose (2002a) and updated through
2000. Appendix Table 6 lists all the FTAs used in our study.
                                               8


Another reason for favoring trade would be that by joining the WTO a country gets the
benefit of most-favored-nation (MFN) treatment and enjoys better export access to other
markets. But this benefit can only be enjoyed if the partner country is also a WTO member
country. For these reasons, Rose’s (2002a) attempt at measuring the impact of the WTO
when only one of the two trading countries is in the WTO seems problematic.7

Another advantage of our specification is that we can meaningfully differentiate importer and
exporter characteristics and their effects (e.g. importer’s log GDP and exporter’s log GDP as
separate regressors) on trade, whereas Rose had to rely on a symmetric composite of the
importer and exporter characteristics (e.g., the sum of the importer’s and exporter’s log
GDP’s as a single regressor). Under our approach, for example, we can measure whether
import liberalization benefits all exporters or just those that are members of the WTO. Thus,
we are able to identify whether there is discrimination between WTO and non-WTO
members and also to measure the potential public good benefits of the WTO.

Second, as Deardorff (1998), Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), and Wei (1996)
emphasized, the standard gravity model might have been misspecified in ignoring a
“multilateral resistance” or “remoteness” term. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) suggest
that empirically, the inclusion of country fixed effects captures “multilateral resistance”
reasonably well and thus corrects this misspecification. In Rose (2002a), the benchmark
regression and indeed all specifications, save one, do not include country fixed effects. In our
analysis, we include country fixed effects in all the specifications.

Third, our specification of the GSP and WTO dummies is different from that in Rose. We
rely on the fact that FTAs, the GSP, and the WTO involve different degrees of liberalization,
and hence define them mutually exclusively in order to be able to isolate the impact of each,
purged of any “contamination” from the other.8 Therefore, the WTO dummies in our analysis
are coded to exclude country pairs belonging to the same FTA/customs union agreement or
involved in GSP relationships. Similarly, the GSP dummy is coded to exclude country pairs
belonging to an FTA or customs union.

                                    B. Data and Sources

The data that we use and their sources are explained in detail in the Appendix. Most of our
data are from Rose (2002a) which are posted on his website. The main difference is our use
of imports rather than trade as the dependent variable which we obtain from the IMF’s
Direction of Trade Statistics. We deflate imports by the US consumer price index. Also we


7
 The other dummy that Rose (2002a) uses to capture possible WTO effects, namely when
both members in a country pair are WTO members, does not suffer from the deficiencies
noted above.
8
 We also report the results when these variables are defined as in Rose (2002a). It turns out
that the GSP coefficients are affected much more than the WTO coefficients.
                                                9


update all the Rose variables for the year 2000. Our panel data set consists of observations
for every 5 years beginning in 1950.

The tariff and import data we use for the disaggregated estimations are obtained respectively
from the TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information Systems) and COMTRADE databases of the
United Nations (See the Appendix for details). Descriptive statistics for the basic data are in
Appendix Table 1. The list of countries in the aggregate and disaggregate estimations is
presented in Appendix Tables 2–4. Consistent with WTO practice, but unlike Rose, we
exclude South Africa, Turkey, and Yugoslavia from the category of industrial countries. The
list of sectors used in the disaggregate estimations is in Appendix Table 5 The list of free
trade areas is described in Appendix Table 6, while Appendix Table 7 provides data on the
number of observations falling into the different categories (WTO, FTAs, GSP etc.).


                                         III. RESULTS

              A. Asymmetry Between Industrial and Developing Countries

We now turn to the regression analysis. The basic gravity model, reported in Table 5, works
well, yielding plausible estimates for the standard covariates—GDP, GDP per capita,
distance—which are highly significant and very much in line with typical estimates from the
literature. Tables 5 and 6 contain the core results for aggregate trade in panel and cross-
section contexts, respectively. The basic Rose result about the ineffectiveness of the WTO in
increasing trade is illustrated in column 1. Indeed, if membership in the WTO is
undifferentiated, with all countries treated alike, our result is a more damning indictment of
the WTO than even that in Rose (2002a). He found that membership in the WTO had no
significant effect on trade. We find that membership has a significantly negative effect on
trade: the average WTO member trades about 11 percent [exp(–0.113)–1] less than the
average in the sample (column 1).

But as we explained in the earlier section, the evolution of the WTO and its precursor the
GATT, most notably involving the special treatment of developing countries, makes it
essential to treat this group differently from industrial countries. Once this is done as in
column 2, we see that the average result of undertrading obscures a significant difference
between the behavior of industrial country members of the WTO and its developing country
members. The coefficient on the former is positive and highly significant. As will be seen,
this is a result that is robust to a large number of changes in specification, estimation
procedure, and sample.

On the other hand, the coefficient on the developing country WTO importer dummy is
negative and significant.9 This negative sign, as it turns out, is not robust; indeed, it is quite
fragile. For example, when we exclude observations with values of trade less than $500,000,

9
 It is worth noting that t-statistics for the industrial country WTO dummy is almost always
above 10, signifying that the coefficient estimates have a high degree of precision.
                                               10


the negative coefficient turns positive and significant (column 4 of Table 5). There are
plausible reasons to believe that small-valued observations are subject to sampling and
measurement error. In particular, idiosyncratic shifts in the behavior of a single importer or
even a single shipment may dominate the variations in the reported import value.10

Table 6 reports a sequence of cross-sectional estimations every five years from 1950 to 2000.
The chief advantage of running separate regressions for different years is that the importer
and exporter fixed effects are allowed to vary over time. This effectively permits the
“multilateral resistance” in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) to be time-varying. The
coefficients on other control variables are not restricted to be the same over time either. The
chief disadvantage of this approach is a possible loss of efficiency which, given the large size
of the data set, is not a crucial loss. In any case, the coefficients on the industrial country
WTO dummy are positive, and significant for all years beginning in 1960. The coefficient on
the developing country dummy is less stable: it is positive and significant in the early years
but negative and usually insignificant for the rest of the estimations.

This result is consistent with the history of asymmetric trade liberalization in the WTO that
we described earlier. Industrial countries reduced their tariff barriers under successive trade
rounds while developing countries were accorded the freedom to maintain their trade barriers
under the principle of special and differential treatment. The known asymmetry in tariff
reductions shows up nicely in the data. Changes in nontariff barriers are apparently not large
enough to completely offset the tariff reductions.

If these results are interpreted causally, we can quantify the contribution of the WTO to
increasing global trade. The coefficient for the industrial country dummy in the panel
regression reported in column 4 of Table 5 is 0.52. This implies that industrial countries’
bilateral imports has on average been about 65 percent more [exp(0.52)–1] by virtue of their
membership in the WTO. Taken literally, our results would imply that in 2000 alone,
aggregate imports of industrial countries would have been higher by about $3 trillion than
without the WTO, representing about 44 percent of world trade.

This estimate is probably overstated because it does not take into account a substitution
effect: if one country joined the WTO its aggregate trade would increase as we have
estimated it; but if all countries joined the WTO there would be some displacement of
imports from non-WTO members by those from WTO members. Having said that, we note
that there are also reasons that our estimates may have understated the true impact of the
WTO membership in raising world trade if there is positive feedback from higher trade to
higher economic growth (see Frankel and Romer, 1999), which in turn spurs even more trade
(the gravity equation examines trade for a given level of income). Of course, if the WTO had
not accorded the freedom to developing countries to maintain trade barriers, and had required
trade liberalization of them, the positive impact on global trade could have been greater still.
10
  For these reasons, the remaining results reported in the paper will exclude observations
with trade values less than $500,000, although we would emphasize that not doing so does
not alter the basic nature of the results.
                                                11



Some additional features of the world trading system are brought out by the results. Members
of the WTO are obliged to extend trade privileges granted to any country (member or non-
member) to all other members of the WTO under the MFN principle. But members are not
obliged to extend the same privilege to non-members of the WTO. They can do so if they
wish but there is no legal obligation to do so. In practice, do they?

In column 5 of Table 5, each of the two WTO dummies is disaggregated into two dummies,
depending on whether the exporter is also a WTO member. For industrial country WTO
members, the coefficients on the dummy when the exporter is also a WTO member is greater
than when the exporter is not a member (0.62 versus 0.34) and this difference is statistically
significant.11 It appears that non-members do not seem to benefit equally from the
liberalization under the WTO. This difference, which highlights the benefits of WTO
membership, could arise for two reasons. The first is explicit discrimination; that is, barriers
could be higher against imports from non-WTO members than from members. The second is
akin to a product composition effect: that is, even though all goods are treated alike
regardless of their provenance, barriers are higher on products of greater interest to non-
members because these products have not been the subject of the reciprocity negotiations in
the WTO.12 Being out of the WTO can thus have two types of disadvantages.

This result, however, also points to the possible public good benefit of the WTO. The fact
that imports from WTO non-members is positive and significant rather than zero could arise
from the fact that WTO members extend some of the privileges of their WTO-induced
liberalization to non-members. In our results, the public good benefit amounts to about
40 percent [exp(0.34)–1] additional exports for non-members to industrial country WTO
members.

In Table 7, we put our core specification through the usual hoops—the robustness-checks
exercise. As the Table confirms, our core result—particularly the positive impact of the
WTO on industrial countries’ imports—remains unchanged. The hoops include: adding time-
varying importer and exporter fixed effects, quadratic gravity terms, using Rose’s (2002a)
definition of the GSP and WTO dummies, using alternative estimation procedures: weighted
least squares (with trade, real GDP, and real GDP per capita as weights), country-pair
random effects, country-pair random effects with importer and exporter fixed effects, and
country-pair fixed effects, and finally, discarding outlying observations.13



11
  The F-test (with a value of 48.0) suggests that the null hypothesis of the equality of
coefficients is easily rejected.
12
     We are grateful to Alan Winters for drawing our attention to this point.
13
  Specifically, we discard values of the dependent variable that are three and two standard
deviations away from the mean, respectively.
                                               12


In all cases, the industrial country dummy is highly significant and the magnitude of the
coefficient remains broadly stable. We would draw particular attention to the first row in
Table 7, which includes time-varying importer and exporter fixed effects. In economic term,
this specification allows multilateral resistance a la Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) to
change over time in the panel regression. Qualitatively, this extension does not change our
basic conclusion. In fact, our results are even stronger in the sense that the industrial country
WTO dummy increases in size while remaining significant.14

The only case in Table 7 where the industrial country coefficient declines significantly is in
the specification with country-pair fixed effects estimations, where the coefficient value
declines to 0.32, while remaining statistically significant. Conceptually, the specification that
includes the country-pair fixed effects asks a “within” question: what does joining the WTO
do to the import pattern? The specifications that exclude country-pair fixed effects but
otherwise include importer and exporter fixed effects ask a different, “between” question: do
WTO members exhibit a different trade patterns from non-members? Our paper has been
focusing mostly on the “between” question and demonstrates that industrial country WTO
members are significantly more open than non-members. On the “within” question, the effect
is smaller numerically but still positive and non-trivial in economic term. The developing
country dummy is generally positive and significant but the magnitudes are typically very
small.

         B. Asymmetries Between New and Old Developing Country Members

The next question we address is whether there has been any change in the trading patterns of
WTO members in the recent past. There is a priori reason to expect changes because it is
widely believed that the Uruguay Round marked a watershed in the status of developing
countries in the WTO. Specifically, special and differential treatment came under attack in
the Uruguay Round. A concerted effort was supposedly made to ensure that developing
countries were integrated into the trading system, most notably by requiring them to take on
more obligations to liberalize their trade regimes. A related development was on the front of
new entrants to the WTO. By many accounts, post-Uruguay Round accessions are supposed
to have been qualitatively different in the sense of extracting more trade liberalizing
concessions from prospective entrants. But does the data support the proposition that the
Uruguay Round really marked a watershed for developing countries?

Table 8 attempts to shed light on this question. For the purposes of this table, developing
country members are disaggregated into those that were members prior to the Uruguay
Round (“old members”) and those that joined after it (“new members”). Given that the
Uruguay Round negotiations lasted eight years, the question arises as to what is the

14
  Including time-varying fixed effects increases dramatically the number of parameters to be
estimated (about 300-350 parameters for each time period). Because of computational
limitations, the sample for this specification had to be restricted to data for every ten rather
than every 5 years beginning in 1950. The resulting sample contained 28667 observations
compared with 55831 observation in the core specification.
                                               13


appropriate cut-off date that distinguishes a possible regime change in the way the WTO
treated its old and new members.

One possibility would be to make 1995—the date of the formal creation of the WTO—as the
cut-off date. But this would be too legalistic; indeed the creation of the WTO with its notion
of a single undertaking—whereby all countries adhered to all the Uruguay Round
agreements—was the culmination of the process of integrating developing countries into the
trading system.15 In the absence of a strong justification for any one particular date, we allow
the data to tell us whether and when there was a regime shift. Therefore, in our regressions,
we successively define new members as those that joined after 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993,
1994, and 1995. We then test the hypothesis that WTO membership had a different impact on
trade for these new members compared with the old ones.

These results are reported in Table 8. Regressions for the year 2000 are reported in columns
1–6 while those for 1995 are in columns 7–11. Three features stand out. First, the regressions
for 2000 indicate that the coefficient on the new WTO member dummy is positive and
significant for all definitions of new members except when 1995 is used as the cut-off date
for defining new members. The average coefficient value is about 0.28, representing extra
trade of about 30 percent for new members.

Second, in the regressions for 2000, the coefficients of the new and old dummies are
significantly different from each other except when 1995 is used as the cut-off date for
defining new members.16 This is suggestive of a regime change.

But how is one to reconcile regime change with the fact that the coefficient on new members
becomes smaller in size and statistically insignificant when 1995 is used as the cut-off date?
A plausible explanation is that the lag between the start of WTO membership and detectable
liberalization efforts is longer than 5 years. Indeed, developing countries are often given
very long periods, sometimes up to 15 years, to phase in their liberalization.

Columns 7–11 shed some light on this issue by reporting regressions for bilateral imports in
1995, when little time has elapsed for the new WTO members. The coefficients on new
members that were significant in the 2000 trade equation become small and insignificant.
These results are consistent with the practice of having the liberalization obligations phased
in over a period of time. Countries that joined in the early 1990s experienced no significant
increase in openness in 1995 but by 2000 they appear to have done so that was worth about
an extra 30 percent of trade.


15
   In private correspondence, Patrick Low of the WTO suggests that a date as early as the
Mexican accession to the GATT in 1986 could be seen as the beginning of the process of
integrating developing countries into the trading system.
16
   As Table 8 shows, the null hypothesis for equality of coefficients is rejected by the F-tests
at the 1 or 5 percent level in 5 of the 6 regressions.
                                               14


We would note, however, that the coefficient on old developing country members is still not
positive and statistically significant. This suggests that their obligations to liberalize even
after the Uruguay Round have not become stringent enough to actually lead them to be more
open than non-WTO members. Evidently, eliminating special and differential still has a long
way to go.

These are important findings because they sit at odds with the popular view that developing
countries were actually integrated into the trading system in the aftermath of the Uruguay
Round. In trade terms this did not happen for the old members of the WTO. Although
developing countries’ bound tariffs may have come down in the Uruguay Round, actual
tariffs barely budged.

Table 9 shows that, although the percentage of tariff lines for which bindings (commitments)
were taken on by developing countries increased by 50 percentage points due to the Uruguay
Round, the actual tariff reductions brought about by the Round were much smaller: only 27
percent of tariff lines involved reductions in applied tariffs, and on these, the reduction was 8
percent. In other words, if tariff reductions are calculated on all tariff lines, the reduction
would be about 2 percent. This lack of reductions in applied tariffs appears to be reflected in
our result that old WTO members continued to be no more open than non-members even
after the Uruguay Round. The irony relating to S&D in the Uruguay Round was that it was
eliminated in areas—such as TRIPs—where maintaining it may actually have been welfare-
enhancing. But S&D was preserved in the conventional area of trade liberalization in goods
where its dilution would have been unambiguously welfare-enhancing.

                             C. Asymmetries Between Sectors

In this sub-section, we turn our attention to the asymmetry in the trade liberalization across
sectors. The proposition that we wish to test is whether WTO membership has a differential
impact for the industrial countries between protected and unprotected sectors. If WTO
membership is a proxy for trade liberalization, then it should have had a greater impact on
trade volumes where barriers came down compared with sectors where barriers have
remained high.

To explore this issue, we go to a recently available data set on disaggregated bilateral trade
(disaggregated at the Harmonized System (HS) 4-digit level) that was not used by Rose
(2002 a or b).17 We adopt a two-step strategy. In the first step, we identify sectors that are
commonly considered to be highly protected by developed countries and sectors that are
supposed to have been liberalized. In the second step, we fit a variation of the augmented
gravity model to these data. The objective is to see whether actual patterns of trade volume
reflect the known difference in trade barriers.18
17
 Rose (2002a) does suggest that a sectoral analysis could shed further light on the impact of
WTO membership.
18
  For details of the data used in this part of the analysis see the Appendix, while Appendix
Table 2 provides the list of countries covered.
                                               15



We begin by describing how we select disaggregated tariff categories into the highly
protected and liberalized sectors. First, we sort United States (ad valorem) MFN tariff rates at
the HS 4-digit level (on imports from other developed WTO members) in 1990 and 2001 in
descending order. We do the same for the European Union’s tariff rates.

Second, we identify the set of 4-digit sectors in which both the United States and the EU
have tariff rates that are greater than ten percent in both years. Note that these sectors may
have additional specific tariffs. A complete list of these products is presented in Appendix
Table 3. These 4-digit sectors can be broadly grouped into four categories: agricultural
products, clothing, footwear, and other highly protected manufactured products. For each
country pair and year, we then sum up the 4-digit imports within each of the four categories.
Note that the data base does not have information on non-tariff barriers at this level of
disaggregation. Therefore, while we are confident that the sectors that we have chosen are
highly protected by developed countries, we cannot be sure if we have left out some other
highly protected sectors (due to nontariff barriers).

Third, we also collect the set of 4-digit sectors that both the United States and the EU have
zero ad valorem and specific tariff rates. We take out agricultural products and raw materials
from this list on the ground that there may be various non-tariff barriers that the information
in the data base does not capture. We label the remaining set of zero-tariff 4-digit sectors as
unprotected sectors.

We specify a system of five equations, one for each of the following sectors: (i) unprotected
manufacturing; (ii) clothing; (iii) footwear; (iv) agriculture; and (iii) other highly protected
manufacturing.


LogImport(j,k,S,t) = Z(j,t) γl + ∑ αi Mi + ∑ θhl Xh+ β1lFTA(j,k,t) + β2lGSP(j,k,t)
                     + β3l WTO-DVED(j,k,t) + β4lWTO-DING(j,k,t) + ej,k,l,t


where S is an index representing the 5 sectors for which this equation is estimated. The
regressors are common for all the equations. The equations have the standard gravity
formulations and are identical to that described in Section II. Since the error terms in the five
equation are potentially correlated, we estimate the five equations jointly using the
Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) technique. Allowing such cross-equation error
correlations makes SUR more general than OLS. Each of the five equations has importer and
exporter fixed effects and year effects. To allow for maximum flexibility, we do not restrict
the parameters on similar regressors in different equations to be the same.

The hypothesis that we test is a simple one. Sectors with the highest protection in industrial
countries are those where the WTO has been least successful. Hence, WTO membership
should have less impact than in sectors characterized by low levels of protection.
                                               16


The United Nations WITS trade database has disaggregated data beginning in 1989.
Consistent with our aggregate estimations reported earlier, we use data for 1990, 1995, and
2000 and discard observations with import values less than US$500,000.

Table 10 presents the results for these estimations. The results for the sector with low
protection (column 1) are consistent with the results for aggregate trade: for example, the
industrial country WTO dummy is positive and highly significant with a coefficient value of
0.62 which is greater than the coefficient value of 0.5 in the aggregate estimations. We would
expect WTO membership to lead to greater trade where it has effected greater liberalization
and this is confirmed by our results. The developing country WTO dummy is positive and
insignificant as in the aggregate estimations. This is therefore a reassuring benchmark against
which we can compare the results for the protected sectors.

For three of the four protected sectors—clothing, footwear and other manufacturing—the
coefficients of the industrial country dummy are insignificantly different from zero.
Formally, they are also significantly smaller than the coefficient in the unprotected sector.19
This provides confirmation that the WTO has not had any significant impact on trade in these
sectors as we have postulated.20 For the fourth sector—agriculture—the industrial country
WTO dummy is negative and significant. It appears that the exemption of agriculture from
WTO disciplines has provided the freedom to industrial countries to throttle trade by
introducing very high levels of protection. The permissiveness toward agriculture has proved
very costly indeed because the coefficient estimates suggest that the typical industrial country
imports of agricultural products is about 60 percent [exp(–0.87)–1] less than that of the
average importer in our sample.

                      D. Industrial Country Effect or WTO Effect?

One of our main and robust findings is that industrial country WTO membership is
associated with greater trade. In most years in our sample, however, all industrial countries
are WTO members. How can we be sure that we are picking up a WTO effect rather than an
industrial country effect?

In response we would make a number of points. First, insofar as industrial countries have
several distinguishing characteristics collectively and individually we control for them
respectively through our various covariates—GDP, per capita GDP, proximity etc.—and our
importer and exporter fixed effects. In other words, the results on the WTO dummy do not
follow simply because they are richer or larger than other countries or in some ways

19
  The hypothesis that the coefficient of the industrial country WTO dummy in the
unprotected sector is equal to that in each of the protected sectors is rejected in three
instances at the 1 percent level and in one instance at the 10 percent level (the chi-square
values are reported in Table 10).
20
  The developing country WTO dummy is also insignificant in three of the four protected
sectors.
                                                  17


geographically or historically distinctive. Nevertheless, it is still possible that there are
residual characteristics of industrial countries that are unobservable and therefore omitted
from our set of regressors, biasing our results.

Second, we also obtain and report some more direct evidence in favor of a WTO rather than
an industrial country effect. It turns out that in the early years of our sample (1950-1965), a
number of industrial countries (Germany, Austria, and Iceland among others) were not WTO
members. We run panel and cross-section regressions for these years and, in addition to the
usual industrial country WTO variable, add an industrial country WTO non-member
variable. The results are reported in Table 11. The panel regression (column 1) shows that
the while both industrial country WTO member and industrial country non-member
coefficients are positive and significant, the two are significantly different from each other.21
The difference in the values of the coefficients suggests that an industrial country WTO
member importing 200 percent more than an industrial country non-member.22 The year-by-
year results (columns 2-5), also confirms, in 3 out of the 4 time periods, an economically and
statistically significant difference in the importing patterns between industrial country WTO
members and non-members.

Third, there is additional evidence suggesting a distinct WTO effect rather than a pure
industrial country effect. As Table 10 reports, consistent with the actual patterns of trade
liberalization by industrialized countries, the WTO coefficient is different between protected
and unprotected sectors. As Column 5 in Tables 5 reports, for industrial country importers,
that the import volume depends on whether the exporters are members of the WTO or not.
As Table 6 reports, the GSP and WTO coefficients are different for industrial countries. All
these results suggest that it is trade and trade policy factors rather than industrial country
status per se that underlie these differences.

There is a separate question of whether industrial country liberalization would have taken
place without the GATT/WTO. This paper does not and cannot address this question.
However, if the null hypothesis is that the various rounds of liberalization under the
GATT/WTO have not generated discernible patterns in trade volumes, the evidence in this
paper can reject that hypothesis.

Even on the broader “counterfactual” question, we would say that the evidence is suggestive
of a positive role for the GATT/WTO. It should be understood in this context that the
GATT/WTO represents a reciprocity framework, which facilitates import liberalization by
harnessing the countervailing power of export interests to overcome the resistance from
import-competing interests. So the question whether liberalization would have happened

21
     The F-test (value of 41.7) rejects the hypothesis of the equality of the two coefficients.
22
  The absolute value of the industrial country coefficients is high and greater than the
average of the cross-section values possibly because of the fact that the fixed effects in the
panel regression are not time-varying. But even the difference in the WTO member and non-
member coefficients in the cross-section results point to a large WTO effect.
                                               18


without the GATT/WTO is really one about the effectiveness of and need for a reciprocity
framework.

Did the reciprocity framework work? A few examples suggest that it did. The first was, of
course, the successive multilateral rounds of tariff liberalization involving the United States
and Europe. The second, more subtle example of the success of reciprocity comes from the
highly protected sectors in industrial countries. Barriers in agricultural, clothing, and
footwear have remained high in part because the reciprocity framework was implicitly
absent: by embracing the right to protect their own markets (under the concept of special and
differential treatment), developing countries opted out of the reciprocity framework, relieving
the pressure on industrial countries to reduce barriers in these sectors. And when developing
countries started to engage in the reciprocity framework in the Uruguay Round, progress was
made, albeit limited, in bringing down industrial country barriers in agriculture and clothing.


                                       E. Other Results

Our analysis also yields a number of additional findings that are worth noting. The first
relates to the complaint that industrial countries’ trade policies discriminate against
developing countries. Industrial country tariffs are highest in agriculture, textiles and clothing
which are sectors of particular export interest to developing countries. This elicits the claim
(e.g., Oxfam, 2003) about the unfairness of industrial countries’ trade policies. Column 6 of
Table 5 sheds light on this question. The coefficient of the dummy relating to industrial
country imports from other industrial countries is greater than that relating to imports from
developing countries (where both types of exporters are WTO members) and this difference
is statistically different.23 In other words, industrial countries do appear to trade more
amongst themselves than with developing countries, ceteris paribus. The magnitudes of the
coefficients suggest that trade with developing countries is about 32 percent less than trade
with other industrial countries. But we cannot definitively assign this difference to higher
barriers rather than to other factors that we may not have controlled for such as product
composition, differential transportation costs etc.

The second finding relates to the role of the GSP. As in Rose (2002a), GSP imparts a positive
fillip to trade. The GSP coefficients are always positive and statistically and economically
significant. But there is a disparity in the magnitude of the effects, with our results suggesting
that the WTO has a greater economic impact than the GSP.

The proper comparison is between industrial country imports under the GSP and under the
WTO. Columns 4 and 6 of Table 5 allows us to answer this question. Column (4) suggests
that, in terms of industrial country imports, the GSP effect (coefficient value of 0.39) is
smaller than the WTO (0.52) effect. Even if we compare industrial country imports from
developing countries under the GSP and the WTO, we find that the GSP (coefficient value of

23
  The F-test (with a value of 15.0) suggests that the null hypothesis of equality of the two
coefficients is rejected at the 5 percent level.
                                                  19


0.36) has a smaller effect than the WTO (0.44). In principle, these coefficients should be
different from each other because the GSP provides for duty-free access for certain sectors
whereas under the WTO the access is subject to the MFN tariff which is always non-
negative. The smaller GSP coefficient suggests that product exclusions and the other
restrictions under the GSP mitigate its benefits to an extent that makes it not very different
from liberalization under the WTO.24

The third finding relates to the evolution in the various coefficients over time (Table 6). It is
interesting that the magnitude of the coefficients on the FTA, GSP, and WTO dummies
declines over time. The FTA dummy declines from 2.0 in 1970 to 0.7 in 2000 while the GSP
dummy declines from 2.2 in 1975 to 0.5 in 2000. One reason for the decline in the FTA and
GSP coefficients could be the reduction in average MFN tariffs—brought about by
liberalization under the WTO—which reduces the value of preferential access under the GSP
and free trade agreements. The temporal behavior of these coefficients could either be a
testimony to the benefits of the WTO or to unilateral liberalization around the globe.

Can one explain the decline in the magnitude of the WTO coefficient itself? We would
suggest two possible answers. First, imports by non-members of the WTO could be
increasing at a differentially rapid pace because of unilateral liberalization by them. Second,
it could also be the case that as the WTO expands its membership, bringing within its fold a
larger share of world trade, the distinction between WTO and non-WTO membership
diminishes. Our analysis does not allow us to isolate these different effects.

We would conclude this section with some observations on methodology and in particular on
the performance of the gravity model as we have specified it. The gravity model appears to
perform well in the sense that its results seem to be consistent with what we know about the
operation of the WTO, GSP, and FTAs individually and relative to each other. The trading
system more broadly seems to be well explained by the gravity specifications.

First, in the aggregate panel estimations (Table 5), the FTA coefficient is significantly
different from the WTO coefficient consistent with the former effecting deeper liberalization
by reducing tariffs to zero.25 In the disaggregated estimations (Table 10), this pattern
continues to hold for the protected sectors. Furthermore, the fact that the industrial country
WTO coefficient is greater in the unprotected sectors (column 1 of Table 10) than in
aggregate (column 4 of Table 5) is also consistent with our priors that WTO membership
should lead to more trade precisely where the institution has presided over greater
liberalization.

24
  When we defined the GSP and WTO dummies in a manner consistent with Rose (2002a),
we find that the GSP dummy becomes negative and insignificant, while the industrial country
WTO dummy remains positive and significant, albeit with a lower point estimate of 0.21
(Table 7). This is to be expected, as we are looking for the trade effect of the GSP over and
above any WTO effect.
25
     The F-test (value of 96.7) rejects the null hypothesis of the equality of coefficients.
                                              20



Second, the GSP dummies are insignificant in three of the four protected sectors which is
consistent with the observation that industrial countries have tended to exempt the most
protected sectors from the benefits granted to developing countries under the GSP program.26

Finally, in Appendix Table 8, we replicate Rose’s results and report some variations. The
main result is that Rose’s results appear to be sensitive to the inclusion of country fixed
effects:27 when the country effects are included, the WTO dummy (when both countries are
members) becomes positive and significant, with the point estimate suggesting greater trade
for the average WTO member of between 14 and 35 percent over nonmembers.


                         IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

Rose (2002a) has seriously called into question the effectiveness and hence the usefulness of
the WTO as a multilateral institution. His analysis implies that the WTO, whose raison d’être
is to promote trade, has failed to do so.

Our paper shows, however, that the GATT/WTO has done a splendid job of promoting trade
wherever it was designed to do so and correspondingly failed to promote trade where the
design of rules militated against it. The WTO has served to increase industrial country
imports substantially, possibly by about 68 percent, the result of successive rounds of tariff
liberalization. But it has done a less good job of increasing the imports of developing
countries because developing countries were essentially exempted from the basic
GATT/WTO mission of progressively lowering import barriers under the so-called principle
of special and differential treatment. Luckily, given that industrial countries have accounted
for nearly two-thirds of global imports during the period 1950–2000, the positive impact on
global trade has been substantial, creating an additional 44 percent worth of current world
trade.

It is important to stress that the above does not imply that developing countries have not
benefited from WTO membership. A distinction needs to be made between developing
country WTO members as exporters and importers. Our results suggest that there has been
little impact of WTO membership on developing countries’ imports. But the positive impact
of WTO membership on industrial country imports meant that imports from developing
countries (namely, developing country exports) also increased significantly. Developing
country exports to industrial countries, on our estimates, were at least one-third greater
because of developing country WTO membership.

26
     Mattoo and others (2003) document this for the U.S. GSP scheme.
27
   See the coefficient of the WTO dummy (when both are members) in columns 2 and 4 in
Appendix Table 8 which include fixed effects and their counterpart specification without
fixed effects (columns 1 and 3, respectively). This is recognized but not emphasized in Rose
(2002a).
                                             21



Second, there is some evidence that this permissiveness of the WTO toward developing
countries has changed since the Uruguay Round. The good news is that new members are
significantly different from old members in that membership in the WTO for the former
group is associated with an increase in imports of close to 30 percent relative to nonmembers.
The bad news is that the Uruguay Round has had little effect on the old members, who
continue to be no more open than non-WTO members even in the aftermath of the Round.
Special and differential treatment of developing countries is therefore alive and well for the
old members of the GATT/WTO. The latter is consistent with the actual pattern of trade
liberalization undertaken, or rather not undertaken, by developing countries in the Uruguay
Round.

Third, WTO membership in sectors with high protection in the industrial countries—food,
clothing, and footwear—has had no impact on trade. The link between protection and trade is
discernible in the data.

Indeed, our paper is also very reassuring about the basic gravity model as we have specified
it. The results are consistent with what one knows about the way the WTO, GSP, and FTAs
work individually and relative to each other. The trading system as a whole seems to be well
explained by appropriately specified gravity equations.
                                               22


                          Appendix. Data Description and Sources

Aggregate estimations
Estimating the model requires data on bilateral aggregate trade, incomes, population,
distance, as well as geographical, cultural, and historical information. The study uses a panel
data set which covers 172 Fund member countries during the five-year periods from 1950
to 2000. The list of countries in the sample is presented in Appendix Table 1.

Our data set is a slightly modified and updated version of Rose’s (2002a) data set, which is
downloadable from Andrew Rose’s web-site. That paper describes the data set in detail, and
we will only comment on a few data issues here. We use bilateral imports rather than trade as
the regressand which we obtain from the IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics. Bilateral
imports are those reported by the importing country and measured in U.S. dollars and
deflated by US CPI (1982–1983 prices) for urban areas (available from freelunch.com).
Real GDP, per capita GDP and population data for 2000 come from the World Bank's World
Development Indicators (WDI). WTO and FTA dummies for 2000 are extended based on the
information available from the WTO official web site (wto.org).

Data and sources for disaggregated estimations
The TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information System) of the UNCTAD contains information on
tariff and nontariff barriers at the most detailed commodity level. We utilize the US and EU
MFN tariff schedules for 1989 and 2001 that are reported in 8-digit HS 1988/1992 and HS
1996 classifications, respectively.28

Our objective is to determine the list of industries subject to high and zero protection both in
the US and EU for 1989 and 2001 respectively.29 We use ad valorem rates for these
purposes.30 For each product at 4-digit disaggregation level we calculate a simple average of
ad valorem rates applied to all 8-digit subsections within that product. We treat a given
industry as protected if its average ad valorem tariff rate both in the US and the EU exceeded
10 percent. Similarly, a given 4-digit industry is considered to be unprotected if all the 8-digit
subsections have zero tariffs (both ad valorem and non-ad valorem).


28
   The 1989 EU tariff lines do not have MFN rates but instead conventional and autonomous
rates are reported. We treat conventional tariff rates as MFN rates since they apply to the
imports originating in WTO member countries. When conventional tariff rates do not exist
for a product the autonomous rates are applied.
29
   The last two decades witnessed gradual decline in trade barriers. For industries with no
protection we use 1989 data since industries that were not subject to trade barriers are also
likely to be so in 2001. Applying the same logic we use 2001 tariff schedules for the list of
highly protected industries.
30
  We cannot make use of non-ad valorem tariff rates since their use requires information on
prices.
                                                23


There are thirty three and forty one 4-digit industries that qualify as protected and
unprotected, respectively. For each protected and unprotected industry, we obtain bilateral
import data in 1990, 1995, and 2000 which cover 147 countries. The import data which come
from the United Nations’ COMTRADE database are disaggregated at the HS 1988/1992, 4-
digit level and are deflated by US urban CPI (1982–1984 prices).31 We define four broad
product categories—food, clothing, footwear, and miscellaneous manufacturing and, then,
sort protected and unprotected industries by categories.32 Not surprisingly, all unprotected
industries fall into the miscellaneous manufacturing category. For a given year and country
pair we obtain the value of imports in each broad category by summing bilateral imports of
all products within that category. Thus, for protected industries our data contain bilateral
imports in food, clothing, footwear, and manufacturing. All industries with zero tariff rates
are aggregated into unprotected manufacturing. The remaining variables are the same as
those used in the aggregate estimations.




31
  Since the list of unprotected industries is obtained using tariff line for 2001 which is
reported in HS 1996 classification, we use the concordance from HS 1996 to HS 1988/1992.
32
     See Appendix Table 3 for the list of industries by level of protection and broad category.
                                            24


                                      REFERENCES

Anderson J.E., 1979, “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” American
      Economic Review, Vol. 69, No. 1, pp. 106–16.

______, and E. van Wincoop, 2003, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
      Puzzle,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 1, pp. 170–92.

Bhagwati, J., 1991, The World Trading System at Risk, (London: Harvester Wheatsheaf).

Deardorff, A. V., 1998, “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a
      Neoclassical World?” in The Regionalization of the World Economy ed. by
      J.A. Frankel, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 7–22.

Eglin, R., 1987, “Surveillance of Balance-of-Payments Measures in the GATT,” The World
       Economy, 10, No. 1, pp. 1–26.

Finger, J.M., M.D. Ingco, and U. Reincke, 1996, “The Uruguay Round: Statistics on Tariff
       Concessions Given and Received” (Washington: World Bank).

Frankel, J., 1997, Regional Trading Blocs in the World Economic System, , (Washington:
       Institute for International Economics).

______, 1998, The Regionalization of the World Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press).

______, and D. Romer, 1999, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic Review,
      Vol. 89 No. 3, pp. 379–99.

Helpman, E., and P. Krugman, 1995, Market Structure and Foreign Trade, (Cambridge, MA:
      MIT Press).

Oxfam, 2003, “EU Hypocrisy Unmasked: Why EU Trade Policy Hurts Development,”
      Oxfam Policy Papers (Oxford: Oxfam).

Mattoo, A., D. Roy, and A. Subramanian, 2003, “The Africa Growth and Opportunity Act
      and Its Rules of Origin: Generosity Undermined,” World Economy, Vol. 26, No. 6,
      pp. 829–51.

Persson T., 2001, “Currency Unions and Trade: How Large Is the Treatment Effect?”
       Economic Policy, pp. 433–48.

Rose, A.K., 2000, “One Money One Market: The Effect of Common Currencies on Trade,”
       Economic Policy, Vol. 30, pp. 9–45.
                                          25


Rose, A.K., 2002a, “Do We Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?” NBER Working
       Paper No. 9273 (Cambridge, MA: NBER).

______, A.K., 2002b, “Do WTO Members have More Liberal Trade Policy?” NBER
      Working Paper No. 9347 (Cambridge, MA: NBER).

______, A.K., and R. Glick, 2002, “Does a Currency Union Affect Trade? Time-Series
      Evidence,” European Economic Review, Vol. 46 No. 6, pp. 1125–51.

Wei, S.J., 1996, “Intra-National Versus International Trade: How Stubborn are Nations in
       Global Intergration?” NBER Working Paper, No. 5531 (Cambridge, MA: NBER).

Wolf, M., 1987, “Differential and More Favorable Treatment of Developing Countries and
      the International Trading System,” The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 1, No. 4,
      pp. 647–68.

World Trade Organization, 2003, “Trade Restrictions for Balance-of-Payments Purposes—
      Notes on Issues Raised by Developing Countries in the Doha Round,” WT,
      TF/COH/13, Document number 03–0970 (2/14/2003).

World Trade Organization, website www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/min99_e/
      english/about_e/22fact_e.htm.
                                                      26



                           Table 1: MFN Tariff Cuts by Industrial Countries 1/

 Implementation                      Round                        Weighted Tariff            Implied Tariff Level
     Period                                                        Reduction                  at period beginning
                                                                                                       2/
     1948–63              First five GATT rounds                     36 percent                       15.4
                                 (1947–62) a/
     1968–72            Kennedy Round (1964–67) b/                   37 percent                       11.3
     1980–87             Tokyo Round (1973–79) c/                    33 percent                       8.3
     1995–99                 Uruguay Round d/                        38 percent                       6.2

Source: WTO website: www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/min99_e/english/about_e/22fact_e.htm

1/ Industrial products excluding petroleum.
2/ Derived from column 3 and applied to the 2001 tariff level of 4.5 percent reported in Finger, Ingco, and
Reincke (1996).
a/ US only.
b/ US, Japan, EC(6), and UK.
c/ US, EU(9), Japan, Austria, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.
d/ US, EU(12), Japan, Austria, Finland, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland.




       Table 2: Percentage of Tariffs “Bound” in the GATT Prior to Uruguay Round 1/

                                           Industrial Countries 2/               Developing Countries 3/
Industrial Products                                 84.7                                  31.8
All Merchandise Trade                               80.2                                  30.1
Source: Table G.2 in Finger, Ingco, and Reincke (1996).

1/ The term “bound” refers to the commitment by countries in the WTO not to raise tariffs beyond a certain
level. The fewer the “bound” tariffs, the less the commitment to liberalize trade barriers. The percentages are
weighted averages over all product groups and by each country’s MFN imports.
2/ Includes Australia, Austria, Canada, Switzerland, European Union, Finland, Hong Kong, Japan, Norway,
New Zealand, Singapore, Sweden, and the U.S.
3/ Includes 21 countries for which data are available in the WTO’s Integrated Data Base (see Table 1 in Finger,
Ingco, and Reincke, 1996).
                                                       27



 Table 3. Use of Trade Restrictions for Balance of Payments Reasons in the GATT/WTO: Selected
                                            Examples 1/

                                                               Years of      Duration 2/
                                                             Invocation 2/
Argentina                                                  early 1970s–91 Approx. 20
Bangladesh                                                   early 1970s–       30+
Brazil                                                         1949–95           46
Chile                                                       1949–late 70s    Approx. 30
Colombia                                                       1985–92            7
Egypt                                                       mid-1960s–95     Approx. 30
Ghana                                                    late 1950s–late 80s Approx. 30
India                                                         1949–2000          51
Indonesia                                               late 1950s–early 80s Approx. 30
Korea                                                       1968–late 80s    Approx. 30
Nigeria                                                        1984–98           14
Pakistan                                                      1949–2001          52
Peru                                                        late 1960s–91    Approx. 30
Philippines                                                    1980–95           15
Sri Lanka                                                      1949–98           49
Tunisia                                                     mid-1960s–97     Approx. 30
Turkey                                                      mid-1950s–97     Approx. 40
Sources: GATT/WTO documents and Eglin, World Economy (1987).

1/ This table does not necessarily indicate how long countries have actually been using quantitative restrictions;
rather, it refers to how long countries have sought legal cover for them in the GATT/WTO under Articles XII:B
and hence escaped multilateral pressure to eliminate the measures. The table does not include all countries that
have invoked the balance-of-payments exceptions to justify trade restrictions.
2/ The years of invocation and duration are not exact.




  Table 4. Tariffs in Highly Protected Sectors in the United States and European Union, 1989 and 2001

                              1989                     2001
                        EU          US           EU           US
Sector             Max. Average Max. Average Max. Average Max. Average
Clothing              23     16    36     17    13     12    33     13
Food                 180     25    25     14    75     17   350     28
Footwear              20     13    48     25    17     17    48     22
Misc. manufactures    28     12    38     14    22     13    38     14

Sources: United Nations, WITS Trade Database.

The average and maximum tariffs are unweighted averages of HS-8 digit tariff lines that make up the
corresponding HS 4-digit categories listed in Appendix Table 3 and grouped under the 4 categories in this table.
                                                                       28

                                             Table 5. Core Regressions. Panel, 1950-2000

                                                             (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)               (5)          (6)
Log distance                                                 -1.230         -1.229    -0.925              -0.926        -0.919       -0.912
                                                               0.020         0.020     0.017                0.017          0.017      0.017
Log real GDP importer                                         0.718          0.821     0.457               0.495          0.538      0.542
                                                               0.065         0.064     0.052                0.052          0.051      0.051
Log real GDP partner                                         -0.332         -0.276     0.115               0.147          0.115      0.105
                                                               0.070         0.069     0.058                0.058          0.058      0.058
Log real GDP per capita importer                             -0.232         -0.336    -0.001              -0.040          -0.084    -0.086
                                                               0.059         0.058     0.047                0.047          0.047      0.047
Log real GDP per capita partner                               0.908          0.858     0.368               0.339          0.365      0.376
                                                               0.064         0.064     0.053                0.053          0.053      0.053
Common language                                               0.323          0.307     0.141               0.135          0.130      0.130
                                                               0.038         0.037     0.031                0.031          0.031      0.031
Common border                                                 0.145          0.161     0.026               0.031          0.026      0.024
                                                               0.087         0.085     0.065                0.064          0.064      0.064
Common colony                                                 0.553         0.553     0.527                0.529          0.528      0.515
                                                               0.058         0.057     0.049                0.049          0.049      0.049
Current colony                                                0.849         0.818      0.936               0.925          0.940      0.947
                                                               0.183         0.185     0.138                0.139          0.137      0.136
Ever colony                                                   1.353         1.352     1.151                1.151          1.157      1.158
                                                               0.090         0.088     0.065                0.065          0.065      0.065
Common country                                                0.272         0.271     -0.658              -0.656          -0.701    -0.694
                                                               0.656         0.658     0.527                0.528          0.529      0.527
Common currency                                               1.051          1.046     0.713               0.714          0.728      0.732
                                                               0.110         0.109     0.081                0.081          0.080      0.080
Free trade area                                               0.712         1.172      0.780               0.971          0.988      0.997
                                                               0.082         0.078     0.048                0.052          0.052      0.052
Industrial country importer granting GSP                      0.324         1.270     0.042                0.393          0.399      0.389
                                                               0.048         0.077     0.038                0.056          0.056      0.056
Importer WTO member                                          -0.113                    0.140
                                                               0.027                    0.022
Industrial country importer WTO member                                       0.911                         0.521
                                                                              0.069                         0.049
Developing country importer WTO member                                      -0.255                         0.072
                                                                             0.029                          0.023
Industrial country importer and partner WTO members                                                                       0.619
                                                                                                                           0.050
Industrial country importer WTO member, but not partner                                                                   0.339      0.326
                                                                                                                           0.058      0.058
Developing country importer and partner WTO members                                                                       0.043      0.027
                                                                                                                           0.024      0.024
Developing country importer WTO member, but not partner                                                                   0.113      0.098
                                                                                                                           0.041      0.041
Industrial country importer WTO member, partner industrial country and WTO member                                                    0.706
                                                                                                                                      0.053
Industrial country importer WTO member, partner developing country and WTO member                                                    0.532
                                                                                                                                      0.058


Importer and exporter fixed effects                             Yes         Yes        Yes                    Yes            Yes        Yes
Time effects                                                    Yes         Yes        Yes                    Yes            Yes        Yes
Number of observations                                        76094      76094       55831                 55831          55831      55831
Sample                                                         All imports      All imports excluding values less than $500,000
R-square                                                      0.702       0.704      0.714                  0.715          0.715      0.715
Root mean square error                                        1.781       1.776      1.171                  1.169         1.168       1.168
F-test 1/                                                                                    15.78, 96.66, 129.31 48.04, 2.97 11.97, 20.72
1/ Column 4. Numbers correspond to the following three null hypotheses: GSP=WTO, FTA=WTO, FTA=GSP
Column 5. Exporter in WTO = Exporter not in WTO for industrial country and developing country WTO importers, respectively
Column 6. Industrial country WTO exporter = Developing country WTO exporter for industrial country imports; and
exporter not WTO member = developing country WTO exporter for industrial country imports
Regressand: log real imports. Robust standard errors (clustered by country-pairs) reported below coefficient estimates.
                                                                           29

                                                            Table 6. Cross-Section Results

                                                   1950       1955      1960     1965     1970      1975       1980      1985      1990         1995       2000

Free trade area                                      n.a.        n.a.     n.a.   1.196    1.988     1.809       1.956    1.008          1.078   0.842      0.701
                                                     n.a.        n.a.     n.a.    0.247    0.208     0.169       0.167    0.161         0.147    0.122      0.081
Industrial country importer GSP member               n.a.        n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   1.138     2.185       2.180    0.844          0.525   0.533      0.465
                                                     n.a.        n.a.     n.a.    0.000    0.342     0.197       0.187    0.191         0.173    0.153      0.109
Industrial country importer WTO member              0.57        0.07     0.47    1.385    1.901     2.184       2.277    1.113          0.867   0.652      0.670
                                                    0.33        0.50     0.13     0.265    0.238     0.194       0.182    0.187         0.166    0.145      0.100
Developing country importer WTO member              0.67        0.41     0.80    0.044    0.383     0.022       0.083    -0.023     -0.130      -0.096     0.077
                                                    0.53        0.39     0.21     0.450    0.235     0.067       0.066    0.063         0.057    0.054      0.051


Importer and exporter fixed effects                  Yes         Yes   Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes            Yes     Yes        Yes
R-square                                           0.740       0.739 0.727       0.736    0.743     0.721       0.735    0.741          0.771   0.779      0.787
Number of observations                              1502       1989 3166         3995     4738      5688        5968     6316           6715    7674        8080
Root mean square error                             1.021       1.044 1.057       1.050    1.055     1.174       1.172    1.125          1.092   1.093      1.107
Regressand: log real imports.
Robust standard errors reported below coefficient estimates. Intercepts and other (standard) covariates not reported for ease
of presentation.


                                          Table 7. Robustness Checks: Panel, 1950-2000

                                  Specification                                           FTA         GSP             Industrial         Developing
                                                                                                                     WTO member          WTO member

Time-varying importer and exporter fixed effects                                           1.102        0.718                0.964                0.047
                                                                                           0.072        0.096                0.091                0.038

Additional quadratic gravity terms                                                         1.002           0.420                0.552             0.093
(for log real GDP and log real GDP per capita)                                              0.052            0.055              0.048              0.023


Rose definition of GSP and WTO dummies                                                     0.655        -0.106                  0.214             0.051
(i.e., not defined mutually exclusively)                                                    0.046            0.032              0.064              0.026


Weighted least squares (log imports as weight)                                             0.921           0.440                0.553             0.071
                                                                                            0.050            0.055              0.048              0.023


Weighted least squares (log real GDP as weight)                                            0.964           0.416                0.541             0.071
                                                                                            0.052            0.057              0.050              0.024


Weighted least squares (log real GDP per capita as weight)                                 0.933           0.398                0.519             0.060
                                                                                            0.053            0.057              0.050              0.024


Country-pair random effects without importer and exporter fixed effects                    0.941           0.349                0.505             0.085
                                                                                            0.036            0.027              0.024              0.015


Country-pair random effects with importer and exporter fixed effects                       0.852           0.221                0.355             0.162
                                                                                            0.039            0.038              0.033              0.017


Country-pair fixed effects                                                                 0.780           0.169                0.322             0.206
                                                                                            0.042            0.040              0.034              0.018


Excluding values of log imports 3 s.d. away from mean                                      0.977           0.383                0.513             0.073
                                                                                            0.052            0.056              0.049              0.023


Excluding values of imports 2 s.d. away from mean                                          1.011           0.345                0.483             0.080
                                                                                            0.054            0.057              0.050              0.023
Regressand: log real imports
Robust standard errors (clustered by country-pairs) reported below coefficient estimates. Intercepts and coefficients for
standard covariates not reported for ease of presentation. All regressions include time effects and, with the exception of the
regression with country-pair random effects, also include importer and exporter fixed effects. As noted, the specification in
the first row includes time-varying exporter and importer fixed effects.
                                                                           30

                                       Table 8. New and Old Developing Country Members in the WTO 1/


Time period for regressions                                            2000                                                  1995

Free trade area                                  0.700   0.691    0.692    0.694      0.693   0.699       0.851    0.854      0.853     0.853    0.846
                                                 0.081    0.081    0.081      0.081   0.081   0.081        0.123    0.123      0.123     0.123    0.122
Industrial country importer GSP member           0.460   0.450    0.452    0.454      0.454   0.462       0.541    0.543      0.541     0.542    0.537
                                                 0.109    0.110    0.110      0.110   0.109   0.109        0.153    0.153      0.153     0.153    0.153
Industrial country importer WTO member           0.668   0.659    0.660    0.662      0.661   0.667       0.659    0.662      0.661     0.661    0.655
                                                 0.100    0.100    0.100      0.100   0.100   0.100        0.146    0.146      0.146     0.146    0.145
Old member (1990)                               -0.003                                                    -0.116
                                                 0.055                                                     0.057
New member (1990)                                0.300                                                    -0.024
                                                 0.075                                                     0.082
Old member (1991)                                        0.015                                                     -0.114
                                                          0.054                                                     0.056
New member (1991)                                        0.297                                                     0.002
                                                          0.083                                                     0.095
Old member (1992)                                                 0.025                                                      -0.116
                                                                   0.054                                                       0.055
New member (1992)                                                 0.299                                                       0.034
                                                                   0.090                                                       0.105
Old member (1993)                                                          0.028                                                        -0.114
                                                                              0.053                                                      0.055
New member (1993)                                                          0.296                                                        0.028
                                                                              0.092                                                      0.108
Old member (1994)                                                                     0.045                                                      -0.104
                                                                                      0.053                                                       0.055
New member (1994)                                                                     0.253                                                      -0.011
                                                                                      0.101                                                       0.131
Old member (1995)                                                                             0.070
                                                                                              0.052
New member (1995)                                                                             0.150
                                                                                              0.123


Importer and exporter fixed effects              Yes       Yes    Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes            Yes   Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes
Number of observations with new members           712       595    531       512       360        217           568   433       388       374     204
F-test for equality of coefficients 2/         15.85 11.21         9.12     8.30       4.19      0.42          1.28  1.55       2.13      1.77    0.53
Prob > F                                       0.000 0.001 0.003 0.004               0.041     0.517          0.258 0.213     0.145     0.183   0.468
R-square                                       0.787 0.787 0.787 0.787               0.787     0.787          0.779 0.779     0.779     0.779   0.779
Number of observations                          8080      8080    8080     8080       8080      8080          7674  7674       7674      7674    7674
Root mean square error                         1.106 1.107 1.107 1.107               1.107     1.107      1.09334 1.0933    1.09328    1.0933 1.09338
1/ Old and new members refer to developing countries in the WTO; cut-off date for defining these in brackets.
2/ Between old and new member.
Regressand: log real imports
Robust standard errors reported below coefficient estimates. Intercepts and coefficients for standard covariates not reported for ease of
presentation.




                                        Table 9. Tariff Bindings and
                         Reductions of Developing Countries in the Uruguay Round 1/

                        Percent of lines bound pre-Uruguay Round                                                                       30.1
                       Percent of lines bound post-Uruguay Round                                                                       80.8
            Percent of lines unaffected by tariff reductions in Uruguay Round                                                          72.3
             Percentage tariff reduction on lines affected by tariff reductions                                                         8.1
                             Post-Uruguay Round applied rate                                                                           13.3
                             Post-Uruguay Round bound rate                                                                             25.2
   Source: Finger, Ingco, and Reincke (1996).
  1/ Includes 21 countries for which data are available in the WTO’s Integrated Data Base (see Table 1 in
  Finger, Ingco, and Reincke, 1996).
                                                              31

                                      Table 10. Sectoral Results, Panel, 1990-2000
                                              (Seemingly Unrelated Regressions)
                                                    Unprotected     Highly protected        Clothing    Footwear       Food
                                                   manufacturing     manufactures 1/

FTA                                                           0.432                 0.494       0.709       0.343         0.176
                                                              0.108                0.180       0.150       0.201         0.211
GSP, excluding FTA                                            0.724                -0.385       0.740      -0.743         0.064
                                                              0.150                0.249       0.207        0.277        0.292
Industrial country WTO member                                 0.618                 0.076       0.294      -0.240        -0.866
                                                              0.132                0.219       0.182        0.243        0.257
Developing country WTO member                                 0.096                -0.080      -0.071      -0.295        -0.681
                                                              0.080                0.133       0.110        0.147        0.155

 Importer and exporter fixed effects                               Yes                  Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Time effects                                                      Yes                  Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Chi-square test for equality of coefficients 2/                                       6.70        2.98       13.21      30.37
 Prob>chi-square                                                                       0.01        0.08        0.00      0.000
 Number of observations                                          4035                  4035       4035         4035       4035
 R-squared                                                       0.861                0.702      0.793        0.647      0.598
 Root mean squared error                                         1.052                1.751      1.455        1.945      2.050
 1/ Excludes clothing and footwear.
 2/ Between industrial country dummy in unprotected manufacturing and that in each of the other sectors.
Regressand: log real imports. Robust standard errors (clustered by country-pairs) reported below coefficient estimates.
Intercepts and coefficients for all the standard covariates listed in Table 5 are not reported for ease of presentation.

                                   Table 11. Industrial Country Effect or WTO Effect?

                           Time period                                Panel         1950        1955        1960        1965
                                                                    1950-1965

Industrial country importer WTO member                                    1.721       0.608       1.334       0.469      1.385
                                                                           0.200       0.357       0.438       0.127      0.265
Industrial country importer not WTO member                                1.261      -0.161      -0.864       0.771      0.370
                                                                           0.214       0.321       0.266       0.194      0.404
Developing country importer WTO member                                    0.106       0.673       0.407       1.036      0.044
                                                                           0.049       0.525       0.389       0.209      0.450


Importer and exporter fixed effects                                        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Time effects                                                               Yes          n.a.        n.a.        n.a.       n.a.
R-square                                                                 0.718        0.740       0.739       0.727      0.736
Number of observations                                                   10652         1502        1989       3166       3995
Number of observations where industrial countries
are not WTO members                                                         906         282         180         270        174
Root mean square error                                                    1.057       1.021       1.044       1.057      1.050
F-test 1/                                                                 41.69        9.66       36.13        2.37       7.04
Prob. > F                                                                 0.000       0.002       0.000       0.124      0.008

 1/ For equality of coefficients between industrial country WTO member and industrial country WTO non-member
Regressand: log real imports. Robust standard errors (clustered by country-pairs in the case of the panel estimation) reported
below coefficient estimates. Intercepts and coefficients for all the standard covariates listed in Table 5 are not reported for
ease of presentation.
                                                     32


                                Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                           Variable                                 Mean    Std. Dev.    Min    Max

Log imports                                                          11.97       2.18    8.52   21.01
Log distance                                                          8.09       0.84    3.78    9.42
Log real GDP importing country                                       24.37       2.10   17.31   29.41
Log real GDP partner country                                         24.61       1.96   17.31   29.41
Log real per capita GDP importing country                             8.15       1.19    4.33   10.56
Log real per capita GDP partner country                               8.19       1.15    4.33   10.71
Common language                                                       0.22       0.42       0       1
Common land border                                                    0.04       0.20       0       1
Common colony                                                         0.07       0.26       0       1
Current colony                                                        0.00       0.05       0       1
Ever colony                                                           0.03       0.18       0       1
Common country                                                        0.00       0.02       0       1
Common currency                                                       0.01       0.12       0       1
Free trade area                                                       0.03       0.17       0       1
GSP (excl. FTAs)                                                      0.14       0.35       0       1
Developing country WTO member (excl. FTAs and GSP)                    0.19       0.39       0       1
Industrial country WTO member (excl. FTAs and GSP)                    0.27       0.45       0       1
55831 observations, spanning every five years between 1950 and 2000
Sources: Rose (2002a) and IMF's Direction of Trade Statistics (see Appendix).
                                                                                       33

                                            Appendix Table 2. List of Countries in the Sample
                                                 (Dates of GATT/WTO accession in parenthesis)
Industrial Countries:
AUSTRALIA (1948)                                   GREECE (1950)                                NORWAY (1948)
AUSTRIA (1951)                                     ICELAND (1968)                               PORTUGAL (1962)
BELGIUM (1948)                                     IRELAND (1967)                               SPAIN (1963)
CANADA (1948)                                      ITALY (1950)                                 SWEDEN (1950)
DENMARK (1950)                                     JAPAN (1955)                                 SWITZERLAND (1966)
FINLAND (1950)                                     LUXEMBOURG (1948)                            UNITED KINGDOM (1948)
FRANCE (1948)                                      NETHERLANDS (1948)                           UNITED STATES (1948)
GERMANY (1951)                                     NEW ZEALAND (1948)


Developing Countries and Territories
ALBANIA (2000)                                     GHANA (1957)                                 PANAMA (1997)
ALGERIA                                            GRENADA (1994)                               PAPUA N.GUINEA (1994)
ANGOLA (1994)                                      GUATEMALA (1991)                             PARAGUAY (1994)
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA (1987)                         GUINEA (1994)                                PERU (1951)
ARGENTINA (1967)                                   GUINEA-BISSAU (1994)                         PHILIPPINES (1979)
ARMENIA                                            GUYANA (1966)                                POLAND (1967)
AZERBAIJAN                                         HAITI (1950)                                 QATAR (1994)
BAHAMAS                                            HONDURAS (1994)                              REUNION (1948)
BAHRAIN (1993)                                     HONG KONG SAR (1986)                         ROMANIA (1971)
BANGLADESH (1972)                                  HUNGARY (1973)                               RUSSIA
BARBADOS (1967)                                    INDIA (1948)                                 RWANDA (1966)
BELARUS                                            INDONESIA (1950)                             SAMOA
BELIZE (1983)                                      IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF                    SAO TOME & PRINCIPE
BENIN (1996)                                       IRAQ                                         SAUDI ARABIA
BERMUDA (1948)                                     ISRAEL (1962)                                SENEGAL (1963)
BHUTAN                                             JAMAICA (1963)                               SEYCHELLES
BOLIVIA (1990)                                     JORDAN (2000)                                SIERRA LEONE (1961)
BOTSWANA (1987)                                    KAZAKHSTAN                                   SINGAPORE (1973)
BRAZIL (1948)                                      KENYA (1964)                                 SLOVAK REPUBLIC (1993)
BULGARIA (1996)                                    KIRIBATI                                     SLOVENIA (1994)
BURKINA FASO (1963)                                KOREA(R) (1967)                              SOLOMON ISLANDS (1994)
BURUNDI (1965)                                     KUWAIT (1963)                                SOMALIA
CAMBODIA                                           KYRQYZ REPUBLIC (1998)                       SOUTH AFRICA (1948)
CAMEROON (1963)                                    LAO PEOPLE'S DEM. REP.                       SRI LANKA (1948)
CAPE VERDE                                         LATVIA (1999)                                ST. KITTS&NEVIS (1994)
CENTRAL AFRICAN REP. (1963)                        LESOTHO (1988)                               ST.LUCIA (1993)
CHAD (1963)                                        LIBERIA                                      ST.VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES (1993)
CHILE (1949)                                       LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA                       SUDAN
CHINA (2001)                                       LITHUANIA (2001)                             SURINAME (1978)
                                                   MACEDONIA, former YUGOSLAV
COLOMBIA (1981)                                    REPUBLIC OF                                  SWAZILAND (1993)
COMOROS (1948)                                     MADAGASCAR (1963)                            SYRIA
CONGO, DEM. REP. OF (ZAIRE) (1971)                 MALAWI (1964)                                TAJIKISTAN
CONGO, REP. OF (1963)                              MALAYSIA (1957)                              TANZANIA (1961)
COSTA RICA (1990)                                  MALDIVES (1983)                              THAILAND (1982)
COTE D'IVORIE (IVORY COAST) (1963)                 MALI (1993)                                  TOGO (1964)
CROATIA (2000)                                     MALTA (1964)                                 TONGA
CYPRUS (1963)                                      MAURITANIA (1963)                            TRINIDAD&TOBAGO (1962)
CZECH REPUBLIC (1993)                              MAURITIUS (1970)                             TUNISIA (1990)
DJIBOUTI (1994)                                    MYANMAR (1948)                               TURKEY (1951)
DOMINICA (1993)                                    MEXICO (1986)                                TURKMENISTAN
DOMINICAN REP. (1950)                              MOLDOVA (2001)                               UGANDA (1962)
ECUADOR (1996)                                     MONGOLIA (1997)                              UKRAINE
EGYPT (1970)                                       MOROCCO (1987)                               UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (1994)
EL SALVADOR (1991)                                 MOZAMBIQUE (1992)                            URUGUAY (1953)
EQUATORIAL GUINEA                                  NAMIBIA (1992)                               UZBEKISTAN
ESTONIA (1999)                                     NEPAL                                        VANUATU
ETHIOPIA                                           NICARAGUA (1950)                             VENEZUELA (1990)
FIJI (1993)                                        NIGER (1963)                                 VIETNAM
GABON (1963)                                       NIGERIA (1960)                               YEMEN, REPUBLIC OF
GAMBIA, THE (1965)                                 OMAN (2000)                                  YUGOSLAVIA, SOCIALIST FED. REP. OF (1966)
GEORGIA (2000)                                     PAKISTAN (1948)                              ZAMBIA (1982)
                                                                                                ZIMBABWE (1948)



Sources: Rose (2002a) and WTO website on accession (http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/acc_e/acc_e.htm).
                                                                                     34


                                                                 Appendix Table 3. List of "New" Members
                                                           (Defined according to various cut-off dates listed below)

                           1990                           1991                            1992                            1993                        1994              1995
Bolivia                         El Salvador
Costa Rica                      Guatemala                        Mozambique                    Bahrain                           Angola                    Brunei
Tunisia                         Mozambique                       Namibia                       Czech Republic                    Djibouti                  Benin
Venezuela                       Namibia                          Bahrain                       Dominica                          Grenada                   Bulgaria
El Salvador                     Bahrain                          Czech Republic                Fiji                              Guinea                    Ecuador
Guatemala                       Czech Republic                   Dominica                      Mali                              Guinea-Bissau             Mongolia
Mozambique                      Dominica                         Fiji                          Slovak Republic                   Honduras                  Panama
Namibia                         Fiji                             Mali                          St. Lucia                         Papua New Guinea          Kyrgyz Republic
Bahrain                         Mali                             Slovak Republic               St. Vincent and Grenadines        Paraguay                  Estonia
Czech Republic                  Slovak Republic                  St. Lucia                     Swaziland                         Qatar                     Latvia
Dominica                        St. Lucia                        St. Vincent and Grenadines    Angola                            Slovenia                  Albania
Fiji                            St. Vincent and Grenadines       Swaziland                     Djibouti                          Solomon Islands           Croatia
Mali                            Swaziland                        Angola                        Grenada                           St. Kitts and Nevis       Georgia
Slovak Republic                 Angola                           Djibouti                      Guinea                            United Arab Emirates      Jordan
St. Lucia                       Djibouti                         Grenada                       Guinea-Bissau                                               Oman
St. Vincent and Grenadines      Grenada                          Guinea                        Honduras
Swaziland                       Guinea                           Guinea-Bissau                 Papua New Guinea
Angola                          Guinea-Bissau                    Honduras                      Paraguay
Djibouti                        Honduras                         Papua New Guinea              Qatar
Grenada                         Papua New Guinea                 Paraguay                      Slovenia
Guinea                          Paraguay                         Qatar                         Solomon Islands
Guinea-Bissau                   Qatar                            Slovenia                      St. Kitts and Nevis
Honduras                        Slovenia                         Solomon Islands               United Arab Emirates
Papua New Guinea                Solomon Islands                  St. Kitts and Nevis           Brunei
Paraguay                        St. Kitts and Nevis              United Arab Emirates          Benin
Qatar                           United Arab Emirates             Brunei                        Bulgaria
Slovenia                        Brunei                           Benin                         Ecuador
Solomon Islands                 Benin                            Bulgaria                      Mongolia
St. Kitts and Nevis             Bulgaria                         Ecuador                       Panama
United Arab Emirates            Ecuador                          Mongolia                      Kyrgyz Republic
Brunei                          Mongolia                         Panama                        Estonia
Benin                           Panama                           Kyrgyz Republic               Latvia
Bulgaria                        Kyrgyz Republic                  Estonia                       Albania
Ecuador                         Estonia                          Latvia                        Croatia
Mongolia                        Latvia                           Albania                       Georgia
Panama                          Albania                          Croatia                       Jordan
Kyrgyz Republic                 Croatia                          Georgia                       Oman
Estonia                         Georgia                          Jordan
Latvia                          Jordan                           Oman
Albania                         Oman
Croatia
Georgia
Jordan
Oman
Source: WTO's website on accession (http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/acc_e/acc_e.htm) and based on definitions described in text.
                                          35

           Appendix Table 4. List of Countries in the Disaggregate Estimations

Albania                      Iceland                   Sri Lanka
Algeria                      India                     St. Kitts and Nevis
Argentina                    Indonesia                 St. Lucia
Armenia                      Iran, I.R. of             St. Vincent & Grens.
Australia                    Ireland                   Sudan
Austria                      Israel                    Suriname
Azerbaijan                   Italy                     Sweden
Bahamas, The                 Jamaica                   Switzerland
Bahrain, Kingdom of          Japan                     Syrian Arab Republic
Bangladesh                   Jordan                    Tanzania
Barbados                     Kazakhstan                Thailand
Belarus                      Kenya                     Togo
Belgium                      Kiribati                  Tonga
Belize                       Korea                     Trinidad and Tobago
Benin                        Kuwait                    Tunisia
Bolivia                      Kyrgyz Republic           Turkey
Botswana                     Latvia                    Turkmenistan
Brazil                       Lithuania                 Uganda
Bulgaria                     Luxembourg                Ukraine
Burkina Faso                 Macedonia, FYR            United Arab Emirates
Burundi                      Madagascar                United Kingdom
Cameroon                     Malawi                    United States
Canada                       Malaysia                  Uruguay
Central African Rep.         Maldives                  Vanuatu
Chad                         Mali                      Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Chile                        Malta                     Vietnam
China,People's Republic of   Mauritius                 Yemen, Republic of
Colombia                     Mexico                    Zambia
Comoros                      Moldova                   Zimbabwe
Congo, Republic of           Morocco
Costa Rica                   Mozambique
Croatia                      Nepal
Cyprus                       Netherlands
Czech Republic               New Zealand
Côte d'Ivoire                Nicaragua
Denmark                      Niger
Dominica                     Nigeria
Dominican Republic           Norway
Ecuador                      Oman
Egypt                        Pakistan
El Salvador                  Panama
Estonia                      Papua New Guinea
Ethiopia                     Paraguay
Fiji                         Peru
Finland                      Philippines
France                       Poland
Gabon                        Portugal
Gambia, The                  Romania
Georgia                      Russia
Germany                      Rwanda
Ghana                        Samoa
Greece                       Saudi Arabia
Grenada                      Senegal
Guatemala                    Seychelles
Guinea                       Singapore
Haiti                        Slovak Republic
Honduras                     Slovenia
Hong Kong, SAR               South Africa
Hungary                      Spain


Sources: United Ntaions' TRAINS and COMTRADE databases.
                                                                                    36

                                                       Appendix Table 5. List of sectors by classification

                  A. Sectors with high tariff barriers in 1989                                       B. Sectors with zero tariff barriers in 2001

HS 1988/1992                               DESCRIPTION                                HS 1988/1992                           DESCRIPTION

                                               FOOD                                                            UNPROTECTED MANUFACTURING
0704           Cabbages, cauliflowers, kohlrabi, kale...etc.                         3704            Photographic plates, film, paper
0710           Vegetables, frozen                                                    3706            Cinematographic film, exposed and developed
1517           Margarine; edible preparations of animal or veg                       4901            Printed books, brochures, leaflets and similar
1901           Malt extract; food preparations of flour, etc .                       4902            Newspapers, journals and periodicals
2002           Tomatoes prepared or preserved                                        4904            Music, printed or in manuscript
2403           Other manufactured tobacco and substitutes                            4905            Maps, etc (incl. atlases, wall maps...), printed
                                                                                     4907            New stamps; stamp-impressed paper; banknotes
                                             CLOTHING                                4911            Other printed matter, including printed picture
5111           Woven fabrics of carded wool or of carded fine                        8408            Compression-ignition,combustion piston engines
5112           Woven fabrics of combed wool or of combed fine                        8409            Accessory parts suitable for engines of heading
6101           Men's or boys' overcoats... and similar article                       8411            Turbo-jets,turbo-propellers and other gas turbines
6102           Woman's or girls' overcoats and similar article                       8413            Pumps for liquids,with or without measuring devices
6103           Men's or boys' suits, ensembles, etc, knitted                         8414            Air or vacuum pumps,exhausting and compression
6104           Women's or girls' suits, ensembles, etc, knitted                      8419            Machinery,plant or lab equipment for all purposes
6105           Men's or boys' shirts, knitted or crocheted                           8424            Mechanical appliances for projecting
6106           Women's or girls' blouses, etc, knitted or crocheted                  8471            Automatic data processing,magnetic,optical
6109           T-shirts, singlets and other vests, knitted or crotcheted             8483            Transmission shafts,cranks,clutches,shafts
6110           Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans and similar articles                    8501            Electric motors and generators
6111           Babies' garments and clothing accessories, knitted                    8516            Electric instantaneous,domestic appliances
6112           Track-suits, ski-suits and swimwear, knitted or crotcheted            8524            Records,tapes for sound etc.
6114           Other garments, knitted or crocheted, nes                             8539            Electtic filament,discharge lamps,ulta-violet
6115           Panty hose, tights, etc, and footwear, knitted                        8802            Other aircraft,spacecraft,and spacecrats launch
6203           Men's or boys' suits, ensembles, jackets, blazers                     8803            Parts of goods of heading No. 88.01,88.02
6204           Women's or girls' suits, ensembles, jackets, blazers                  8805            Aircraft launching gear,deck-arrestor etc.
6206           Women's or girls' blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses                   8901            Cruise ships,excursion/ferry-boatsetc.
6209           Bables' garments and clothing accessories                             8902            Fishing vessels;factory ships
6211           Track suits, ski suits and swimwear                                   8903            Yachts,other vessels for pleasure/sports,rowing
6303           Curtains (incl. drapes) and interior blinds                           8904            Tugs and pusher craft
6308           Sets of woven fabric and yarn                                         8905            Navigation vessels,floating or submersible drills
                                                                                     8906            Other vessels including warships,lifeboats
                                          FOOTWEAR                                   8908            Vessels and other floating structures
6401           Waterproof footwear                                                   9014            Direction finding conpasses;other navigational devices
6402           Other footwear with outer soles and uppers of rubber                  9020            Other breathing appliances,gas masks
6404           Footwear with rubber, plastic, leather soles                          9029            Revolution counters,mileomoters,pedometers etc.
                                                                                     9305            Parts,accessories of articles of heading 93.01
                        HIGHLY PROTECTED MANUFACTURING                               9506            Articles,equipments for general physical exercise
6911           Tableware,kitchenware,other household,toilet articles                 9601            Worked ivory,bone,tortoise-shell,coral
7013           Glass articles used for indoor decoration                             9701            Hand made decorative materials
8704           Motor vehicles for the transport of goods                             9702            Original engravings,prints,lithographs
                                                                                     9703            Original sculptures and statuary,in any material
                                                                                     9704            Postage,revenue stamps,pastal stationery etc.
Source: United Nations' TRAINS database.
                                                          37


                    Appendix Table 6. List of Free Trade Areas/Customs Unions

Data on free trade areas and customs union (FTAs) for the years 1950–1995 comes from Rose (2002a). For
2000, we use the WTO’s website on regional agreements
(www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/regfac_e.htm) by selecting all agreements notified to the WTO whose
date of entry into force fell between 1996 and 2000. Thus, the FTAs covered in our sample
include:
ASEAN                                                   PATCRA
EEC/EC/EU                                               ANZCERTA
US-Israel                                               CACM
NAFTA                                                   SPARTECA
CARICOM                                                 Mercosur
Turkey — Slovenia                                       EC — Tunisia
EC — Slovenia                                           Estonia — Turkey
EC — Lithuania                                          Slovenia — Israel
EC — Estonia                                            Poland — Israel
EC — Latvia                                             Estonia — Faroe Islands
Chile — Mexico                                          Czech Republic — Estonia
Chile — Mexico                                          Slovak Republic — Estonia
Mexico — Israel                                         Lithuania — Turkey
Georgia — Armenia                                       Israel — Turkey
Georgia — Azerbaijan                                    Romania — Turkey
Georgia — Kazakhstan                                    Hungary — Turkey
Georgia — Turkmenistan                                  Czech Republic — Israel
Georgia — Ukraine                                       Slovak Republic — Israel
Latvia — Turkey                                         Slovenia — Croatia
Turkey — Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia          Hungary — Israel
EC — South Africa                                       CEFTA accession of Romania
EC — Morocco                                            CEFTA accession of Slovenia
EC — Israel                                             Poland — Lithuania
EC — Mexico                                             Slovak Republic — Latvia
Estonia — Ukraine                                       Slovak Republic — Lithuania
Poland — Turkey                                         Canada — Chile
EFTA — Morocco                                          Czech Republic — Latvia
Bulgaria — Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia        Czech Republic — Lithuania
Hungary — Latvia                                        Canada — Chile
Hungary — Lithuania                                     Slovenia — Estonia
Poland — Latvia                                         Slovenia — Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Poland — Faroe Islands                                  Slovenia — Latvia
Kyrgyz Republic — Moldova                               Slovenia — Lithuania
Kyrgyz Republic — Ukraine                               EC — Faroe Islands
Kyrgyz Republic — Uzbekistan                            Canada — Israel
Bulgaria — Turkey                                       EC — Slovenia
Czech Republic — Turkey                                 EFTA — Estonia
EAEC                                                    EFTA — Latvia
CEFTA accession of Bulgaria                             EFTA — Lithuania
Slovak Republic — Turkey                                EC — Turkey

Sources: Rose (2002a) and WTO's website on regional agreements
(www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/regfac_e.htm)
                                                      38


                Appendix Table 7. Composition of Sample in Core Specification 1/
                                (Corresponding to columns 3-6 in Table 5)

                                                                            Number of Observations
FTA                                                                                             1,565
 of which industrial country importers                                                            823
GSP (excluding FTA)                                                                             7,895
Industrial country importing members of WTO (excl. GSP andd FTA)                               10,452
Developing country importing members of WTO (excl. GSP and FTA)                                15,271
Other (=developing countries not members of the WTO)                                           19,825
Total                                                                                          55,831

Memorandum items
GSP including FTAs                                                                             8,053
Industrial country WTO importers                                                              17,825
 of which: in FTAs                                                                               823
             in GSP                                                                            8,053
              in FTAs and GSP                                                                    158
Developing country WTO importers                                                              21,176
 of which: in FTAs                                                                               518
1/ That is, for sample comprising trade values greater than $500,000.
                                                     39


         Appendix Table 8. Sensitivity of Core Specification of Rose (2002a)

Log distance                                       -1.111      -1.308      -1.108     -1.305
                                                     0.023       0.024      0.023       0.024
Log product real gdp                                0.928       0.183      0.926       0.164
                                                     0.010       0.055      0.010       0.056
Log product real per capita GDP                     0.268       0.378      0.269       0.401
                                                     0.014       0.052      0.014       0.052
Common language                                     0.365       0.296      0.360       0.295
                                                     0.041       0.046      0.041       0.046
Common border                                       0.504       0.256      0.501       0.253
                                                     0.111       0.111      0.110       0.111
Landlocked                                         -0.333      -0.451      -0.333     -0.407
                                                     0.032       0.308      0.032       0.309
Island                                              0.059       0.577      0.059       0.444
                                                     0.037       0.214      0.037       0.214
Log product area                                   -0.097       0.504      -0.095      0.514
                                                     0.008       0.040      0.008       0.040
Common colony                                       0.524       0.531      0.515       0.520
                                                     0.069       0.068      0.069       0.068
Current colony                                      0.920       0.645      0.874       0.556
                                                     0.216       0.253      0.215       0.251
Ever colony                                         1.168       1.268      1.179       1.280
                                                     0.117       0.115      0.117       0.116
Common country                                      0.224       0.374      0.236       0.444
                                                     0.971       0.605      0.965       0.601
Common currency                                     1.226       1.324      1.212       1.307
                                                     0.125       0.130      0.125       0.130
Free trade area                                     0.858       0.739      1.031       1.078
                                                     0.092       0.102      0.109       0.115
GSP 1/                                              0.800       0.605
                                                     0.032       0.033
One country in WTO 1/                               0.012       0.076
                                                     0.052       0.047
Both countries in WTO 1/                            0.026       0.131
                                                     0.056       0.054
GSP 2/                                                                     0.838       0.840
                                                                            0.063       0.062
One country in WTO 2/                                                      -0.025      0.100
                                                                            0.053       0.049
Both countries in WTO 2/                                                   0.076       0.303
                                                                           0.058       0.054

 Country fixed effects                                   No         Yes         No          Yes
 Time effects                                           Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
 R-square                                            0.653       0.708       0.653        0.708
 Number of observations                              51400       51400      51400        51400
 Root mean square error                               1.961       1.802      1.960        1.801
 1/ As defined in Rose (2002a)
 2/ Defined mutually exclusively. That is, GSP excludes common FTA country pairs,
 and WTO dummies exclude common FTA and GSP country-pairs
Regressand log real trade. Robust standard errors (clustered by country pairs) reported below coefficient
estimates. Columns 1 and 2 correspond to the specification in columns 1 and 4 in Table 1 of Rose (2002a).
