                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    STOCK MARKET AND INVESTMENT GOODS PRICES:
                        IMPLICATIONS FOR MACROECONOMICS

                                        Lawrence J. Christiano
                                          Jonas D. M. Fisher

                                         Working Paper 10031
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10031


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




This is a revision of Chicago Fed working paper 98-15. It also supercedes ‘Tobin’s q and Asset Returns:
Implications for the Business Cycle,’ which appeared as NBER working paper 5292. We thank Gadi Barlevy,
Michele Boldrin, Marty Eichenbaum, Lars Hansen and an anomymous referee for advice. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Lawrence J. Christiano and Jonas D. M. Fisher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Stock Market and Investment Goods Prices: Implications for Macroeconomics
Lawrence J. Christiano and Jonas D. M. Fisher
NBER Working Paper No. 10031
October 2003
JEL No. E10, E32

                                            ABSTRACT

Stock market prices, a measure of the marginal cost of installed capital, are procyclical. Yet, prices

of investment goods, the main input into new installed capital, are countercyclical. We exploit this

information to identify the driving forces of the business cycle and the nature of capital installation

costs. In our model installation costs are increasing in the growth of investment, and the business

cycle is driven by permanent investment-specific technology shocks and transitory neutral

technology shocks. When calibrated to the capital price observations, the model does well at

accounting for the main features of asset returns and the business cycle of macroeconomic

aggregates. In addition, unlike most other models, our's accounts for sectoral comovement in both

output and factor inputs.



Lawrence J. Christiano
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-christiano@northwestern.edu

Jonas D. M. Fisher
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
jfisher@frbchi.org
1. Introduction

Stock market prices, a measure of the marginal value of installed capital, are procyclical. Yet,
prices of investment goods, the main input into new installed capital, are countercyclical.1
We exploit this information to identify the driving forces of the business cycle and the nature
of capital installation costs. In our model, installation costs are increasing in the growth
of investment, and the business cycle is driven by permanent investment-specific technology
shocks and transitory neutral technology shocks. When calibrated to the price observations,
our model does well at accounting for the main features of asset returns and the business
cycle.
       To understand how our model accounts for the dynamics of capital prices, it is helpful
to recall a basic property of neoclassical models, that the price of a firm’s stock equals the
marginal cost of its installed capital. The investment-specific shocks play a small role because
they trigger oﬀsetting eﬀects on marginal installation costs. The fall in investment prices after
a positive investment-specific shock pushes marginal cost down, while the rise in investment
works in the other direction, by increasing installation costs. Our finding that the latter
eﬀect is relatively small explains our conclusion that stock prices are countercyclical relative
to investment-specific shocks. The marginal cost of installed capital responds strongly and
procyclically to a neutral shock because this increases the demand for investment goods which
causes the two eﬀects just cited now to work in the same direction. Therefore, stock prices
are procyclical because they are dominated by the neutral shock. Similar to Greenwood,
Hercowitz and Krusell (2000) (GHK), investment good prices are countercyclical because
they are dominated by the investment-specific shock.
       The phenomena that interest us lie at the intersection of macroeconomics and finance. To
have confidence in the inferences we draw from the data, we need to be sure that they are not
inconsistent with the salient facts in these two areas. For example, since the procyclicality

   1
    The procylical nature of stock prices is well known. For documentation, see Christiano and Fisher (1995)
and Fischer and Merton (1984) and the references they cite. The cyclical behavior of investment good prices
is documented in Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (1997, 2000), Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989),
Christiano and Fisher (1997) and Fisher (2003).



                                                     2
of equity prices is a feature of asset prices, it is particularly important to verify that our
explanation does not conflict with existing explanations of other features of asset markets.
Similarly, since our focus is on characteristics of the business cycle, we want to verify that
our hypothesis is not at odds with the business cycle facts.
   These considerations lead us to work with a modification of the model of Boldrin, Chris-
tiano and Fisher (2001) (BCF). Their model incorporates assumptions designed to help
account for basic features of asset returns, and represents a step forward compared to stan-
dard business cycle models in accounting for the business cycle. Nevertheless, it has the
property that stock market and investment good prices are both strongly procyclical. When
we introduce our modifications, the asset pricing implications are comparable to those of
BCF and the improved business cycle implications of that model are retained. Moreover,
our model improves on a notable drawback of the BCF model, that investment in the con-
sumption sector is counter-cyclical. In our model, output and both factor inputs display the
sectoral co-movement phenomenon.
   The empirical success of the model lends credibility to the interpretation of the busi-
ness cycle it describes. Therefore the technology shock driven business cycle hypothesis is
supported by the findings. However, the nature of the technology process underlying our
findings is quite diﬀerent from that typically assumed. In addition to involving both neutral
and investment-specific shocks, we find that these shocks must be highly correlated to ac-
count for the data. So while the nature of the process is diﬀerent, the conclusion that there
is a single major technological source for the business cycle is the same.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model. Section 3 discusses our
strategy for assigning values to the model’s parameters and Section 4 evaluates our calibrated
model’s empirical implications. Section 5 discusses some potential alternative explanations
for the capital price dynamics and Section 6 concludes.




                                              3
2. The Model Economy

There are two sets of assumptions that diﬀerentiate our model from a standard one-sector,
representative agent real business cycle model. First, we adopt the assumptions proposed in
BCF to account for asset returns: preferences have the habit persistence form proposed in
Constantinides (1990) and Sundaresan (1989); investment and consumption goods are pro-
duced in spatially isolated industries; and the allocation of capital and labor to sectors must
be made prior to the realization of the current period technology shocks. The assumptions
on preferences result in procyclical demand for productive capital. The assumptions on tech-
nology guarantee that the supply of capital is inelastic in the short run. BCF show that the
combined eﬀects of these two features produce a cyclical pattern in capital gains that allows
a model with neutral technology shocks to generate a large equity premium. Second, we
adopt modifications designed to help the model account for the dynamic behavior of stock
market and investment good prices: a transitory technology shock perturbs both production
technologies; the investment good technology is also perturbed by a permanent shock; and
there are costs associated with the installation of new investment goods.


2.1. Preferences

The preferences of the representative agent are:

                          ∞
                          X
                     E0         β t [log(Ct − bCt−1 ) − Ht ] , 0 < β < 1, b ≥ 0,           (1)
                          t=0


where, 0 < Ct denotes time t consumption, 0 ≤ Ht denotes time t labor, and E0 is the
conditional expectation operator. When b > 0 household preferences are characterized by
habit persistence. When b = 0, these preferences correspond to those in a standard RBC
model. See BCF for a discussion of the use of habit persistence in macroeconomics.




                                                    4
2.2. Technology

The technology for producing consumption goods in t is


                                       αc
                              Ct ≤ Zt Kc,t Hc,t 1−αc ,     0 < αc < 1                     (2)


where Zt = exp(θt )(1 + γ)t is the neutral technology, with γ ≥ 0 the growth rate of this
technology and θ t a covariance stationary shock:


                                 θt = ρθt−1 + εt ,       0 < ρ < 1.                       (3)


The technology for producing new investment goods in t is


                                               αi
                          Ic,t + Ii,t ≤ Zt Vt Ki,t Hi,t 1−αi   0 < αi < 1                 (4)


where
                                     Vt = exp(µ + ν t )Vt−1 .                             (5)

Here, Kc,t and Ki,t denote the beginning of period stocks of capital in the consumption and
investment sectors. Similarly, Hc,t and Hi,t refer to hours worked in the consumption and
investment good sectors, with Ht = Hc,t +Hi,t . The term Vt is the investment-specifc technol-
ogy with µ ≥ 0 denoting the mean growth rate of this techology. Greenwood, Hercowitz and
Krusell (1997) argue that investment specific technical change is a more important source
of growth than growth in the neutral technology. This strongly suggests it is also important
for the business cycle. The innovations εt and ν t in (3) and (5) are independent of time,
zero-mean, normally distributed random variables with standard deviations σ ε and σ ν and
contemporaneous correlation coeﬃcient ω.
   Our dual technology shock specification has not been considered much. It is common to
assume a single stationary neutral shock. Relatively few papers have considered investment-
specific shocks. Business cycle models that include this kind of shock have been studied
by Campbell (1998), Fisher (1997), Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huﬀman (1988), and GHK.


                                                  5
GHK describe a model with dual technology shocks, but they assume both shocks are tran-
sitory and they do not consider the possibility that two shocks are correlated.
       Our assumption that the business cycle is driven mostly by an investment-specific shock
that is permanent and a neutral shock that is transitory is not at odds with the recent
macro-econometric literature. Christiano, Eichenbaum and Vigfusson (2003), Gali (1999)
and Fisher (2003) document, in a quite general way, that permanent neutral shocks are
unimportant for the business cycle. However, the methodology underlying these papers
leaves open the possibility that orthogonal transitory neutral shocks have a role to play in
the business cycle. Fisher (2003) also finds a permanent component in aggregate investment
good prices and estimates that shocks to this account for a large fraction of the business
cycle. This estimate does not depend on assuming the shock is orthogonal to a transitory
neutral shock.2
       The technology for producing end of period t capital Kx,t+1 , for sector x is


                                Kx,t+1 ≤ (1 − δ)Kx,t + F (Ix,t , Ix,t−1 ),                             (6)


where                                                     Ã    !
                                                        x
                                      F (x, y) = (1 − G    )x                                          (7)
                                                        ζy

is the technology for installing new capital. Here, ζ is the growth rate of investment along
a nonstochastic growth path. Following Christiano, et. al. (2003) we restrict the function,
G, to satisfy the following properties: G(1) = G0 (1) = 0, and ψ ≡ G00 (1) > 0, where ‘0 ’s
denote diﬀerentiation. Under our assumptions, the derivatives of F with respect to its first
and second arguments are unity and zero when evaluated in a nonstochastic steady state in
both sectors. Because of this, steady state values of quantities and prices in the model are
not a function of the adjustment cost parameter, ψ. Of course, the dynamics of the model
are influenced by ψ. When ψ = 0 the model is equivalent to one without adjustment costs.3

   2
     Once can see this by studying the instrumental variables description of the identification strategy in
Fisher (2003).
   3
     The model with ψ = 0, no investment-specific shock and a permanent neutral shock is identical to the



                                                    6
Given our solution procedure, no other features of the G function need to be specified.
   The function F penalizes changes in investment growth and not changes in the invest-
ment rate, as is conventional in the real business cycle and q-theory literatures. Our model
incorporates the rate case if we assume the second argument of F is Kx,t . We use the
specification in (6) for two main reasons. First, as stressed in BCF, the traditional rate
specification is a force for smooth and countercyclical hours worked, both major drawbacks
for a technology-shock driven business cycle model. Second, Christiano, et. al. (2003) argue
that the growth specification is useful for understanding the consequences of a monetary
disturbance because it generates hump shaped responses of output, hours and investment.
That paper has a more detailed comparison of the two cost of adjustment specifications.
   We assume that Ht , Hc,t and Hi,t are determined prior to the realization of xt . This is
our way of capturing the notion that it is diﬃcult to quickly adjust aggregate employment
and its sectoral allocation in response to a shock. We also assume that capital, once installed
in a sector, cannot be shifted to another sector. That is, we assume that Kc,t+1 and Ki,t+1
are determined as a function of date t state variables, and cannot be adjusted in response
to contemporaneous innovations in technology.


2.3. Equilibrium

We find the equilibrium allocations by solving the following planning problem: maximize (1)
subject to (2)-(7), Kc,t , Ki,t , Hc,t , Hi,t ≥ 0, the timing assumptions mentioned at the end of
the previous section, and C−1 , Kc,0 , Ki,0 , Hc,0 , Hi,0 > 0 given. We approximate the solution
to the planning problem using the linear approximation strategy of Christiano (1998). It
is well understood how to decentralize the allocations that solve the planner’s problem by
means of competitive markets, and so we do not discuss the details here.
   Prices and rates of return are derived from the solution to the planning problem as
follows. In this model, the rates of return on equity may diﬀer between the two sectors. The
rate of return on equity in sector x = c, i is:

model in BCF.



                                                  7
                                                 "                              #
                                                     mpkx,t+1 + (1 − δ)Pkx ,t+1
                  1+    e
                       rx,t+1   = (1 +   dxt )                                  − dxt (1 + rtf ),             (8)
                                                               Pkx0 ,t

where mpkx,t+1 denotes the marginal product of capital in sector x, denoted in period t + 1
consumption units. The variable dxt denotes the firm’s debt to equity ratio. As is well
known, dxt is not determined in equilibrium, although the equilibrium quantity allocations
in the model are unique and coincide with the allocations that emerge from the planning
problem. In practice, we set dxt equal to a constant, d, denoting the average debt to equity
ratio in the economy. Finally, the risk-free rate of return, rtf , is computed using

                                                            Λc,t
                                                 rtf =               −1
                                                          βEt Λc,t+1

where Λc,t is the Lagrange multiplier on (2) in the planner’s problem.
                                   e
    The overall return on equity, rt+1 , is:


                                 e       Pkc0 ,t Kc,t+1 e      Pk0 ,t Ki,t+1 e
                                rt+1 =                 rc,t+1 + i           ri,t+1 ,                          (9)
                                             Kt+1                Kt+1

where Kt+1 = Pkc0 ,t Kc,t+1 + Pki0 ,t Ki,t+1 , Pkc0 ,t = Λkc ,t /Λc,t , Pki0 ,t = Λki ,t /Λc,t and Λkc ,t , Λki ,t
denote the Lagrange multipliers on and (6). Here, Pkx0 ,t denotes the consumption good value
of a newly installed unit of capital, to be used in production at the beginning of period t + 1
in sector x. Also, Pkx ,t+1 is the value of that same unit of capital at the end of period t + 1.
We refer to Pkx0 ,t as the date t price of a share of stock, or a share of equity in sector x, where
a share corresponds to a claim on a unit of the underlying capital being financed. Under
this interpretation, the expression Pkx ,t+1 /Pkx0 ,t , is the capital gain during that period.
    It is straightforward to show that Pkx0 ,t , Pkx ,t and Pi,t , the consumption-price of an in-
vestment good, satisfy the following eﬃciency condition for investment:

                                                                   Pi,t
                                                      Pkx0 ,t =          ,                                   (10)
                                                                  mpix,t




                                                              8
where
                                      x               Λc,t+1 Pkx0 ,t+1 x
                            mpix,t = F1,t + βEt                       F                      (11)
                                                       Λc,t Pkx0 ,t 2,t+1

Pi = Λi,t /Λc,t , mpix,t the marginal product of investment in producing installed capital in
                                                                    x        x
sector x, and Λi,t denotes the Lagrange multiplier on (4). In (11) F1,t and F2,t are the first
partial derivatives of the function F in (7) evaluated at date t for sector x = c, i. Our
observations in the introduction about the response of the marginal cost of installed capital
to shocks to the demand and supply of investment goods are based on (10). We can see
here that a demand shock, which drives Pi,t and Ix,t both up leads to mutually reinforcing
movements of the numerator and denominator in (10), while a supply shock leads to oﬀsetting
movements.
   The dynamic nature of (11) contrasts with the traditional q−theory case where the
analogous expression for mpix,t is not forward looking. See, for example, Cochrane (1991)
and Hayashi (1982). Marginal q in sector x is

                                                       Pkx,t
                                                         0
                                             qx,t =            .
                                                       Pi,t

Under the rate specification of adjustment costs used in the literature, mpix,t is just a function
of date t investment. Using the eﬃciency condition (10), it follows that qx,t is a suﬃcient
statistic for investment in sector x.
   A diﬀerent relationship between q and investment holds in our model. Log-linearizing
(10) about steady state and imposing (11) it is straightforward to derive

                                                                   
                                                       X∞
                                                  1        j
                               ı̂x,t   = ı̂x,t−1 + Et  β̃ q̂x,t+j                          (12)
                                                  ψ    j=0


where ẑt is the percent deviation from steady state of variable z and β̃ = β exp(−(γ +µ)/(1−
αi )). In addition, ix,t denotes Ix,t after applying the balanced growth transformation. This
expression shows that current investment depends on lagged investment and the expected
present discounted value of future marginal q’s. Equation (12) is clearly diﬀerent from the
standard q relation.


                                                   9
   In our quantitative analysis, we study the dynamics of an aggregate stock market index,
St . Ignoring the debt-equity ratio, the time t value of this index is measured as the total
value in current consumption units of end-of-period installed capital. That is,


                               St = Pkc0 ,t Kc,t+1 + Pki0 ,t Ki,t+1 .


3. Assigning Values to the Parameters

In this section, we discuss the values we assign to our model’s parameters. A key aspect
of our method is that we do not use most business cycle statistics or any second moment
properties of asset returns to estimate the model. These are reserved for testing purposes.
There are 13 model parameters:


                        β, αc , αi , δ, d, γ, µ, b, ψ, σ ε , σ ν , ρ, ω


The first set of seven parameters control the steady state properties of the model and are
chosen by exactly matching the same number of first moments of the data. The remaining six
parameters control the business cycle and asset pricing properties of the model. We choose
these parameters to optimize the model’s ability to account for eight second moments of the
data.


3.1. Parameters Controlling Steady State

We set

                       β = 0.99999, αc = 0.45, αi = 0.26, δ = 0.021
                             d = 1, γ = 0.000185, µ = 0.00832

   The indicated value of β was selected to maximize the model’s ability to account for
the observed low risk free rate. The capital share values are from Hornstein and Prashnick
(1997) and diﬀer from BCF who assume equal shares of 0.36. Christiano and Eichenbaum
(1992) is our source for δ. We chose a conservative value for d. It matches the lower bound


                                                10
of the range of empirical estimates of the debt to equity ratio reported in Benninga and
Protopapadakis (1990).4 It lies below the debt to equity ratios considered in Abel and
Blanchard (1986, p.258), who consider d = 2, 3. Nothing essential in our analysis depends
on the assumed value of d. Finally, there is a linear mapping from steady state consumption
and real investment price growth to the growth parameters γ and µ. Therefore we choose the
growth parameters to match average quarterly consumption growth of 0.0053 and average
quarterly price growth of -0.00614 over our sample period 1955-1999.


3.2. Parameters Controlling Business Cycles and Asset Pricing

The remaining parameters are φ = {b, ψ, σ ε , σ ν , ρ, ω}.5 The eight moments of the data used
to identify these parameters are:


             ρ(Y, Pi ) = −0.41        ρ(Y, S) = 0.34        Erep = 7.45          Erf = 1.19
                                                                                                         (13)
            σ(Pi )/σ(Y ) = 0.92 σ(S)/σ(Y ) = 5.26 σ(Y ) = 1.59 σ(C)/σ(Y ) = 0.56


Here, ρ(x, y) and σ(x) denotes the correlation between the logged, HP filtered variable x and
the similarly filtered variable, y and the standard deviation of the filtered variable x. Also,
Y denotes aggregate GDP, measured with the chain weighting formula used by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis. The variable rep is the equity premium, the diﬀerence between the
return on equity and the risk free rate. Finally, E denotes the unconditional expectation
operator. See the appendix for the data sources.
       With six parameters to identify we require at least six moments of the data. The two
correlations in (13) are the observations that motivate this paper. The mean equity premium
and risk free rate are the moments used by BCF to calibrate their model. The relative
volatility statistics involving the two prices are natural choices given our desire to understand

   4
     They argue (footnote 6, p. 54) that the annual average debt to total asset ratio of all U.S. corporations
between 1937 and 1984 ranged between 53% and 75%. Our assumption, d = 1, translates into a debt to
total asset value of 50%.
   5
     In the model of GHK the investment price is a direct measure of the investment technology. This is not
the case in our model because of the factor immobilities and the diﬀerent sectoral factor shares. Therefore
we cannot use the investment price to estimate the investment technology process directly, i.e estimate σ ν ,
as do Greenwood, et al (2000).



                                                     11
the business cycle dynamics of these variables. A model which accounted for the correlations
but not the degree of price volatility would not be credible. We find that without the two
remaining statistics, the variance of output and the relative volatility of consumption, then
the fit of the model is poor. This is because the model can get closer to the other statistics
with higher output volatility and higher consumption volatility.
      The metric we used in our optimization procedure is L(φ), where


                               L(φ) = [ν̂ T − f (φ)] V̂T−1 [ν̂ T − f(φ)]0 .                        (14)


Here, ν̂ T is the 8 × 1 vector composed of the sample target moments. The 8 × 8 matrix V̂T is
the diagonal matrix with the inverse of the variances of the estimates in ν̂ T . Finally, f(φ) is
an 8 × 1 vector of the model’s implied values for the target moments.6 In the optimization
procedure we imposed that parameters must be such that Ct ≤ bCt−1 and Λc,t ≤ 0 are never
observed in the Monte Carlo simulations used to evaluate f. Let


                                              J = L(φ̂T ),                                         (15)


where φ̂T minimizes L(φ). Under the null hypothesis that the model is true, and ignoring
sampling uncertainty in the other parameters, J has a Chi-square distribution with 2 degrees
of freedom.
      We obtained the following results:


                                       b̂ = 0.76        ψ̂ = 6.92
                                     σ̂ ε = 0.0075 σ̂ ν = 0.0094.
                                       ρ̂ = 0.94        ω̂ = 0.98

                                               J = 6.26

  6
    The annual return for a given year is computed as the sum of the rate of return over each quarter in
that year. The mapping, f, was executed by computing the average of the mean risk free rate and mean
equity premium across 500 artificial data sets, each of length 200 quarters.




                                                   12
The value of J indicates the overidentifying restrictions are not rejected at the 3% level of
significance. Presumably with parameter uncertainty the value of J would fall. We conclude
that the model plausibly accounts for all of the business cycle variation in output.
       Interestingly, some of the parameter estimates are close to values often used in the busi-
ness cycle literature. In particular, the estimate for the habit parameter is close to the one
in BCF and the persistence of the neutral shock is close to the often assumed value in real
business cycle studies. Another notable feature of our estimates is the high estimated value
of ω. That this is so close to unity is suggestive of a common source for the technology
shocks.
       The empirical literature on Tobin’s q does not provide direct evidence on ψ because this
literature is based on the rate specification for adjustment costs.7 To quantify our estimate of
ψ we follow the approach of Christiano, et. al. (2003). According to (12) 1/ψ is the elasticity
of investment in sector x with respect to a one percent increase in marginal q for that sector.
Our point estimate implies that this elasticity is 0.14. Christiano, et. al. (2003) estimate
this elasticity to be 0.28 by optimizing their model’s ability to account for the consequences
of a monetary shock. A more persistent rise in qx induces a larger change in investment.
                                                                             h ³         ´i
For example, a permanent one percent change in qx induces a 1/ ψ 1 − β̃                       = 12.6 percent
change change in x-sector investment. This value is about 1/3 the one reported by Christiano,
et. al. (2003).


4. Quantitative Findings

In this section we evaluate the interpretation summarized in the introduction regarding the
divergent cyclical behavior of stock market and investment good prices. We document how
the various features of our calibrated model contribute to accounting for this phenomenon.
We then build confidence in our interpretation by evaluating the model’s asset pricing and
business cycle implications. Overall, the model does well on this test. The modifications

   7
    See Christiano and Fisher (1997) for a discussion of the empirical Tobin’s q literature as it relates to a
business cycle model like the one here, but with the rate specification of adjustment costs.



                                                     13
we introduce into BCF to articulate our hypothesis do not change that model’s superior
empirical performance. Moreover, the modifications lead to a substantial improvement, by
enabling the model to account for sectoral co-movement in both output and factor inputs.


4.1. Stock Market and Investment Good Prices

Table 1 presents the statistics summarizing the business cycle dynamics of stock market and
investment good prices. The basic layout is common to all the tables considered. The first
column presents various statistics from the data (‘Data’). The column marked ‘Calibrated’
reports results using the parameter values from the calibration described in the previous
section. The columns to the right of that report results based on perturbing the value, as
indicated in the column header, of one model parameter. In each case, the other parameter
values are kept at their calibrated values.
   Panel A of Table 1 shows the model’s implications for stock market and investment
good prices. This shows that the calibrated model is close to the data in terms of the sign
switch in the correlation with output of stock market and investment good prices and in
terms of business cycle volatility. We begin our discussion of this finding by documenting
the contributions of the two-shock and adjustment cost assumptions to explaining the sign-
switch phenomenon. When adjustment costs are eliminated (see the column marked ‘ψ = 0’),
or there is only a neutral shock (‘σ ν = 0’), then the model loses its ability to account for the
sign switch. This is to be expected. Adjustment costs are the wedge between stock market
and investment good prices (recall (10)). Eliminate the wedge, and the diﬀerence in the
behavior between the two prices disappears too. Also, with only neutral shocks there are
only sources of procyclicality in the two prices.
   Further insight into our calibrated model’s account for the sign switch may be obtained
from Figure 1. That figure displays the response of the capital prices and the stock index
to neutral (right column) and investment-specific shocks (right column). In Figure 1 the
correlation between the shocks is ignored. Consider the response to the neutral shock. There
is a sharp rise in both the investment good price, Pi , as well as the prices of installed capital,



                                                14
Pkc0 and Pkc0 , and the stock index, S. Consistent with the intuition in the introduction, the
jump in the stock index price exceeds that in the price of investment goods. Now consider
the response to an investment-specific technology shock. As anticipated in the introduction,
Figure 1 shows that S falls relatively little, by comparison with Pi .
       The intuition underlying the sign-switch property in the model suggests a one-shock
hypothesis, involving only the investment-specific shock, might be capable of accounting for
the sign switch, if the installation costs rise fast enough with investment growth. Under the
adjustment cost assumptions used here, the one-shock hypothesis is not capable of accounting
for the sign switch. That is, we could not find a value of ψ such that the model could account
for the sign switch under the one-shock hypothesis. Simply setting the variance of the neutral
shock to zero without raising the degree of adjustment costs of course does not work, since
both prices are countercyclical with respect to the investment-specific shock in this model
(‘σ ε = 0’).8
       Panel A of Table 1 also shows that the model accounts well for the cyclical volatility of
investment and equity prices. In the data, equity prices are 5 and 1/4 times as volatile as
output and investment goods prices are a little less volatile that output. That the relative
volatility of the capital prices is about right in the calibrated model, seems to depend a lot
on the two shocks being highly correlated (‘ω = 0’). Note that the Shiller (1981) “excess
volatility” of equity puzzle does not stand here. However, this seems in part to be due to
the model’s (counterfactual, as we will see) high volatility in interest rates.
       We conclude by noting that our model’s success with respect to the sign-switch does
not depend on the growth specification for adjustment costs. For example, Christiano and
Fisher (1997) describe a model similar to that here except that it has the rate specification
of adjustment costs. The calibrated version of that model also exhibits the sign-switch
phenomenon. The reasons are similar to those discussed here. While accounting for the
sign-switch, that model overstates the volatility of both prices.

   8
    Christiano and Fisher (1997) show that with the rate specification of adjustment costs that a one-shock
model can match the sign-switch. They discuss several reasons why this hypothesis is dominated by the
two-shock hypothesis.



                                                    15
4.2. Asset Returns

The asset pricing performance of our calibrated model, shown in Panel B of Table 1, is
comparable to that of BCF. The model does well accounting for the mean equity premium
and risk free rate as well as the Sharpe ratio, Ere−p /σ re and the variance of equity returns.
As with BCF, and other models with the habit specification used here, the model does poorly
with respect to the volatility of the risk free rate.
       As can be anticipated from BCF, the equity premium disappears when the innovation of
the aggregate technology shock is set to zero (‘σ ε = 0’), and is virtually unaﬀected by setting
the innovation in the investment-specific shock to zero (‘σ ν = 0’). These latter findings
reflect that the equity premium depends on the one-step-ahead uncertainty in aggregate
consumption.
       The risk free rate hardly responds to the investment specific shock (‘σ ε = 0’), but responds
a lot to the neutral shock (‘σ ν = 0’). This reflects (i) that the investment-specific shock has
no current period impact on consumption, while the neutral shock does, (ii) the primary
avenue by which a shock aﬀects the risk free rate in the model is via the current period
marginal utility of consumption and (iii) the marginal utility of consumption is sensitive to
current consumption under habit persistence.
       The strong response in the risk free rate to the neutral shock is the reason our model
overstates by several factors the volatility of the risk free rate (‘σ ν = 0’). The poor perfor-
mance of the model on this dimension is comparable to that of BCF.9 The response of the
rate of return on equity to the neutral shock is also strong, but this is about right (‘σ ν = 0’).
Interestingly, unlike the stock market and investment good prices, the behavior of asset
returns is virtually unrelated to the high correlation of the two shocks (‘ω = 0’).

   9
    Our findings on the volatility of asset returns are consistent with those in of Heaton (1995). One of
Heaton’s findings is that the ability to account for first moments of asset returns comes at a cost of poor
performance on second moments. Although this appears to be a feature of our model too, the results of
Campbell and Cochrane (1995) suggest that this need not be a feature of models with habit persistence
generally.




                                                    16
4.3. The Business Cycle

We now turn to the business cycle implications of our model. We first discuss the impli-
cations for key aggregate business cycle statistics mentioned in the introduction: measures
of volatility and comovement, persistence, the excess-sensitivity of consumption puzzle, and
the leading indicator phenomenon. We then discuss how our model accounts for sectoral
co-movement in factor inputs.


4.3.1. Aggregate Business Cycle Statistics

Table 2 presents the implications of our model for certain aggregate business cycle statistics.
The results in the ‘Data’ column are based on data from the NIPA and data from our model
are calculated in a consistent way. For example, aggregate output in the model is calcu-
lated using the BEA’s chain-weighting method. Figure 2 displays the response of output,
investment, consumption and hours to the two shocks, again ignoring their correlation.


                                 Volatility and Comovement


   Consistent with the way we calibrated our model, the model does well accounting for
output and consumption volatility (see Panel A, Table 2). The results suggest that both
shocks must be present and these shocks must be highly correlated for this to be the case.
The other statistics were not used in the calibration, and consistent with standard models
as well as the model in BCF, the model does well here as well. In particular, consumption,
investment and hours all comove positively with output and investment is more volatile than
output.
   The main deviations from the unconditional moments in the data are that hours and
investment are not volatile enough. In at least one respect this is not a problem for the
model. Specifically, the estimates of the fraction of hours worked accounted for by the
technology shocks is similar to that estimated by Fisher (2003) using a reduced form model.
Still, to the extent that we have sought to account for the entire business cycle with the
shocks in the model, this might be viewed as a drawback of the model. The volatility


                                              17
failures are common drawbacks for a business cycle model that might be overcome by the
addition of other model features, such as endogenous capacity utilization.
   The source of the shocks has little impact on the volatility of hours, (‘ψ = 0’, ‘σ ν = 0’, and
‘ω = 0’). Interestingly, removing adjustment costs (‘ψ = 0’) worsens the model’s prediction
for the relative volatility of hours. This contrasts sharply with a model based on the rate
adjustment cost specification, such as Christiano and Fisher (1997), where the adjustment
costs are a force for smoothing hours relative to output. In section 2.2, we emphasized this
drawback of the rate specification as one of the two main reasons for choosing to work with
our growth specification. Under both adjustment cost specifications, the absolute volatility
of hours rises when adjustment costs are removed.
   Interestingly, the adjustment costs are not that important for the smoothness of invest-
ment relative to output (‘ψ = 0’). The relatively weak response of investment to a neutral
shock (‘σ ν = 0’) and the high correlation between the two shocks (‘ω = 0’) are crucial here.
Of course the adjustment costs do aﬀect the absoluate volatility of investment.


                                          Persistence


   Macroeconomists have for a long time sought to identify factors which propagate the
eﬀects of economic shocks over time. It is well known that standard real business cycle
models do poorly on this dimension. Due in part to its incorporating the features in BCF, our
model does quite well on this dimension (see Panel B, Table 2). Figure 2 shows investment,
output and hours displays hump shaped responses to both shocks in the calibrated model.
Consumption responds slowly and persistently to the investment-specific shock. In response
to a neutral shock, consumption displays little persistence beyond that already in the shock.
   It is interesting to note how curvature in adjustment costs enhance the model’s internal
propagation mechanism. Thus, when curvature is eliminated (‘ψ = 0’), then output per-
sistence drops to −0.45. This is just a feature of the strong propagation eﬀect the growth
adjustment cost specification imparts on a model. In section 2.2, we gave this as the second
main reason for adopting the growth adjustment cost specification over the rate specification.



                                               18
   The model’s implications for consumption persistence may seem counterfactual. Because
of the limitations on the intersectoral mobility of resources, consumption responds immedi-
ately to the neutral shock and slowly to the investment-specific shock. The response to the
first shock generates negative autocorrelation in consumption growth (‘σ ν = 0, Panel B’),
while the response to the second generates positive autocorrelation (‘σ ε = 0, Panel B’). The
net outcome with both shocks is about zero.
   The model’s zero autocorrelation in consumption growth misses the corresponding em-
pirical estimate, which is positive and statistically significant. We are not very concerned
about this failure. First, temporal aggregation, as considered by Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Marshall (1991), could account for the positive correlation in the data. Moreover, it is
common in asset pricing studies to assume consumption is a random walk, e.g. Campbell
and Cochrane (1999).

                       Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Income

   We now turn to the statistical evidence which Campbell and Mankiw (1989, 1991) (CM)
argue is a puzzle from the perspective of equilibrium business cycle models. The implications
of our model for this evidence are displayed in Panel C, Table 2.
   CM estimate a linear expression relating the predictable component of consumption
growth to the predictable component of income growth and to the interest rate. Apply-
ing instrumental variables techniques, they find that the estimated coeﬃcient on income, λ,
is about 1/2, while the coeﬃcient on the interest rate, θ, is close to zero. Appealing to stan-
dard consumption models, CM argue that household maximization implies the coeﬃcient
on income should be zero and the coeﬃcient on the interest rate should be large. In these
models, the level of consumption is determined by household wealth and its growth rate is
determined solely by the rate of interest. The coeﬃcient on the interest rate is the reciprocal
of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. This coeﬃcient should be substantially above zero
on the assumption that risk aversion is small.
   CM interpret the evidence as indicating that the representative agent, optimizing frame-
work should be abandoned as a way of thinking about fluctuations. Just as in BCF, our


                                              19
results suggest another interpretation. The modifications introduced into the standard model
to help it account for asset prices also have the eﬀect of raising the implied estimated value
of λ and reducing the implied estimated value of θ. Given that our model shares these mod-
ifications, it also does well along this dimension (see BCF for a detailed discussion of why
this is so.) Indeed, our model is superior to the one in BCF since its implied value for λ is
smaller and closer to the CM estimate. Panel C, Table 2 shows that the investment-specific
shock is largely responsible for this (‘σ ε = 0’). Thus, an alternative interpretation of CM’s
findings is that they provide corroborating evidence in favor of our model.

                               Inverted Leading Indicator Phenomenon

       Nominal interest rates appear to covary positively with past (detrended) levels of output
and negatively with future levels.10 This can be seen in Table 2, Panel D, which displays the
dynamic correlations between the Federal Funds rate and detrended output. They represent
a key factor underlying the belief of some researchers that monetary policy shocks play an
important role in the dynamics of the business cycle. One reason for this belief is that the
monetary policy shock interpretation seems straightforward. Another reason, which appears
to receive support in the results of King and Watson (1996), reflects the view that standard
models are incapable of accounting for the negative association between interest rates and
future output. BCF find that the two-sector model which incorporates changes designed
to account for asset returns is not. It is consistent with the inverted leading indicator
phenomenon. This suggests that the dynamic economic behavior attributed to monetary
disturbances may, at least in part, also reflect the eﬀects of real disturbances propagated via
mechanisms like those captured by our model.
       Our findings in Table 3, Panel C show that the modifications to the BCF model intro-
duced to account for the capital price dynamics do not diminish the ability of the model to
account for the leading indicator phenomenon.11 The reasons for the success of the model

  10
     The result for real interest rates, e.g. Fiorito and Kollintzas (1994), is not robust to alternative ways of
measuring real interest rates.
  11
     Without loss of generality Panel C, Table 2 displays real interest rate-output correlations. This is without
loss of generality, because it is straightforward to introduce money into the model such that it is neutral


                                                       20
are similar to those in BCF. Mechanically, the positive correlation between the interest rate
and current and future output reflects that a positive shock to the neutral technology drives
up the rate of interest and also drives up current and future output. The responses to an
investment-specific shock work in the other direction (‘σ ε = 0’) and the adjustment costs
seem to help (‘ψ = 0’).


4.3.2. Sectoral Co-movement of Factor Inputs

It has been extensively documented that employment and investment move up and down
together across economic sectors, e.g. Christiano and Fitzgerald (1998). As BCF discuss,
standard models are inconsistent with these observations. In particular, while they pre-
dict consumption and investment output are procyclical, they also predict factor inputs are
countercyclical in the consumption sector.
    Table 3 and Figure 3 document that our model produces strong comovement over the
cycle in sectoral employment and investment. As in BCF, habit persistence and factor
market inflexibilities are necessary for our model to produce comovement in employment.
However, the BCF model only has employment comovement. In our model both employment
and investment respond positively to each shock. Table 3 shows that the adjustment costs
are important for this finding (‘ψ = 0’).
    One can understand why our model has sectoral investment comovement while model’s
such as BCF’s do not, by considering (12) and Figure 1. Figure 1 shows that the responses
of the installed capital prices are almost identical. Therefore, by (12), it must be that
investment in the sectors move together. In BCF, Pi. = Pkx0 so that qx = 1 and there is
no variation in marginal q. Therefore this source of comovement is not in that model. Our
model with ψ = 0 shares this property and so also has trouble with investment comovment.
    We conclude by noting that our model’s success with respect to comovement does not
depend on the growth specification for adjustment costs. For example, the calibrated model
of Christiano and Fisher (1997) also exhibits sectoral input comovement. The reason is

for quantities, yet its implications for the nominal interest rate correlations are virtually identical to the
corresponding real interest rate correlations. See Christiano and Fisher (1997) for how this can be done.


                                                     21
similar to the reason given here, because sectoral installed capital prices comove strongly
there as well.


5. Other Explanations of Stock Market and Investment Good Prices

There are two leading alternative theories of why stock prices and investment prices behave
so diﬀerently over the business cycle. Both theories involve diﬀerent interpretations of the
negative correlation between investment prices and output.
   Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989) infer that the business cycle is driven by a shock to
the demand for investment goods, and that there are increasing returns in the production of
investment goods. The empirical evidence seems to go against this interpretation, however.
For example, although Harrison (1998) provides some empirical support for the notion that
there are increasing returns associated with capital and labor in the production of investment
goods, the degree of increasing returns she finds is not suﬃcient to generate increasing returns
in the factor of production, labor, that is variable in the short run. This is consistent with the
findings of Goolsby (1998) and Shea (1993), who find that supply curves slope up. Goolsby’s
analysis focuses specifically on the supply of capital goods.
   Another possible interpretation of countercyclical investment good prices is that markups
in the investment good sector are countercyclical, or more generally, that they are more so
than in the consumption good sector. A model with the potential to formally articulate this
possibility has been described by Jaimovich (2003). In his model of imperfect competition a
positive neutral technology shock encourages entry by firms, which in turn reduces markups.
Since investment responds more than consumption to neutral technology shocks, such a
model should predict that the relative price of investment goods falls in a business cycle
boom driven by neutral shocks. It would be interesting to see evaluate whether the conclusion
regarding the nature of technology shocks arrived at here would stand up with such a model
calibrated to the same moment as here. More generally, this hypothesis seems more promising
than the increasing returns theory so it is of interest to investigate it further.




                                               22
6. Concluding Remarks

We used the business cycle properties of stock market prices and investment good prices to
draw inferences about the source of business cycle shocks and the nature of capital installation
costs. We achieved identification using an explicitly formulated model.
   As in Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (1997, 2000), we infer that the countercyclical
nature of investment good prices reflects the eﬀects of supply shocks in the investment sector.
Our analysis suggests that a second shock also plays a role in the business cycle. In addition,
we interpret the fact that investment good and stock market prices behave diﬀerently as
reflecting the presence of costs for installing new capital.
   To test these inferences, we go beyond simply constructing a model that can account
quantitatively for the observations that interest us. We also investigate the model’s im-
plications for other business cycle and asset pricing phenomena. We find that the model
does well on these dimensions. Moreover, in some respects, the model actually represents a
step forward. In particular, unlike standard models and BCF, our model is consistent with
sectoral comovement in factor inputs.
   We sought to draw out the shortcomings of our analysis. On the asset pricing side, our
model inherits the diﬃculties that BCF has in accounting for the volatility of the risk free
rate. On the business cycle side, our model has diﬃculties with the labor market and the
volatility of investment. Resolving these shortcomings constitutes a task for future research.




                                               23
                                         Appendix



   Below we list the data series used in our analysis. The Haver database mnemonic for the
series is indicated where appropriate.


  1. Aggregate price data. The real investment price is measured as the price index for
     investment divided by the price index for consumption. We use the adjustments de-
     scribed in Fisher (2003) to correct for quality bias in the NIPA equipment price deflator.
     The stock index is the New York Stock Exchange composite (SPNY) divided by the
     consumption deflator. chain-weighted dollars.

  2. Asset return data. The real risk free rate and the real return on equity are from
     Ibbotson Associates. The nominal interest rate is the Federal Funds rate (FFED).

  3. Aggregate quantity data. When series are added together they are chain weighted.
     Output (GDPH), Consumption (Consumption of nondurables and services, CNH +
     CSH), Investment (Private nonresidential investment, GFNSH+GFNEH, where the
     adjustment to the equipment deflator discussed in Fisher (2003) are used in the chain-
     weighting). Chain-weighting requires the nominal version of the series listed above
     (mnemonics for these series are the same as for the real series listed above with the
     last letter removed.) Hours worked are private nonfarm (LXNFH).

  4. Sectoral data. Hours and investment in the consumption sector are proxied with the
     service sector variables (LIPSRVA, ZPPSQ) and hours and investment in the invest-
     ment sector are proxied with the durables manufacturing variables (LIDURGA, ZPP-
     MDQ).




                                             24
                                      References

Abel, Andrew, and Olivier Blanchard, 1986, ‘The Present Value of Profits and Cyclical
    Movements in Investment,’ Econometrica, vol. 54, no. 2 March, pp. 249-73.
Benninga, Simon and Aris Protopapadakis, 1990, ‘Leverage, time preference and the equity
    premium puzzle,’ Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 25, pp. 49—58.
Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jonas D.M. Fisher, 2001, ‘Habit Persistence,
    Asset Returns, and the Business Cycle.” American Economic Review.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, ‘By force of habit: A consumption-based
   explanation of aggregate stock market behavior,’ Journal of Political Economy.
Campbell, John, and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1989, ‘Consumption, income, and interest rates:
   reinterpreting the time series evidence,’ in Blanchard and Fischer, editors, NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual 1989.
Campbell, John, and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1991, ‘The response of consumption to income:
   a cross-country investigation,’ European Economic Review, vol. 35, pp. 723-767.
Christiano, Lawrence J., 1998, ‘Solving Dynamic Equilibrium Models by a Method of Un-
    determined Coeﬃcients’, National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working
    Paper, January.
Christiano, Lawrence J., and Martin Eichenbaum, 1992, ‘Current real-business-cycle the-
    ories and aggregate labor-market fluctuations,’ American Economic Review, vol. 82,
    pp. 430—450.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans, 2003, ‘Nominal Rigidities
    and Monetary Policy Shocks”.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Robert Vigfussen, 2003, ‘What Happens
    After a Technology Shock?. Northwestern manuscript..
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and David Marshall, 1991, ‘The Permanent
    Income Hypothesis Revisited,’ Econometrica 59, no. 2, March.
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Jonas D. M. Fisher, 1995, ‘Tobin’s q and Asset Returns:
    Implications for Business Cycle Analysis,’ NBER working paper 5292.
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Jonas D. M. Fisher, 1998, ‘Stock Market and Investment Good
    Prices: Implications for Macroeconomics.” Chicago Fed Working Paper 1998-xx.
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Jonas D. M. Fisher, 1998, ‘Technical Appendix to Stock Market
    and Investment Good Prices: Implications for Macroeconomics’, manuscript.
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Terry Fitzgerald, 19, ‘The Business Cycle: Its still a Puzzle.’
    Chicago Fed’s Economic Perspectives.
Cochrane, John, 1991, ‘Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link between Stock Re-
    turns and Economic Fluctuations,’ Journal of Finance, vol. 46, no. 1, March, pp.
    209-37.
Constantinides, George, 1990, ‘Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle,’
    Journal of Political Economy, vol. 98, pp. 519—542.


                                           25
Fiorito, Riccardo and Tryphon Kollintzas, 1994, ‘Stylized Facts of Business Cycles in the
     G7 from a Real Business Cycles Perspective,’ European Economic Review, vol. 38, no.
     2, pp. 235-69.
Fischer, Stanley, and Robert C. Merton, 1984, ‘Macroeconomics and Finance: The Role of
    the Stock Market,’ in Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Essays On Macroeco-
    nomic Implications of Financial and Labor Markets and Political Processes, Carnegie-
    Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 21, pp. 57-108.
Fisher, Jonas D.M., 2002, “Technology Shocks Matter.” Chicago Fed Working Paper 2002-
    14.
Gali, Jordi, 1999, “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology
     Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review.
Goolsbee, Austan, 1998, ‘Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital
    Goods,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113, issue 1, pp. 121-148, February.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, 1997, ‘Long-Run Implications of
    Investment-Specific Technological Change,’ American Economic Review, vol. 87, no.
    3, June, pp. 342-362.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, 2000, ‘The Role of Investment-Specific
    Technological Change in the Business Cycle,’ European Economic Review.
Harrison, Sharon G., 1998, Evidence on the empirical plausibility of externalities and inde-
    terminacy in a two sector model, unpublished manuscript, Barnard College, Columbia
    University.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, ‘ Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation,’
    Econometrica, vol. 50, no. 1, January, pp. 213-24.
Heaton, John, 1995, ‘An empirical investigation of asset pricing with temporally dependent
    preference specifications,’ Econometrica 63, 681—717.
Hornstein, Andreas, and J. Praschnik, 1997, ‘Intermediate Inputs and Sectoral Comovement
    in the Business Cycle,’ Journal of Monetary Economics, pp. 573-595.
Jaimovich, Nir, 2003, “Countercyclical Markups and the Business Cycle.” Northwestern
    manuscript.
King, Robert and Mark Watson, 1996, ‘Money, Prices, Interest Rates and the Business
    Cycle,’ The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. LXXVIII, no. 1, pp. 35-53.
Masulis, Ronald W, 1988, The debt/equity choice. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1989, ‘Building blocks of market
   clearing business cycle models,’ NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, edited by Olivier
   J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, MIT Press.
Shea, John, 1993, ‘Do Supply Curves Slope Up?’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
    108, February, pp. 1-32.
Shiller, Robert, 1981, ‘Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes
     in dividends?’ American Economic Review, vol. 71, pp. 421—436.
Sundaresan, Suresh M., 1989, ‘Intertemporally dependent preferences and the volatility of
    consumption and wealth,’ Review of Financial Studies, vol. 2, pp. 73—89.



                                            26
                               Table 1: Captial Prices and Asset Returns
           Statistic(i)         Data(i)   Calibrated ψ = 0 σ ε = 0    σν = 0 ω = 0

                    Panel A: Stock Market and Investment Good Prices
                ρ(Y, Pi ) −0.41       −0.42     0.29 −0.29     0.31               0.11
                           (0.12)
                 ρ(Y, S)     0.34       0.23    0.30 −0.79     0.34               0.27
                           (0.10)
                   σ(Pi )    0.92       0.93    0.80    10.3   5.24               6.54
                           (0.11)
                   σ(S)      5.26       5.47    0.78    1.62   8.49               7.64
                           (0.58)

                                        Panel B: Asset Returns
                          ep
                   Er              7.45        7.09 9.52       0.07        7.80   7.81
                                 (2.22)
                    Erf            1.34        2.06 2.45       2.14        2.07   2.09
                                 (0.34)
                  σ(re )           31.3        25.6 29.4       3.03        28.8   28.6
                                 (2.59)
                  σ(rf )           2.61        18.8 23.2       0.44        19.1   19.1
                                 (0.23)
           Erep /σ(rep )           0.24        0.20 0.23       0.02        0.20   0.20
                                 (0.08)

Notes to Table 1: (i) See the text for an explanation of the notation; (ii) See the Appendix
for the data sources.




                                                  27
                           Table 2: Aggregate Business Cycle Statistics
            Statistic(i)    Data(ii) Calibrated ψ = 0 σ ε = 0 σ ν = 0 ω = 0

                             Panel A — Volatility and Comovement
                       σY      1.59        1.65    13.9     0.56   1.12    1.26
                             (0.16)
                σ C /σ Y       0.56        0.57    0.06     0.13   0.86    0.77
                             (0.04)
                 σ I /σ Y      2.99        1.76    1.91     2.65   1.29    1.65
                             (0.19)
                σ H /σ Y       1.10        0.46    0.29     0.54   0.41    0.44
                             (0.05)
               ρ(Y, C)         0.79        0.96    0.40     0.21   0.98    0.88
                             (0.05)
                ρ(Y, I)        0.78        0.99    0.99     0.99   0.97    0.93
                             (0.04)
               ρ(Y, H)         0.87        0.68    0.19     0.75   0.66    0.68
                             (0.03)
                                     Panel B — Persistence
                ρ(∆Y )         0.31        0.13 -0.47      0.24    0.10    0.13
                             (0.07)
                ρ(∆C)          0.42       -0.02 -0.12      0.97   -0.02 -0.01
                             (0.07)
                 Panel C — Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Income(iii)
                                                       f
                                  ∆Ct = µ + λ∆Yt + θrt−1  + εt
                        λ      0.47        0.46    0.02 -0.002     0.80    0.78
                             (0.15)
                         θ    0.089       0.002 0.003      0.91    0.01 0.003
                             (0.11)
                       Panel D — Inverted Leading Indicator Phenomenon
                f
            ρ(rt−4   , Yt )   -0.54       -0.19 -0.05      0.22   -0.20 -0.18
                             (0.14)
                  f
              ρ(rt , Yt )      0.35       -0.24 -0.26      0.25   -0.28 -0.25
                             (0.08)
                f
            ρ(rt+4   , Yt )    0.45        0.21    0.07 -0.21      0.21    0.19
                             (0.11)

Notes to Table 2: (i) See the text for an explanation of the notation; (ii) See the Appendix
for the data sources. (iii) See BCF for details on how we did these calculations.




                                             28
                          Table 3: Sectoral Comovement of Factor Inputs
             Statisticb      Datac Calibrated ψ = 0     σε = 0 σν = 0     ω=0
             ρ(Y, Hc )        0.81    0.76     0.20      0.41   0.77      0.71
                             (0.04)
              ρ(Y, Hi )       0.90    0.68     0.19      0.75     0.65    0.67
                             (0.03)
              ρ(Y, Ic )       0.73    0.99    -0.27      0.98     0.99    0.93
                             (0.08)
              ρ(Y, Ii )       0.49    0.95     0.36      0.98     0.92    0.89
                             (0.08)

Notes to Table 3: (i) See the text for an explanation of the notation; (ii) See the Appendix
for the data sources.




                                               29
Figure 1: Capital Prices




          30
Figure 2: Aggregate Quantities




             31
Figure 3: Sectoral Comovement of Factor Inputs




                     32
