NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEALTH AND WEALTH ACCUMULATION:
EVIDENCE FROM NINETEENTH-CENTURY AMERICA
Chulhee Lee
Working Paper 10035
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10035
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

I have benefited from the helpful comments and suggestions of Dora Costa, Joseph Ferrie, Robert Fogel,
Mathew Kahn, and participants in the 2003 NBER Early Indicators of Later Work Levels, Disease and Death
and Cohort Studies Group Joint Meeting, the 46th National History Meeting, and seminars at Seogang and
Seoul National Universities. I thank Janet Bassett and her research team for their assisting in the collection
and linkage of the 1870 manuscript census, J. Kim and S. Lee for their research assistance, and Susan Jones
for her editorial assistance. This study is supported by National Institute on Aging, the National Institutes of
Health (P01 AG10120), and the Brain Korea 21 Project in 2003. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Chulhee Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Health and Wealth Accumulation: Evidence from Nineteenth-Century America
Chulhee Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 10035
October 2003
JEL No. N3, I1
ABSTRACT
This study explores how the health of Union Army recruits while in the service affected their wealth
accumulation through 1870. Wartime wounds and exposure to combat, measured by the company
mortality from wounds, had strong negative effects on subsequent savings. Variables on illnesses
while in service, if corrected for the potential bias arising from omitted variables by using
instrumental variables, also greatly diminished wealth accumulations. The economic impact of poor
health was particularly strong for unskilled workers. These results suggest that health was a
powerful determinant of economic mobility in the nineteenth century. The strong influences on
wealth accumulations of various infectious diseases, such as malaria, typhoid, and diarrhea, found
in this study point out that the economic gains from the improvement of the disease environment
should be enormous. This study also suggests that the direct economic costs of the Civil War were
probably much greater than previously thought, if the persistent adverse effects of wartime
experiences on veterans’ health are considered.
Chulhee Lee
School of Economics
Seoul National University
San 56-1, Sillim-dong, Kwanak-gu
Seoul, Korea
and NBER
clee@prome.snu.ac.kr

1. Introduction
There is increasing evidence of a strong association between many measures of
economic status, including income and wealth, and a variety of health outcomes, such as
mortality, morbidity, and self-reported health (Ettner 1996, McDonough et al. 1997,
McCellan 1998, Attanasio 2000, Meara 2001). According to the head of household’s 1984
self-reported general health status, for instance, those in excellent health in 1984 were 74%
wealthier than respondents in fair or poor health (Smith 1999). Nutritional status (indicated
by height, BMI, and caloric intake) are closely correlated with wages in many developing
countries (Deolaliker 1988, Berhman and Deolaliker 1989, Strauss and Thomas 1992).
Medical scientists are often convinced that variation in socioeconomic status produces
health disparities, while economists tend to emphasize the influence of health on wealth.
Recent studies have attempted to measure the magnitude of wealth depletion caused
by poor health and to explain the cause of lower savings among the sick. Smith (1999)
reports that the mean wealth reduction caused by new severe health problems is about 7%
of household wealth. This study also suggests that the major causes of wealth depletion
include (1) a decline in labor supply that reduces income, (2) downward revisions in life
expectancy that allow spending of precautionary savings, and (3) the reduced likelihood of
leaving large inheritances.
The studies on the impact of poor health on wealth accumulation are subject to
several empirical difficulties. First, since current health is in part influenced by past
economic status, and since economic conditions at different ages are to an extent correlated,
there is a potential endogeneity problem. Analyzing changes in wealth based on a panel
dataset mitigates but does not entirely eliminate the problem. Second, in order to measure
the pure health effect on wealth accumulation, it is desirable to see how unanticipated
changes in health affect savings, because if people anticipate that their health will
deteriorate, they will save prior to the onset of illness to take care of this contingency. For
this reason, some studies use the onset of new chronic conditions as a predictor of savings,
2

but while new onsets may provide the best chance of identifying health shocks, not all new
onsets come as a surprise.2
This study explores how wartime stress and health of recruits while in service
affected their subsequent wealth accumulations, based on a sample of Union Army veterans
linked to the 1860 and 1870 censuses as well as military records. The Union Army data
have several advantages over the modern datasets commonly used for studying the impact
of health on economic status, such as the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) and the
Asset and Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old Survey (AHEAD). First, we are able to
mitigate the potential endogeneity problem mentioned above by looking at the behaviors of
people in the past. In the mid-nineteenth century, there were few effective medical or health
care services to be purchased. The most important link between economic status and health
was the quality of nutrition and housing. There was less residential segregation by social
class, and both the rich and the poor were exposed to a similar ecological environment.
Furthermore, there was no medical insurance in the nineteenth century. Thus, we have
fewer factors to mask the true saving effect of poor health in the past.3 Second, the military
medical records enable us to isolate unanticipated changes in health. All recruits who

2

A number of studies have attempted to deal with this problem, employing various instruments.
Ettner (1996) used the state unemployment rate, work experience, parental education, and spousal
characteristics as instruments for an individuals’ income. She found that the effect of income on
health remains significant and even increases after instrumenting. Meer, Miller, and Rosen (2003)
used the size of inheritance as an instrument for wealth. They found that the originally small but
significant effect of wealth on health became statistically insignificant if instrumental variable
estimation was applied.
3
The results of studies on the effects of socioeconomic status on health in the past are mixed.
Steckel (1988) found that socioeconomic class differences in mortality among women and children
in mid-nineteenth-century America were small based on a sample of families matched to the 1850
and 1860 censuses. Preston and Haines (1991) also reported that the influences of economic factors
on child mortality at the end of the nineteenth century were relatively weak. Preston et al. (1981)
suggested that the link between wealth and health became stronger over the twentieth century. In
contrast, Ferrie (2003) found that socioeconomic status, especially wealth, was an important force
shaping the mortality rates experienced by Americans in the middle of nineteenth century, based on
a sample of the mortality schedules of the 1850 and 1860 censuses. Lee (2003) found that wealth
had a significant positive effect on the health of Union Army recruits while in service.
3

passed the medical examination were presumably in relatively good health at the time of
enlistment. Illnesses and injuries while in service were purely unpredicted events prior to
enlistment. These features of the data provide an ideal setting to analyze the influence of
health on economic mobility. Finally, the Union Army data allow a rare chance to examine
the association between health and economic mobility at relatively young ages. Studies
based on today’s data are largely concerned with individuals at middle and older ages, in
part because there are relatively small variations in health among the young. But due to the
extremely varied wartime experiences of the recruits, the Union Army data allow us to
observe substantial disparities in health at younger ages.
This study is related to a number of important issues in the fields of labor and health
economics, economic history, and medicine, such as determinants of economic mobility,
economic effects of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), and economic costs of the
Civil War. Studies on economic mobility in the nineteenth century are abundant, especially
for individuals from particular ethnicities and geographical locations (Thernstrom 1973,
Kearl and Pope 1986, Galenson and Pope 1989, Herscovici 1993, 1998, Conley and
Galenson 1998, Ferrie 1999). As determinants of economic mobility, various human capital
attributes such as age, literacy, race, length of residence, and nativity, have been employed.
By considering the role of health, another important dimension of human capital, this study
will broaden the understanding of this subject.
Measuring wartime stress and following upon its subsequent effects on health and
mortality is an important issue in medical and epidemiological studies (Archibald and
Tuddenham 1965, Beebe 1975, Berg and Richlin 1977, Dent et al. 1989, Goulston et al.
1985, Hearst, Newman, and Hulley 1986, Nefzger 1970, Lund et al. 1984, Smith et al. 1987,
Spaulding 1977, Sutker el al. 1991, Ursano 1990). Since stress is not directly observable,
previous studies have developed an index to proxy the severity of wartime experiences. As
will be addressed below, the measures of combat exposure available from the Union Army
service records are much wider in range and more detailed in characterization than those
4

that have been employed in previous studies. For instance, company-level variables, such
as the casualty rate of a particular company, can be constructed from the data. The richness
of these data makes possible an improved measure of wartime stress. Although there is a
voluminous literature on the effect of veteran status on measures of economic performance
(Taussig 1974, DeTray 1982, Berger and Hirsch 1983, Schwartz 1986 Angrist 1990), little
is known about how the extent of wartime stress or particular wartime events affected later
economic mobility. This study will fill this gap in the literature.
Finally, this study will significantly alter our understanding of the economic costs of
the Civil War. Where previous studies have mainly focused on the damages during the war
itself (Goldin and Lewis 1975), my analysis of the Union Army data takes into account, in
the estimation of human and physical losses, the persistent effects of military service on
economic mobility of Union Army veterans after the war. In addition, where previous
studies paid attention exclusively to the aggregate impact of the war, this study provides
new micro-evidence on how the costs of the war were allocated across different populations
and what the mechanisms of such allocations were.

2. Data
This article is based on a sample of the several primary data sources that were
collected and linked as part of the project titled “Early Indicators of Later Work Levels,
Disease, and Death” (referred to as the EI project, hereafter) jointly sponsored by the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the National Institutes of Health, the Center for
Population Economics at the University of Chicago, and Brigham Young University. The
original population from which the sample used in this study was drawn is composed of
28,546 recruits who enlisted in the states of Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas,
Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New
Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Vermont, West Virginia, and the District of
Columbia. These recruits have been linked to various data sources, such as military service
5

records, pension records, and records from the 1850, 1860, 1900, and 1910 censuses.4
The service records contain very detailed descriptions of the diseases or wounds
that recruits suffered during military service. As soon as a recruit was too ill to report for
duty, his condition was noted in morning reports. If his condition required medical attention,
it was recorded in the regimental surgeon’s report; if he was hospitalized, the diagnosis of
the disease was described in the case history together with the ultimate outcome, such as
return to service, discharge for disabilities, or death (U.S. Surgeon General’s Office 1870,
vol. 1). Information on disease and wounds, which was used in measuring health of recruits,
was gathered from these sources. Military service records provide information on the
demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of recruits prior to enlistment, including
age, occupation, place of birth, and height, and military career, including rank, military duty,
company, regiment, change in military status, dates of enlistment and discharge, and so on.
Variables on occupation prior to military service, nativity, age, year of enlistment, and death
rates of each company that were used as either measures or determinants of economic
mobility or indexes of wartime stress came from these records.
For the purpose of examining the patterns of economic mobility shortly after the
Civil War, 4397 recruits were located in, and linked to, the manuscript schedules of the
1870 population census. The recruits selected for the search met the following criteria: First,
they were known to be alive when the 1870 census was enumerated, or information on their
death dates was not available. Second, they enlisted in a state or district for which an index
of the 1870 census is available, such as the District of Columbia, Delaware, Iowa, Kansas,
Maine, Minnesota, Missouri, Ohio, and West Virginia. The second criterion for the sample
selection is employed to reduce the costs of data collection. The information contained in
pension and military records that had been already linked to the sample of recruits were
4

See Fogel (1993, 2000a, 2000b, 2001) and Wimmer (2003) for more detailed explanations of the
EI Project and data produced from the project. The data sets collected and linked as part of this
project can be obtained from the web site of the Center for Population Economics
(http://www.cpe.uchicago.edu).
6

utilized in locating the selected recruits in manuscript census. As a result of the linkage
process, 1,863 veterans (42.4% of those who were searched) were successfully linked to the
1870 census. Of these veterans, 1,097 men (58.8%) were connected to the 1860 census.
Census records provide additional information on socioeconomic structure and on
household structure prior to and shortly after the military service of recruits. These contain
information on age, occupation, place of birth, personal and real estate wealth, place of
residence, and literacy, not only for recruits themselves but also for other household
members. Among the variables required for this study, wealth and place of residence at the
town level prior to enlistment are found only in the 1860 census. Therefore, I limit the
sample to the 1,097 recruits who were linked to both the 1860 and 1870 censuses whenever
wealth or town of residence is concerned.
As can be expected from the nature of the data linkage process, the sample linked
to the 1870 census is a severely selected sub-sample of the entire Union Army sample.
Table 1 compares some key characteristics of recruits between the entire and selected
samples. A comparison of the first and second columns of the table shows that the sample
of 4,397 persons who were searched in the 1870 census is much different from the entire
sample in terms of geographical and occupational compositions. In particular, recruits from
the West North Central region (55%) are heavily overrepresented in the sample searched in
the 1870 census. On the other hand, recruits from the Mid Atlantic and East North Central
regions account for, respectively, 9% and 20% of the sub-sample, much lower than their
original shares (35% and 42%, respectively). The percentage of farmers and tenants (59%)
is also much higher for the sample searched in the 1870 census than the entire sample
(49%), primarily due to the overrepresentation of the recruits from the Mid West and the
lower rate of migration of farmers. Other characteristics are generally similar between the
two samples.
Additional sample selections occurred in the course of linking the sample of 4,397
men to the 1870 census. The second and third columns of Table 1 present the differences
7

between the sample searched and the sub-sample linked to the 1870 census. In addition, a
logistic regression was conducted to examine the correlates of probability of successful
linkage to the 1870 census, using the variables included in Table 1. The most powerful
predictor of a successful linkage is whether a recruit is linked to pension records. Recruits
who were linked to pension records were nearly four times as likely to be found in the 1870
census as those who were not connected to pension data. Since pension records provide
useful information, especially on place of residence, that helps to locate and identify
persons in manuscript schedules of censuses, it is an anticipated pattern of sample selection.
Persons whose death dates are known are twice as likely to be linked to the 1870 census
than those whose death dates are unknown, even after controlling for the status of linkage
with pension records, the primary source of death dates. This result suggests that some
recruits whose death dates are unknown may have been dead by 1870, and, therefore, were
not at risk to be found in the 1870 census. Also, recruits who were found in the 1870 census
were more likely to be U.S.-born, to be farmers, to reside in either the West North Central
region or the South, and to have wartime medical experiences than those not linked to the
1870 census.5
Since the information from pension records was used in locating the veterans in the
1870 census, the sample used here is subject to additional bias problems. Recruits who got
on the pension rolls early (those who were severely injured or sick while in service) could
be more likely to be linked to the 1870 census, owing to the information on place of
residence around 1870. On the other hand, the majority of veterans got on the pension rolls

5

The overrepresentation of the U.S. born and greater disease cases among the recruits who were
linked to the 1870 census can be explained in part by their higher linkage rate to pension records.
Immigrants were less likely to be found in pension records because many foreigners who died
during the early postwar years had no eligible dependents or were used behind the front and so were
less likely to incur war-related disabilities (Fogel 1993). Army veterans with health problems
originating from military service were more likely to apply for and receive pensions because early
pension laws required such conditions. Therefore, it is not surprising that recruits who were
connected to census records present more severe medical experiences while in service.
8

after 1890, when the eligibility condition for pensions was relaxed.6 Therefore, both the
very sick, who began to receive pensions early and the very healthy,

who received

pensions late, could be overrepresented in the present sample. If this is the case, the effect
of wartime experiences on wealth accumulation, estimated below, could be biased upward,
because two extreme cases are compared. To see if veterans who got on the pension roll
early and those who got late are overrepresented in the sample linked to the 1870 census, I
compare the percentage distribution of the timing of the first pension application for
veterans who were wounded while in service and those who were not between the full
sample searched and the selected sample linked to the 1870 census. Figure 1 shows that the
pattern of the difference in the timing of pension applications between injured veterans and
those not wounded was similar for the full sample and the linked sample. This suggests that
the potential bias problem explained above may not be too serious.
In sum, the sample used in this study is a biased sample that overrepresents the
native and agricultural population in the Mid West. Therefore, the extent and patterns of
wealth accumulation between 1860 and 1870 found in this study may not convey a general
experience of the Union Army at large, let alone the entire northern population. However, it
is not likely that the present sample will produce a serious bias in the relationship between
wartime medical experiences and wealth accumulation, the main focus of this study. In
spite of the potential selection bias, therefore, a careful use of the sample provides a rare
opportunity to examine the effects of various health problems while in service and the
extent of wartime stress on wealth accumulation in the nineteenth century.

3. Measuring Health
Military service during the Civil War seriously damaged the health of recruits who
survived the war. As presented in Table 2, a quarter of the recruits were injured, and nearly

6

For the evolution of the Union Army pension laws, see Costa (1998) and Glasson (1918).
9

three-quarters of the veterans suffered various illnesses at least once while in service.
Wartime illnesses were mainly caused by infectious diseases, although some chronic
conditions such as rheumatism and hernia were also prevalent. Diarrhea was the most
common disease in the army camp, contracted by 30% of the recruits in the sample,
followed by malaria (19%), respiratory infections such as pneumonia and bronchitis (7%),
measles (6%), and typhoid (4%). The unusually high rates of disease contraction were due
to the peculiar nature of the army camp, in which a large number of men from
heterogeneous socioeconomic and ecological backgrounds were confined in an extremely
unhealthy environment.
Many of the recruits who contracted infectious diseases while in service, if they
survived, probably recovered from the illnesses rather quickly, even before they were
discharged from their service. However, the damage caused by those acute diseases may
have had persistent influences on their later health. Studies have found that infectious
diseases affect the odds of suffering chronic conditions such as heart, respiratory, and
musculoskeletal disorders at older ages (Elo and Preston 1992, Costa 2000). I use dummy
variables indicating whether a veteran experienced a particular type of wound or disease as
well as wounds and illnesses in general as a measure of health.
Measurement of health based on wartime medical experiences requires an attention
to omitted variables pertaining to the recruit’s health status prior to enlistment. Simple
models using variables on wartime traumatic events such as injury and illness as indexes of
health assume that the probability of being wounded or contracting disease was unrelated to
individual characteristics of the recruits. But the probability of being wounded or
contracting disease was by no means equal for all recruits. It was determined in part by
factors that we might consider exogenous, such as the battle experience of the company in
which a recruit served. It was also determined by factors that reflect individual
characteristics, some observable and some not. For example, taller and more robust men
were more likely to be placed near the front lines where wounds were more likely. Men
10

who were ill in hospital were not at risk for battle wounds. If individual-specific
determinants of the probability of being wounded are also determinants of subsequent
health, the estimated effect of the stress of being wounded will be biased.
This potential association between individual characteristics and wartime events is
clearly seen in Table 3, which reports the effects of recruits’ personal characteristics on their
medical experiences while in service and military positions. Former farmers and rural
residents, who were healthier on average prior to enlistment thanks to greater isolation from
other people, were more susceptible to disease and were more likely to die from diseases
they contracted than nonfarmers and urban dwellers (Table 3, columns 1 and 3).7 Native
recruits were subject to a greater risk of illness than were foreigners, who had had more
chances of exposure to infectious disease in the course of immigration. The different degree
of immunity against pathogens is probably the most important link between the extent of
exposure to disease prior to enlistment and health while in service. That is, survivors of
unhealthy environments developed better immunity to some of the infectious diseases that
were rampant in the army (Lee 1997, 2003).
The probabilities of being wounded and of dying from a wound while in service
were not so strongly affected by individual characteristics as were the odds of contracting
and dying from diseases. As noted above, however, taller recruits were significantly more
likely to be killed by injury while in service. Military position, such as rank, duty, and
company, was another important determinant of the extent of risk in military service. For
instance, men who were assigned a non-infantry duty or who held a higher rank were less
likely to die while in service than, respectively, infantrymen and privates. Assignment of
military positions was, again, strongly affected by age, height, occupation, place of
residence, household wealth, and nativity (Table 3, columns 5 and 6). For example,
nonfarmers and natives were significantly more likely to be appointed to a higher rank, and
7

Lee (2003) also found that recruits from a county with a higher child death rate were less likely to
contract disease than those from a low-mortality county.
11

to be assigned to a non-infantry duty than were, respectively, farmers and foreigners. Also,
the chances of being assigned a higher rank were greater for taller or wealthier recruits than
for shorter or poorer persons. This relationship is explained by a match between the quality
and type of skills recruits obtained prior to enlistment and the requirements for particular
military positions (Lee 1999).8
In general, stressful wartime events such as wounds and illnesses are positively
correlated with superior health and productivity prior to enlistment, which, again, would be
positively associated with wealth accumulation after military service. Therefore, simple
models using the variables on wartime events as stress measures would induce a downward
bias in estimating the effect of wartime experiences on subsequent savings. The most
straightforward solution is to this problem is to employ instrumental variable regression.
Specific wartime events undergone by individuals can be modeled as functions of
exogenous variables which are correlated with the extent of wartime stress, but not with
unobservable individual characteristics that affect economic mobility. Then the predicted
probability of the event, rather than the actual events, could be used to construct indexes of
wartime stress.
A company-level variable, such as the casualty rate of a particular company, is a
good candidate for an instrument. Enlistees in the same company shared common
experiences from training to discharge. Residents of a town were often recruited to the
same company, sent to the same battle ground, and fought side by side. Consequently, all
individuals in a particular company were exposed to a similar level of stress. On the other
hand, the company mortality rate, especially from wounds, was only weakly correlated with
individual characteristics. According to the regression results reported in Table 3, natives
and nonfarmers living in rural areas tended to serve in companies with a higher injury8

Lee (1999) suggested that higher-rank positions in the Union Army tended to be filled by
individuals with better human capital attributes that would be useful for making a good officer. A
military duty requiring particular skills was more likely to be given to a person possessing similar
skills thanks to his occupation prior to enlistment.
12

caused mortality compared to, respectively, foreigners and farmers.9 However, the average
differences in the company mortality between natives and immigrants and between
nonfarmers dwelling in rural areas and farmers were small (1% and 0.3% respectively).
The first row of Table 4 presents several characteristics of recruits who served in
companies with particular rates of death from wounds. It suggests that the degree of
wartime stress undergone by recruits greatly varied across different companies. Twenty-two
percent of the recruits in the sample served in companies in which not a single person was
killed in action. In contrast, nearly 11% of the recruits fought in a company in which more
than 10% of enlisted men died from wounds. Some recruits in the former category
belonged to militia units formed exclusively from men of their locality and never saw battle.
Many of them were recruited (and released) before the major battles or after Lee’s surrender,
as indicated by the short average length of service (1.2 years), and thus escaped not only the
stress of combat but even a substantial threat of exposure to combat (Hamersly 1888).
These 22% of recruits are clearly distinct from others in terms of the proportion of recruits
who suffered from illnesses while in service (46% compared to 72% for the entire sample)
and the average rate of company mortality from illness (5.3% in contrast to 10% for the
entire sample). 10 Although the wartime experiences of those 22% of recruits were
apparently more favorable than those of the rest of the recruits, the relationship between the
company mortality rate from wound and other company casualty rates, such as mortality
from illness and discharge because of wounds or illness, does not appear to be linear. This
9

It is unclear why native farmers were more likely to be enlisted in higher-risk companies than
nonfarm immigrants. A possible explanation is that they were (or were viewed as) more loyal to the
Union in comparison with nonnatives from cities (Lee 1999). Many foreigners in the North were
lukewarm or hostile to the entire war effort, especially those who perceived it as an unnecessary
crusade to free slaves (Murdock 1964, Vinovskis 1990). Those who participated in draft resistance
or evasion during the Civil War were often characterized as lower-class immigrants, living in cities
and allied with Democratic politicians (Lavine 1981). A commanding officer, when sending a unit
to a dangerous mission, would have chosen a company composed of more reliable recruits to reduce
the risk of desertion.
10
In this sense, recruits who served in companies with no deaths from injury may be used as a
control group where the effect of participation in the Civil War on economic mobility is examined.
13

suggests that recruits who were exposed to bloody combat, regardless of how often, were
subject to a higher level of stress than those who did not experience any serious battle.
Other candidates for valid instruments are the year and month of enlistment. The
severity of wartime experiences of recruits heavily depended upon the year of enlistment.
As presented in Table 4, the earlier a person entered the army the greater the probabilities
of getting wounded and of suffering from illnesses. This is mainly due to the fact that
earlier enlistees served longer on average as the war lasted long enough for them to finish
their three-year term. In addition, the difficulties of military missions and the disease
environment changed year to year.
The chances of contracting diseases and being wounded while in service also
differed remarkably by the month of enlistment. The wartime casualty rate was particularly
severe among recruits who enlisted in summer. In contrast, recruits who joined the army in
spring or winter fared relatively well. Again, the difference in the average length of service
is a major explanation for the seasonal disparity in the casualty rates. Summer enlistees
served the longest term (two and a half years), while those who enlisted in spring served the
shortest (less than ten months). This is because most recruits who enrolled in the Union
Army in 1861 enlisted shortly after Lincoln’s call for 42,000 three-year army volunteers on
May 3, and Congress’ authorization of another one million three-year volunteers in June
(McPherson 1988, chapter 10). Another explanation, especially for the high rate of illness
among those who enlisted in June through August, is the particularly strong influences of
infectious diseases in summer. It is documented in the medical histories of the Civil War
that the earlier seasoning period in the army was most critical for the survival of recruits.
During this period enlistees with limited prior development of immunity were exposed to a
pool of infectious diseases in the army (Steiner 1968). Therefore, it would be more
dangerous to be first confined to the unhealthy army environment in summer when various
infectious diseases were rampant.
Visible medical experiences are not the only indicators of the extent of health
14

damages suffered by veterans who fought in a bloody war. It has been reported that PostTraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was widespread and severe among the veterans who
served in Vietnam and the Civil War (Dean, Jr. 1997). Since stress is not directly observable,
it is necessary to develop an index to proxy the severity of wartime experiences. Most
previous studies have used a single wartime event as an index, such as being wounded in
combat, fired upon in combat, stationed in a combat zone, and being captured by enemy.
Epidemiologists studying PTSD in contemporary veterans reported that suffering these
events had persistent and statistically significant effects on the later mortality and morbidity
of veterans who fought in World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War (Archibald
and Tuddenham 1965, Beebe 1975, Berg and Richlin 1977a-d, Dent et al. 1989, Goulston et
al. 1985, Hearst, Newman, and Hulley 1986, Nefzger 1970, Smith et al. 1987, Spaulding
1977, Sutker el al. 1991, Ursano 1990). Based on a sample of Union Army veterans, Costa
(1993) found that imprisonment by the enemy, being wounded, and being discharged for
injury or illness significantly increased the risk that veterans who survived to 1890 would
die between the ages of 55 and 77.
Based on the above results, I use below the following indexes as measures of
wartime stress and insults to health caused by war. First, the company mortality from
wounds is employed as an index of wartime stress. Considering the particularly favorable
wartime experiences of the recruits who served in companies with no deaths from injury,
and the nonlinear relationship between the injury-caused mortality and other measures of
casualties, I use a set of four dummy variables representing particular rates of death from
injury: (1) zero (2) 3% or less (3) 3% to 5%, and (4) more than 5% (denoted as “Co wound
mortality 1-4”). Second, I use simple dummy variables on wartime medical events. The
wartime events considered here include wounds in general, five types of wound by location,
illnesses in general, and 10 particular diseases that were common among Union Army
recruits, including typhoid, smallpox, measles, diarrhea, respiratory infections, malaria,
tuberculosis, rheumatism, syphilis, and hernia. Finally, to address the issue of the omitted
15

variable problem, I estimate the probabilities of particular wartime events predicted by
several instrumental variables, including polynomials of the company mortality from
wounds, dummy variables for the year and month of enlistment, and some combination of
the three instruments. The predicted probability of each event is used as an index of insults
to health while in service, corrected for the potential bias arising from omitted variables.
In addition to the variables on wartime experiences I add variables on height at the
time of enlistment as an indicator of the nutritional status of recruits. Since it is
inappropriate to compare the height of a recruit at a growing age with those who had
already gained their final stature, it is desirable to use an age-standardized measure of
height. Accordingly, I construct five dummy variables on height (Height 1 to Height 5),
each of which represents a quintile of the height distribution for a particular age. For age 18,
for example, recruits with heights from 64.5 inches to 67 inches were classified as the
fourth quintile; for age 19, recruits whose heights were 65 inches to 66.25 inches were
included in the same category. The height distribution by age was obtained from the entire
Union Army sample of about 35,000. To all recruits 23 and older, a single height
distribution was applied, assuming that height after age 23 remained unchanged.

4. Wartime Stress, Health, and Wealth Accumulation
The magnitude of wealth accumulation is a widely used measure of economic
mobility in the nineteenth century, along with occupational movement. Since wealth
acquisition captures changes in economic status within each category of occupations, it
provides an even more comprehensive yardstick of economic mobility. The literature on
wealth accumulation in the nineteenth century is voluminous. It has been established by
these studies that the age profile of wealth was inverse-U shaped, that duration of residence
in America or in a particular locality was positively related with the magnitude of wealth,
and that the size and pattern of wealth accumulation differed by ethnicity (Soltow 1975,
Kearl and Pope 1986, Pope 1989, Galenson and Pope 1989, Galenson 1991, Ferrie 1999).
16

To my knowledge, however, the effect of health, a potentially important element of wealth
mobility, has not been explored yet.
The accumulation of physical wealth of a person between two points in time can be
modeled as determined by (1) the initial stock of human capital (such as health, ability,
skills, and so on), (2) individual choice (such as occupational shift, geographical movement,
and family formation), (3) change in the value of wealth, and (4) luck (Kearl and Pope
1986). The adverse influences of wartime events are expected to have affected the size of
wealth accumulation of the Union Army veterans via two different paths, by directly
impairing their health, and by altering individual choices. Though not taken up in this paper,
I have examined how the combat exposure, wounds, and illnesses recruits experienced
while in service affected their subsequent economic choices through 1870 using the same
data. I found that that greater combat exposure, measured by the company mortality from
wounds, strongly reduced occupational mobility.11 The adverse effects of wartime stress
and medical events on geographical movement and family formation by 1870 do not appear
to be strong. The empirical analyses given in this section estimate the direct effects of
wartime events while in service on wealth accumulation between 1860 and 1870, after
controlling for occupational changes, geographical migration, and number of children, as
well as other personal characteristics. The results given below do not change much if the
variables on choice are excluded, which implies that the effect of health on wealth
accumulation is largely direct.
Table 5 presents the results of baseline regressions that examine the effects of
combat exposure measured by the company mortality from wounds, wounds, and illnesses
on wealth accumulation between 1860 and 1870. Exploiting the fact that both the 1860 and

11

I used three different measures of occupational mobility. First, I used the probability of not being
gainfully employed in 1870 to see if poor health prohibited veterans from labor force participation.
Second, I employed the probability that persons employed in unskilled occupations at the time of
enlistment moved up to farming, skilled, or white-collar occupations by 1870. Finally, I used the
rate of change in the estimated occupational income scores.
17

1870 censuses report personal and real estate wealth separately, three different measures of
wealth, namely, logarithms of total, personal, and real wealth, are used in the analysis.12 In
addition to the variables representing the health of recruits while in service, the following
control variables are included. First, to control for the initial wealth, the logarithms of the
1860 total, personal, and real wealth are included. In addition, the logarithm of the 1860
wealth held by other family members is added to consider the additions of wealth from
inheritance or gift. As indexes pertaining to the initial stock of human capital, I employ
variables on 1860 age, place of birth, ability to read and write, and height. I also include
variables on the region of residence at the time of enlistment and the size of town of
residence as of 1860 and 1870 to control for the potential variations in the conditions of
labor and property markets.
As controls for the choice of veterans, the following variables are included. First,
the number of children younger than age 10 and those 10 and older for 1860 and 1870 is
included to consider the effects of family size and structure. Presence of older children
would have a positive effect on wealth accumulation by providing additional family labor.
On the other hand, a large number of younger children could impede wealth accumulation
owing to more expenditures on children.13 In addition, dummy variables on geographical
mobility (same county, moved to a different county within the same state, and moved to a
different state) are added to capture the effect of migration on wealth. The effect of
geographical migration on wealth accumulation is ambiguous, even though it is more likely
that its net effect is negative at least in the short-term given the large cost associated with

12

For recruits who possessed no wealth, the log of wealth was given as zero.
It should be noted that in the analysis of wealth accumulation, variables on occupational shift,
geographical movement, and the number of children are subject to a potential endogeneity problem.
That is, for example, a wealthier person would be able to support more children, and spare a fund
for relocation. I do not attempt to address this issue here, because it is difficult to find an
instrumental variable to cure this problem, and the main concern of this study is to examine the
effects of wartime events on wealth accumulation.

13

18

relocation. Finally, dummy variables for occupational changes are included to account for
the effect of occupational change on wealth accumulation.14 Since a better occupation pays
more on average, it is expected that the extent of occupational mobility is positively
associated with wealth. If the cost of training required for a job switch is too large, however,
it is possible that occupational change diminished the size of wealth accumulation, at least
in the short-term.
The results suggest that combat exposure and wounds while in service had strong
negative effects on the total 1870 wealth, controlling for the total 1860 wealth and other
personal characteristics. On the other hand, illnesses in general had no significant effect on
wealth accumulation. The effects of wartime events are generally stronger for personal
wealth than for real wealth. For personal wealth, the effect of the company mortality from
wounds largely reflects the difference between the veterans who served in a company with
no single person killed in action and the rest who served in a company sent on more
dangerous missions. For real wealth, only those who served in the category of highestmortality companies had statistically significant disadvantages. The significant effect of
wounds on wealth is found only for personal wealth; its effect on real wealth is negative,

14

The identification of farmers at the time of enlistment is subject to errors; therefore, the extent of
occupational mobility suggested here could be biased to some extent. For recruits who were linked
to the 1860 census, the direction of bias is unclear. It is assumed in the above method that persons
who had real estate wealth in 1860 continued to possess wealth at the time of enlistment, which may
not be true. This tends to overstate the proportion of farmers, and understate the degree of
occupational mobility, because some cases of switching from tenant farmer to farmer will be
counted as no change in occupation. On the other hand, persons who owned no real estate wealth
are assumed to remain landless by the time of enlistment. Since some of these persons moved up to
self-employed farmers, this assumption will lead to an underestimation of the proportion of farmers
at the time of enlistment, and to an overstatement of the extent of occupational mobility. It is
unknown which type of bias is greater. For recruits who were not linked to the 1860 census, it is
likely that the extent of occupational mobility suggested here is subject to a downward bias. It is
implicitly assumed that farmers who possessed real wealth at the time of enlistment continued to do
so by 1870, and those without farm when entering the army also continued to do so by 1870. Given
that the direction of occupational mobility is upward on average, the above assumption will
overstate the share of self-employed farmers at the time of enlistment, and thus understate the extent
of mobility from tenant farmers to self-employed farmers.
19

too, but statistically insignificant.15
The effect of the 1860 other family wealth is small and statistically insignificant for
all three specifications, indicating that the influence of inheritance or gift was probably
unimportant. The coefficients on age and age squared show an inverse-U shaped age-wealth
profile, as is found in other studies on wealth accumulation.16 The total wealth of natives
was not significantly different from that of immigrants, controlling for other personal
characteristics. Illiteracy greatly hampered wealth accumulation, especially personal wealth.
The result for height weakly supports the findings of previous studies suggesting that
superior nutritional status is associated with greater productivity (Deolaiker 1988, Berhman
and Deolaiker 1989, Strauss and Thomas 1992). That is, taller persons, who belonged to the
top quintile, had significant advantages in total wealth accumulation. As for the regional
differences, veterans who lived in the North West Central and New England at the time of
enlistment acquired significantly more

real wealth than did others. The result for the size

of location suggests that the magnitude of wealth accumulation, real wealth in particular,
was significantly smaller for those who resided in urban areas in 1870 than the rest of the
veterans.
The number of children younger than age 10 in 1860 had a negative effect on both
types of wealth as of 1870, although it misses statistical significance by a small margin. It
probably reflects the influence of the cost required for raising children. In contrast, the
number of children younger than age 10 in 1870 had a strong positive effect on both types
of wealth. This relationship could be explained in terms of a wealth effect in choosing the
number of children. The presence of children age 10 and older had a positive effect on
wealth accumulation, but it is statistically significant only for personal wealth.

15

The particularly strong effect of health on personal wealth is largely due to the occupational
difference that will be discussed below. The impacts of wounds and exposure to combat on wealth
were especially powerful for unskilled workers for whom personal wealth was the major form of
savings.
16
Wealth peaked at age 31 for total wealth, 30 for personal wealth, and 33 for real wealth.
20

Geographical mobility was associated with a decrease in wealth accumulation. Longdistance migration, indicated by moving across a state border, had a much greater negative
effect on wealth than a shorter move to a different county within the same state, especially
for real estate wealth.
The results for dummy variables for occupational change between 1860 and 1870
suggest that veterans who were farmers either in 1860 or 1870 were wealthier in 1870 than
those who never became farmers. Secondly, veterans who were skilled workers in both
1860 and 1870 were wealthier than those who were unskilled workers either in 1860 and
1870. I also used another measure of occupational mobility, namely, the rate of change in
the estimated occupational income scores.17 The result of the alternative regression, not
reported here, shows a strong positive effect of occupational mobility on the 1870 wealth. If
the variable on occupational mobility is omitted from the regression, the size of the
coefficients on the company mortality slightly increases.18 It suggests that the degree of
combat exposure had a negative indirect effect on wealth

accumulation through

occupational mobility, but such an effect is relatively small. On the other hand, the
coefficient for wounds diminishes a bit if variables on occupational change are omitted. It
implies that occupational switch helped wounded veterans overcome their disadvantages to
some extent.
17

This score was estimated by Ferrie (1999) based on a regression with the natural log of real
estate wealth as the dependent variable and age, age squared, and age cubed, controls for region of
residence and size of location, along with dummy variables for 157 occupation titles, as regressors.
The coefficients on the occupational dummies, evaluated at age 30, were taken to represent
differences in income within three broad occupational classes: white collar, skilled, and unskilled.
These dummies were adjusted, taking into account the skill premia found by Goldin and Margo
(1992). See Ferrie (1999, Appendix D) for the detailed method of imputation and data on imputed
income scores. The occupation at enlistment as of 1870 was coded into the three-digit occupation
codes for the 1950 census (Bureau of Census 1950, Ruggles and Sobek 1998), and matched to the
occupational income socres.
18
The percentage change in the three dummy variables on the company mortality was 45% for the
lower-mortality companies (Co wound mortality 2) and 17% for the next category (Co wound
mortality). The coefficient for highest-mortality companies (Co wound mortality 4) remained
unchanged.
21

Table 6 reports the results of regressions in which more detailed classifications of
wounds and illnesses are employed. Regression coefficients for all other control variables
are excluded from the table to save the space. The results for these variables are similar to
the results reported in Table 5. Among wounds on various body parts, injuries to a leg or
foot had the most powerful negative effect on wealth accumulation. As in the case of
illnesses in general, specific diseases had no significant effects on wealth accumulation.
The only exception is diarrhea, which exerted a strong negative effect on total and personal
wealth accumulations.
To address the potential omitted variable problem that might produce an downward
bias in the effect of wartime medical events, especially diseases, on wealth accumulation, I
conducted instrumental variable estimations. As noted above, I use three instrumental
variables that are correlated with the probabilities of being injured and suffering from
illnesses while in service, but not related to the health of recruits prior to enlistment, namely,
the polynomials of the company mortality from wounds, year of enlistment, and month of
enlistment. I also use combinations of the three instruments. The predicted probabilities of
wartime events are highly correlated with each other. This is not too surprising because
these variables are all estimated based on the same set of instrumental variables. Since the
results of regression analyses that include these variables together as independent variables
exhibit symptoms of multicollinearity, I examine the effect of each wartime event one at a
time. Table 7 reports the regression coefficients for the variables for wartime events,
estimated from 85 regressions. The results for other variables, omitted from the table, are
generally similar to those reported in Table 5.
The results show that illnesses while in service had strong negative effects on
wealth accumulations if instrumental estimations are used. Although the magnitudes of
coefficients and the degree of significance vary depending on the choice of instrumental
variable, all four sets of instruments provide considerably consistent results. The
coefficients on illnesses in general are all statistically significant, with their magnitudes
22

ranging from -1.24 to -1.55. The results for specific diseases are less robust, but still exhibit
a considerable regularity in terms of statistical significance and relative size, especially for
more common diseases such as diarrhea (contracted by 30%), malaria (19%), and
rheumatism (10%). For instance, the coefficients for diarrhea are all significant for the four
specifications, with their sizes ranging from -1.62 to -2.20. Similarly, the coefficients for
malaria are all significant, with their magnitudes ranging from -1.71 to -3.32. Other specific
diseases whose impacts on wealth accumulation were significant for two or more
specifications include typhoid, measles, respiratory infections, tuberculosis, and syphilis.
According to the results, the magnitude of the loss of wealth caused by exposure to
combat, wounds, and illnesses while in service is large. Applying the estimated regression
coefficients reported in Table 5, I obtain a rough estimate of the decrease in wealth
accumulation caused by each wartime event, evaluated at the mean total 1870 wealth
($2052). First, men who served in a company that lost more than 5% of its men due to
injury would accumulate $1109, only 54% of the amount acquired by men enlisted in a
company with zero mortality from wounds.19 If the coefficient for the simple dummy
variable is taken, veterans who were injured while in service would have acquired $1418,
only two-thirds of the mean wealth for the entire sample used in the analysis.
Table 8 presents a summary of the results of regressions conducted separately for
three occupational categories, namely, farmers, white-collar and skilled workers, and
unskilled workers. 20 The results suggest that the impact of poor health on wealth
accumulation was quite different for men employed in different occupations. The wealth
losses caused by wartime medical and military experiences were more severe for veterans
19

The log of the mean total wealth as of 1870 was 7.6266. Assuming persons in the control group
(men who served in companies with no persons killed by injury) possessed the same amount of total
wealth, the mean total wealth of veterans who served in a company with the mortality from wounds
greater than 5% is calculated as 7.6266 – 0.6151 = 7.0115, which is $1109.
20
It would be useful to divide the non-farm occupations into white-collar and blue-collar
occupations. There are too few white-collar workers in the sample (less than 70) to conduct the
regression analysis separately for white-collar workers.
23

who were unskilled workers at the time of enlistment. The magnitudes of the negative
effects of wounds and the company mortality from wounds are much larger than the effects
found from the entire sample. In contrast, the wealth accumulations of white-collar and
skilled workers between 1860 and 1870 were not affected significantly by wounds or
combat exposure while in service. For farmers, wartime wounds had a relatively small
effect on wealth accumulations. If instrumental estimation is employed, wartime illnesses
greatly reduced wealth accumulations of white-collar and skilled workers, and manual
laborers. But farmers were not damaged much by illnesses. The particularly strong impacts
of wartime events found for the unskilled, for whom personal wealth was the major form of
savings, explains why health affected personal wealth more significantly in the results for
the entire sample (Table 5). The type of wounds or illnesses that affected wealth
accumulation also differed by occupation. For unskilled workers, the effect of leg and foot
injuries was particularly strong. For white-collar and skilled workers, on the other hand,
wounds to an arm or hand had a strong impact on wealth accumulation, although it misses
statistical significance by a small margin. For farmers, unclassified wounds caused the
largest damage.
A possible explanation for the occupational differences in the impact of health on
wealth accumulations is the difference in the type of human capital required for each job.
It is likely that wartime wounds and combat exposure damaged the physical attributes of
veterans’ human capital such as functional abilities and physical strength rather than their
skills or knowledge. Therefore, the economic impacts of wartime medical experiences
should be greater for persons employed in manual jobs than those engaged in occupations
that require non-physical human capital.
Another hypothesis is that farmers, white-collar workers, and the skilled had
advantages over unskilled workers in coping with physical damages because they were
more likely to be self-employed and to initially possess wealth. Thanks to the greater job
flexibility allowed by self-employment, it would be easier for them to adjust the type and
24

intensity of work according to their health conditions.21 Farmers, for example, would be
able to adjust the amount of work by modifying acreage or crop mix. Also, they could
utilize the service of family members or hire farm laborers. It is not likely that unskilled
laborers had such options.

5. Conclusions and Further Implications
This study has explored how the wartime stress and health of Union Army recruits
while in service affected their wealth accumulation through 1870, based on a sample of
men successfully linked to military records and the manuscript schedules of the 1860 and
1870 censuses. This study, relying on the data from the past, has several advantages over
other studies on the relationship between health and economic performances based on
modern data. First, we are able to mitigate the potential endogeneity problem arising from
the fact that current health is in part influenced by past economic status because economic
conditions at different ages are to an extent correlated. It is also because health was less
influenced by economic status in the past than today because there were less medical
interventions to purchase, and because the wartime experiences enable us to isolate
unanticipated changes in health. Secondly, the data used in this study allow a rare chance to
examine the association between health and economic mobility at relatively young ages.
I use the following indexes as measures of wartime stress and insults to health
caused by war. First, I use the company mortality from injury, which reflects
experiences shared by enlistees in the same company from training to discharge. Second, I
use dummy variables on wartime medical events such as wounds and illnesses in general,
five types of wounds by location, and ten particular diseases that were common among

21

Older farmers in the past postponed the timing of retirement by adjusting the amount and
intensity of their work in accordance with changes in their health and economic needs (Pedersen
1950). This flexibility of farming was one reason why the labor force participation rate of older
males in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was higher for farmers than for
nonfarmers (Lee 2002).
25

Union Army recruits, including typhoid, smallpox, measles, diarrhea, respiratory infections,
malaria, tuberculosis, rheumatism, syphilis, and hernia. One difficulty of using these
wartime events as determinants of economic mobility is that the odds of suffering these
events were influenced by personal characteristics of recruits pertaining to their health. In
particular, recruits from healthier environments were more likely to contract diseases, and
taller persons were at a higher risk of being wounded. Therefore, the variables on wartime
events are subject to a bias arising from omitted variables pertaining to the health of
recruits that are correlated with both the probability of undergoing wartime medical events
and economic mobility. I address this problem using several instrumental variables, such as
the company mortality from wounds, year of enlistment, and month of enlistment, which
are uncorrelated with the health prior to enlistment but correlated with the risk of suffering
wounds or illnesses while in service. Consequently, the probability of each wartime event
predicted by instrumental variables was used as the third index of insults to health while in
service.
Veterans who served in a company that underwent more dangerous military
missions acquired much less wealth, especially personal wealth, than those enlisted into a
company with a lower casualty rate. For instance, men who fought in a company that lost at
least 5% of its men due to injury would accumulate only 54% of the amount acquired by
men who entered a company with zero mortality from wounds. Wounds while in service
also had a strong negative effect on wealth accumulation. In contrast, simple dummy
variables for illnesses in general as well as ten particular diseases had no significant effects
on wealth accumulation. If instrumental variable estimation is employed, however, illnesses
while in service turned out to have greatly diminished

wealth accumulation. Many

particular diseases, especially diarrhea, malaria, rheumatism, and tuberculosis, also had
strong negative impacts on wealth accumulation. The influences of wartime medical and
military experiences were particularly strong for unskilled workers compared to farmers
and skilled workers.
26

The results of this study suggest that health was a powerful determinant of
economic mobility in the nineteenth century. It is particularly revealing that infectious
diseases such as diarrhea, malaria, and tuberculosis exerted strong influences on

wealth

accumulation. It is well documented that infectious diseases affect the probability of
suffering chronic conditions such as heart, respiratory, and musculoskeletal disorder at
middle or older ages (Elo and Preston 1992, Costa 2000). The present study adds to this
literature that the adverse influences of infectious diseases could come out at relatively
young ages in the form of reduced productivity.
Also the results provided here suggest that the decline in the prevalence rate of
various infectious diseases would have brought a large saving of economic costs arising
from poor health. According to the estimate reported in Table 7, for instance, a 10%
increase in the probability of contracting malaria was associated with a 22% decline in total
wealth on average, if evaluated at the mean wealth. Even if the lowest estimate is applied,
the economic benefits of reducing the prevalence rate of malaria should have still been
substantial, 13% of the average wealth. If the effect of the decline in all infectious diseases
is combined, the economic gains from the improvement of the disease environment would
have been enormous.
This paper also suggests that the direct economic costs of the Civil War were much
greater than has previously been thought. Goldin and Lewis (1975) estimated that the dollar
amount of human losses arising from deaths and wounds was $1.3 billion for Union
soldiers and $945 million for Confederate troops, accounting for 37% and 28% of the total
direct costs of the Civil War for the North and the South, respectively.22 It should be noted
that more than two-thirds of recruits succumbed to disease while in the service, while about
20% of soldiers were wounded. If this estimate is correct, therefore, it understates the entire

22

These costs include $955 million for 360,000 Union soldiers killed, $365 million for 275,175
Union soldiers wounded, $684 million for 258,000 Confederate troops killed, and $261 million for
197,000 Confederate troops wounded.
27

direct costs because the economic losses due to degraded health of the recruits who
survived the war without being wounded are not considered.
A rough estimate of the wealth losses of Union Army veterans who survived the war
can be given as follows. Suppose that the recruits who served in a company in which no
one was killed by injury while in service were similar to those who did not join the army in
terms of the size of wealth accumulation. The underlying assumption is that these 20% of
recruits were not damaged by military service at all. The regression coefficient on the
dummy variable of the company mortality from wounds (-0.55) suggests that individuals
who served in the army during the war accumulated $868 less by 1870 than those who did
not join the army. The present value of wealth losses caused by participating in the war as
of 1861 in 1861 dollars is about $408, if the discount rate is assumed to be 6%.23 If this
estimate is regarded as a per capita loss for about 1.8 million Union Army recruits who
survived the war, the total economic losses caused by wartime damages to health for the
North is $734 million, more than twice as large as the $365 million, cost of wartime
wounds estimated by Goldin and Lewis (1975). This amount is probably a lower bound
estimate of the economic costs of health problems caused by the war for the following
reasons. First, it only considers the wealth losses through 1870. If the adverse economic
impacts of wartime experiences lasted longer, their lifetime costs would have been even
larger. Second, the economic performances of veterans who served in a company with no
deaths from wounds were presumably not as good as those who did not serve in the army,
as assumed above, because they also were exposed to diseases and wartime stress to some
extent.

23

The choice of the discount rate of 6% comes from Goldin and Lewis (1975). The consumer price
index used for converting 1870 dollars into 1861 dollars is 27 for 1861 and 38 for 1870 (U.S.
Bureau of the Census 1975, E135). The present value of the losses evaluated in 1861 was calculated
by discounting the estimated value by 1/(1.06).9
28

References
Angrist, J. 1990. “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from
Social Security Administrative Records, American Economic Review 80, 313-336.
Archibald H. C., and Tuddenham, R. D. 1965. “Persistent Stress: Reaction after Combat,”
Archives of General Psychiatry 12, 475-81.
Attanasio, O. P., and H. W. Hoynes. 2000. “Differential Mortality and Wealth
Accumulation,” Journal of Human Resources 35, 1-29.
Beebe, Gilbert W. 1975. “Follow-up Studies of World War II and Korean War Prisoners, II:
Morbidity, Disability, and Maladjustments,” American Journal of Epidemiology 101, 400422.
Behrman J.R., and A.B. Deolaliker. 1989. “Agricultural Wages in India: The Role of Health,
Nutrition, and Seasonality,” In D. Sahn, ed., Seasonal Variability in Third World Agriculture.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 107-17.
Berg, S. William and Milton Richlin. 1977a. “Injuries and Illnesses of Vietnam War POWs,
I. Navy POWs,” Military Medicine 143, Jul., 514-517.
Berg, S. William and Milton Richlin. 1977b. “Injuries and Illnesses of Vietnam War POWs,
II. Army POWs,” Military Medicine 143, Aug., 598-602.
Berg, S. William and Milton Richlin. 1977c. “Injuries and Illnesses of Vietnam War POWs,
III. Marine Corps POWs,” Military Medicine 143, Sept., 678-679.
Berg, S. William and Milton Richlin. 1977d. “Injuries and Illnesses of Vietnam War POWs,
IV. Comparison of Captivity Effects in North and South Vietnam,” Military Medicine 143,
Oct., 757-761.
Berger, M., and B. T. Hirsch. 1983. “The Civilian Earnings Experience of Vietnam Era

29

Veterans,” Journal of Human Resources 18, 455-479.
Bodnar, J. 1985. The Transplanted: A History of Immigrants in Urban America,
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Conley, T. G., and D. W. Galenson. 1998. “Nativity and Wealth in Mid-Nineteenth-Century
Cities,” Journal of Economic History 58, 468-493.
Costa D. L. 1993. “Health, Weight, Wartime Stress, and Older Age Mortality: Evidence
from Union Army Records,” Explorations in Economic History 30, 424-49.
________. 1998. Evolution of Retirement, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
________. 2000. “Understanding the Twentieth-Century Decline in Chronic Conditions
among Older Men,” Demography 37, 53-72.
Dent, Owen F., B. Richardson, S. Wilson, K. Goulston and C. Murdoch. 1989. “Postwar
Mortality among Australian World War II Prisoners of the Japanese,” Medical Journal of
Australia 150, 378-382.
Dean, E. C. Jr., Shook over Hell: Post-Traumatic Stress, Vietnam, and the Civil War,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Deolaliker, A. B. 1988. “Do Health and Nutrition Influence Labor Productivity in
Agriculture? Econometric Estimates for Rural India,” Review of Economics and Statistics
70, 406-413.
DeTray, D. N. 1982. “Veteran Status as a Screening Device,” American Economic Review
72, 133-142.
Elo, I. T., and S. H. Preston. 1992. Effects of Early-Life Conditions on Adult Mortality: A
Review,” Population Index 58, 186-212.

30

Ettner, S. 1996. “New Evidence on the Relationship between Income and Health,” Journal
of Health Economics 15, 67-85.
Ferrie, J. P. 1999. Yankeys Now, New York: Oxford University Press.
Figley C. R. 1977. “Symptoms of Delayed Combat Stress among a College Sample of
Vietnam Veterans,” Military Medicine 143, 107-10.
Fogel R. W. 1993. “New Sources and New Techniques for the Study of Secular Trends in
Nutritional Status, Health, and Mortality, and the Process of Aging,” Historical Methods 26,
5-44.
_________. 2000a. Public Use Tape on the Aging of the Veterans of the Union Army Data
User’s Manual: Military, Pension, and Medical Records 1820-1940, Version M-5, Center
for Population Economics, University of Chicago and Department of Economics, Brigham
Young University.
_________. 2000b. Public Use Tape on the Aging of the Veterans of the Union Army Data
User’s Manual: U.S. Federal Census Records 1850, 1860, 1900, 1910, Version C-3, Center
for Population Economics, University of Chicago and Department of Economics, Brigham
Young University.
_________. 2001. Public Use Tape on the Aging of the Veterans of the Union Army Data
User’s Manual: Surgeon’s Certificates 1862-1940, Version S-1 Standardized, Center for
Population Economics, University of Chicago and Department of Economics, Brigham
Young University.
Foy D. W., D. B. Rueger, R. C. Sipprelle, and E. H. Carroll. 1984, “Etiology of Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder in Vietnam Veterans: Analysis of Premilitary, Military, and
Constant Exposure Influences. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 52, 79-87.
Frye, J. S., and R. A. Stockton. 1982, “Discriminant Analysis of Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder among a Group of Vietnam Veterans. American Journal of Psychiatry 139: 52-56.

31

Galenson, D. W. 1991, “Economic Opportunity on the Urban Frontier: Nativity, Work, and
Wealth in Early Chicago, Journal of Economic History 51, 581-603.
Galenson, D. W., and C. Pope. 1989. “Economic and Geographic Mobility on the Farming
Frontier: Evidence from Appanoose County, Iowa, 1850-1870,” Journal of Economic
History 49, 635-55.
Glasson, W. H. 1918. Federal Military Pensions in the United States. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Geary, J. W. 1991. We Need Men: The Union Draft in the Civil War. Dekalb: Northern
Illinois University Press.
Goldin, C. D., and F. D. Lewis. 1975. “The Economic Cost of the American Civil War:
Estimates and Implication,”. Journal of Economic History 35, 299-326.
Goldin, C. D., and R. Margo. 1992. “Wages, Prices, and Labor Markets Before the Civil
War,” In C. Goldin and H Rockoff, eds., Strategic Factors in Nineteenth Century American
Economic History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goulston, Kerry J. et al. 1985. “Gastrointestinal Morbidity among World War II Prisoners
of War: 40 Years On,” Medical Journal of Australia 143, 6-10.
Hamersly, T. H. S. 1888. Complete Army and Navy Register of the United States of America,
from 1776 to 1887. New York: THS Hammersly, pub.
Hearst, N, T. B. Newman, and S. B. Hulley. 1986. “Delayed Effects of the Military Draft on
Mortality: A Randomized Natural Experiment,” New England Journal of Medicine 314,
620-624.
Herscovici, S. 1993. “The Distribution of Wealth in Nineteenth-Century Boston: Inequality
among Natives and Immigrants, 1860. Explorations in Economic History 30, 321-55.

32

___________. 1998. “Migration and Economic Mobility: Wealth Accumulation and
Occupational Change among Antebellum Migrants and Persisters, Journal of Economic
History 58, 927-956.
Kearl, J. R., and C. Pope. 1986. “Choices, Rents, and Luck: Economic Mobility of
Nineteenth-Century Utah Households, In S. Engerman, and R. Gallman, eds., Long-term
factors in American economic growth. Chicago: Chicago Univ. Press, 215-260.
Kemp, T. R. 1990. “Community and War: The Civil War Experience of Two New
Hampshire Towns. In Vinovskis, M. A. ed., Toward A Social History of the American Civil
War. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 31-77.
Lavine, P. 1981. “Draft Evasion in the North during the Civil War, 1863-1865,” Journal of
American History 67: 816-34.
C. Lee. 1997. “Socioeconomic Background, Disease, and Mortality among Union Army
Recruits: Implications for Economic and Demographic History,” Explorations in Economic
History 34, 27-55.
______. 1999. “Selective Assignment of Military Positions in the Union Army:
Implications for the Impact of the Civil War,” Social Science History 23, 67-97.
_____. 2002. “Sectoral Shift and the Labor-Force Participation of Older Males in the
United States, 1880-1940, Journal of Economic History 62, 512-523.
______. 2003. “Prior Exposure to Disease, and Later Health and Mortality: Evidence from
Civil War Medical Records,” In D. Costa, ed., Health and Labor Force Participation over
the Life Cycle. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lund M., D. Foy, C. Sipprelle, and A. Strachan. 1984. “The Combat Exposure Scale: A
Systematic Assessment of Trauma in the Vietnam War,” Journal of Clinical Psychology 40,
1323-328.

33

McClellan, M. 1998. “Health Events, Health Insurance, and Labor Supply: Evidence from
Health and Retirement Survey,” In D. Wise, ed., Frontiers in the Economics of Aging.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 301-346.
McDonough, P., G. Duncan, D. Williamson, and J. House. 1997. “Income Dynamics and
Adult Mortality in the United States, 1972 through 1989,” American Journal of Public
Health 87, 1479-1583.
Meara, E. 2001. “Why is Health Related to Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Pregnancy
and Low Birth Weight,” NBER Working Paper No. 8231.
Meer, J., D. Miller, and H. Rosen. 2003. “Exploring the Health-Wealth Nexus,” NBER
Working Paper No. 9554.
Murdock, E. C. 1964. “Was It A ‘Poor Man’s Fight’?” Civil War History 10, 241-45.
Nefzger, M. Dean. 1970. “Follow-up Studies of World War II and Korean War Prisoners, I.
Study Plan and Mortality Findings,” American Journal of Epidemiology 91, 123-138.
Pedersen, H. 1950. “A Cultural Evaluation of the Family Farm Concept,” Land Economics
26, 52-64.
Pope, C. L. 1989. “Households on the American Frontier: The Distribution of Income and
Wealth in Utah, 1850-1900,” In D. W. Galenson, ed., Markets in History. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Preston, S. H., and Haines, M. R. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late Nineteenth
Century America. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Preston, S. H., Haines, M. R., and Pamuk, E. 1981, “Effects of Industrialization and
Urbanization on Mortality in Developed Countries,” In International Union for the
Scientific Study of Population. International Population Conference, Manila, 1981:

34

Solicited Papers, vol. 2. Liege: IUSSP, 233-54.
Smith, C. I. et al. 1987. “Evidence of Hepatitis Virus Infection among Australian Prisoners
of War during World War II,” Medial Journal of Austria 147, 229-230.
Smith, J. P. 1999. “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation between Health
and Economic Status, Journal of Economic Perspectives 13, 145-166.
Soltow, L. 1975. Men and Wealth in the United States. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Spaulding R. C. 1977. “The Pueblo Incident: Medical Problems Reported During Captivity
and Physical Findings at the Time of the Crew's Release,” Military Medicine, 681-684.
Steckel, R. 1988. “The Health and Mortality of Women and Children, 1850-1860,” Journal
of Economic History 48, 333-45.
Strauss, J., and D. Thomas. 1992. “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development,”
Journal of Economic Literature 36, 766-817.
Sutker, P., D. Winstead, Z. Galina and A. Allan. 1991. “Cognitive Deficits and
Psychopathology among Former Prisoners of War and Combat Veterans of the Korean
Conflicts,” American Journal of Psychiatry 148, 67-72.
Thernstrom, S. 1964. Poverty and Progress. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
____________. 1973. The other Bostonians. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ursano, Robert J. 1990. “The Prisoner of War,” Military Medicine 155, 176-180.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1866. Eighth Census: 1860 Statistics of the United States,
Including Mortality. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

35

______________________. 1950. 1950 Census of Population Alphabetical Index of
Occupations and Industries. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
______________________. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times
to 1970. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Surgeon General's Office. 1870. Medical and Surgical History of the War of the
Rebellion. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Vinovskis, M. A. 1990. “Have Social Historians Lost the Civil War? Some Preliminary
Demographic Speculations,” In Vinovskis, M. A. ed., Toward A Social History of the
American Civil War. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1-30.
Wimmer, L. 2003 (forthcoming), “Reflections on the ‘Early Indicator’s Project’: A Partial
History,” In D. Costa, ed., Health and Labor Force Participation over the Life Cycle.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

36

Table 1
Some Characteristics of the Entire and Selected Samples
Variables
Personal Characteristics
Age in 1860
Height (inch)
U.S. born (%)
Occupational Composition (%)
Farmers
Professionals and Managers
Craftsmen & Semiskilled
Unskilled & No jobs
Region of Enlistment (%)
New England
Mid Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
South
Year of Enlistment (%)
1861
1862
1863
1864
1865
Wartime Medical Experience
Wounded (%)
Illness (%)
Mean wound cases
Mean Illness cases
Linkage Information (%)
Death dates known
Linked to pension data

Entire Union
Army sample
N = 35,784

Sample searched
in the 1870 census
N = 4397

Sample linked to
the 1870 census
N = 1863

Sample linked to
the 1860 and 1870
census
N = 1097

23.1
67.5
69.4

23.3
68.0
71.9

23.6
68.2
83.0

24.4
68.4
86.8

48.8
7.6
25.1
17.2

59.1
8.2
20.4
11.3

67.7
7.4
17.8
6.8

69.8
7.4
16.6
6.3

7.4
34.5
42.0
8.9
5.3

7.8
8.8
20.2
54.6
8.6

7.6
7.8
12.8
59.8
12.1

8.6
7.9
12.6
57.2
13.7

25.5
33.8
6.8
22.7
10.8

22.8
35.2
6.4
30.4
5.2

24.4
35.4
6.3
27.9
6.1

23.6
34.4
6.2
29.1
6.7

27.1
64.4
0.57
2.19

23.3
64.3
0.47
2.38

25.5
72.1
0.50
2.73

24.3
71.8
0.48
2.78

70.0
68.5

72.3
77.6

89.8
93.9

90.7
94.9

37

Table 2
Wartime Medical Experiences of the Veterans in the Sample Linked to the 1870 Census
Medical Experiences
Wounds in general

Number of cases
Mean
SD
1.0968
0.4855

Wounds, arm/hand
Wounds, leg/foot
Wounds, body
Wounds, head/face
Wounds, unclassified
Illnesses in general

0.0947
0.1546
0.0469
0.0337
0.0600
2.7778

0.4325
0.5935
0.2482
0.2918
0.2673
3.2414

Proportion having any case
Mean
SD
0.4295
0.2437
0.0656
0.0918
0.0394
0.0178
0.0534
0.7179

0.2477
0.2889
0.1945
0.1323
0.2250
0.4502

0.1945
0.0394
0.2209
0.0431
Typhoid
0.1288
0.0169
0.1824
0.0225
Smallpox
0.2323
0.0572
0.3411
0.0750
Measles
0.4584
0.2999
1.1988
0.5904
Diarrhea
0.2558
0.0703
0.2978
0.0778
Respiratory infections
0.3919
0.1893
0.9281
0.3365
Malaria
0.1138
0.0131
0.1138
0.0131
Tuberculosis
0.3054
0.1040
0.4423
0.1350
Rheumatism
0.0808
0.0066
0.1101
0.0084
Syphilis
0.1098
0.0122
0.1614
0.0150
Hernia
Note: Calculated for 1067 men who had complete information on medical experiences while in service.

38

Table 3
Logistic and OLS Regressions: Socioeconomic Backgrounds and Wartime Experiences

Variable
Intercept
Age
Age squared
Height
Height squared
Farmer
Rural nonfarmer
Urban
U.S. born
Log adjusted wealth
Enlisted in 1861
Enlisted in 1862
Enlisted in 1863
Enlisted in 1864
Enlisted in 1865

(1)
(2)
Dying from disease
Dying from injury
(Logistic Regression) (Logistic Regression)
Odd ratio P-value Odd ratio P-value
0.974
1.006
0.875
1.010
NI
0.574
0.404
0.749
1.004
NI
1.104
1.271
0.483
0.411

0.2200
0.0702
0.5614
0.5489
NI
0.0001
0.0001
0.0010
0.8027
NI
0.2265
0.1144
0.0001
0.0001

0.1323
0.0826
0.0414
0.0541
NI
0.3608
0.1996
0.0006
0.8120
NI
0.8329
0.2691
0.0001
0.0001

1.068
0.987
0.611
1.035
NI
0.908
0.788
0.669
0.995
NI
1.023
0.772
0.392
0.018

(3)
Contracting disease
(Logistic Regression)
Odd ratio P-value
0.905
1.017
1.301
0.981
NI
0.654
0.379
1.205
0.969
NI
0.870
0.962
0.340
0.401

0.0001
0.0001
0.1564
0.1571
NI
0.0001
0.0001
0.0022
0.0011
NI
0.0243
0.7533
0.0001
0.0001

(4)
Suffering injury
(Logistic Regression)
Odd ratio P-value
0.947
1.009
1.000
1.001
NI
0.785
1.111
0.888
0.994
NI
1.215
1.365
2.817
2.602

0.0018
0.0021
0.9989
0.9618
NI
0.0001
0.2234
0.0424
0.4914
NI
0.0002
0.0033
0.0001
0.0001

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Infantry duty
Rank of Private
Company mortality
Company mortality
Variable
(Logistic Regression) (Logistic Regression)
from illness (OLS)
from injury (OLS)
Odd ratio P-value Odd ratio P-value Parameter P-value Parameter P-value
0.0078
0.1202
0.9261
0.0160
Intercept
0.0003
0.0010
0.3203
-0.0005
0.0001
0.842
0.0018
0.947
Age
0.0001
-0.0002
0.1614
0.0001
0.0001
1.025
0.0021
1.009
Age squared
0.5424
-0.0018
0.5746
0.0029
0.0023
2.307
0.9989
1.000
Height
0.6816
0.0001
0.6773
-0.0002
0.0007
0.935
0.9618
1.001
Height squared
NI
NI
NI
NI
NI
NI
NI
NI
Farmer
0.0001
0.0029
0.0001
-0.0252
0.0001
0.524
0.0001
0.785
Rural nonfarmer
0.6930
-0.0005
0.0001
-0.0664
0.0002
0.608
0.2234
1.111
Urban
0.0001
-0.0104
0.0001
-0.0161
0.0001
0.689
0.0424
0.888
U.S. born
0.0009
0.0005
0.6846
-0.0001
0.0001
0.896
0.4912
0.994
Log adjusted wealth
NI
NI
NI
NI
NI
NI
NI
NI
Enlisted in 1861
0.0001
0.0078
0.0001
0.0161
0.7141
0.972
0.0002
1.215
Enlisted in 1862
0.0276
-0.0038
0.0001
0.0180
0.0001
4.107
0.0033
1.365
Enlisted in 1863
0.0001
-0.0143
0.0001
-0.0380
0.0001
2.789
0.0001
2.817
Enlisted in 1864
0.0001
-0.0326
0.0001
-0.0482
0.0001
4.093
0.0001
2.602
Enlisted in 1865
Notes. Number of observations for all regressions is 10,124. Dependent variable is one if the recruit died from disease
for (1), died from injury for (2), contracted disease for (3), was injured for (4), was assigned an infantry duty for (5),
and was given the lowest rank for (6), and is zero, otherwise. Dependent variable is the company mortality from
illness for (7), and the company mortality from injury for (8).

39

Table 4
Wartime Experiences by the Range of Instrumental Variables
Instrumental
variable
Company
mortality from
wounds

Year of
enlistment

Month of
enlistment

Range
Nobody killed
over 0% to 2%
over 2% to 4%
over 4% to 6%
over 6% to 8%
over 8% to 10%
over 10%
1861
1862
1863
1864
1865
Mar. - May
Jun. – Aug.
Sep. – Nov.
Dec. – Feb.

Proportion of
recruits in the
category
0.2231
0.1987
0.1022
0.1912
0.0956
0.0806
0.1087
0.2362
0.3449
0.0619
0.2915
0.0656
0.1051
0.4484
0.2955
0.1510

Average length
of service
(year)
1.1793
2.0206
1.5774
2.4247
2.0175
2.0255
2.3837
2.9482
2.4693
1.7392
0.7274
0.4394
0.8096
2.5083
1.6743
1.1931

40

Proportion of
recruits wounded
in service
0.0882
0.1605
0.2294
0.3824
0.3039
0.2558
0.4224
0.3889
0.2745
0.2879
0.1286
0.0286
0.1071
0.3117
0.2317
0.1615

Proportion of
recruits having
any illness
0.4580
0.7830
0.6881
0.8284
0.8333
0.8023
0.8017
0.8056
0.8370
0.8485
0.5820
0.2571
0.5268
0.8494
0.6667
0.5652

Table 5
OLS Regressions: Correlates of Wealth Accumulation between 1860 and 1870
Variable
Intercept
Company Mortality
Co wound mortality 1
Co wound mortality 2
Co wound mortality 3
Co wound mortality 4
Wounds
Illnesses
ln (1860 total wealth)
ln (1860 personal wealth)
ln (1860 real wealth)
ln (1860 other family wealth)
1860 Age
1860 Age2H 10-2
U.S. Born
Illiterate
Height
Height 5th quintile
Height 4th quintile
Height 3rd quintile
Height 2nd quintile
Height 1st quintile
Region of enlistment
New England
Mid Atlantic
North East Central
North West Central
South
Size of location, 1860 & 1870
Rural-Rural
Rural-Urban
Urban-Rural
Urban-Urban
Children
Younger than 10 in 1860
Age 10 and older in 1860
Younger than 10 in 1870
Age 10 and older in 1870
Geographic mobility
Same county
Moved to different county
Moved to different state
Occupation, 1860 & 1870
Farmer, Farmer
Farmer, Skilled
Farmer, Unskilled
Skilled, Farmer
Skilled, Skilled
Skilled, Unskilled
Unskilled, Farmer
Unskilled, Skilled
Unskilled, Unskilled
Adjusted R2
F

Mean

(1)
ln (1870 total wealth)
Estimate
P-value

(2)
ln (1870 personal wealth)
Estimate
P-value

(3)
ln (1870 real wealth)
Estimate
P-value

2.2967

0.0230

1.6250

0.1084

1.7614

0.0912

0.212
0.275
0.182
0.331
0.241
0.721
5.667
5.291
1.624
3.604
23.741
62.184
0.868
0.085

NI
-0.3775
-0.5062
-0.6151
-0.3697
0.0817
0.1290

NI
0.0916
0.0488
0.0098
0.0334
0.6429
0.0016

NI
-0.4764
-0.6671
-0.6240
-0.3368
0.1889

NI
0.0334
0.0095
0.0087
0.0527
0.2843

NI
0.0108
-0.0708
-0.5181
-0.1149
0.1173

NI
0.9628
0.7889
0.0354
0.5216
0.5192

0.1307

0.0023

0.0214
0.2748
-0.0447
0.2380
-0.6078

0.4035
0.0003
0.0018
0.2902
0.0206

0.0160
0.2582
-0.0433
0.4263
-0.8671

0.5422
0.0007
0.0025
0.0577
0.0010

0.1606
0.0274
0.2533
-0.0381
-0.0597
0.1093

0.0001
0.2662
0.0013
0.0101
0.7947
0.6864

0.118
0.154
0.201
0.267
0.260

0.3609
-0.0351
NI
0.2080
0.5337

0.1732
0.8854
NI
0.3288
0.0127

0.2022
-0.2423
NI
0.0618
0.2975

0.4452
0.3196
NI
0.7718
0.1645

-0.1966
-0.2995
NI
0.0668
0.1523

0.4723
0.2330
NI
0.7612
0.4897

0.123
0.085
0.082
0.569
0.142

0.4718
-0.4796
NI
0.5115
-0.2474

0.1992
0.1769
NI
0.0511
0.4783

0.2496
-0.2546
NI
0.3844
-0.4397

0.4973
0.4744
NI
0.1432
0.2079

1.1121
-0.1738
NI
0.7322
0.4820

0.0035
0.6354
NI
0.0069
0.1809

0.711
0.131
0.040
0.118

NI
-0.2940
0.0357
-0.0229

NI
0.1933
0.9278
0.4374

NI
-0.3728
0.0851
-0.4327

NI
0.0992
0.8289
0.1320

NI
-0.3933
-0.2472
-0.6426

NI
0.0916
0.5424
0.0304

0.817
0.192
1.520
0.755

-0.1549
0.0635
0.1510
0.1570

0.1274
0.6605
0.0090
0.1258

-0.1642
0.0253
0.0847
0.2070

0.1074
0.8614
0.1424
0.0442

-0.1274
0.0134
0.1727
0.0149

0.2213
0.9284
0.0038
0.8878

0.618
0.197
0.185

NI
-0.3528
-0.5762

NI
0.0669
0.0144

NI
-0.3213
-0.3675

NI
0.0952
0.1186

NI
-0.2889
-0.7121

NI
0.1464
0.0034

0.343
0.029
0.014
0.029
0.106
0.031
0.019
0.049
0.263

NI
-0.2397
-0.1228
0.4120
-1.5609
-2.1016
-0.0989
-2.4873
-2.2535
0.3084
13.10

NI
0.5878
0.8401
0.3485
0.0001
0.0001
0.8596
0.0001
0.0001

NI
-1.4835
0.0020
0.3889
-1.4534
-1.7801
-1.1380
-1.8228
-1.2088
0.1946
7.56

NI
0.0008
0.9974
0.3764
0.0001
0.0001
0.0423
0.0001
0.0001

NI
0.4574
0.1286
0.9332
-1.8713
-3.7413
0.6278
-4.3565
-5.5111
0.6110
43.62

NI
0.3163
0.8378
0.0399
0.0001
0.0001
0.2781
0.0001
0.0001

0.0001

0.0001

0.0001

Note: The sample is limited to 978 veterans who were linked to the 1860 and 1870 censuses and for whom information on all
independent variables is given. NI stands for “Not Included.”
41

Table 6
OLS Regressions: Effects of Particular Types of Wounds and Illnesses on Wealth Accumulation
Variable
Company Mortality
Co wound mortality 1
Co wound mortality 2
Co wound mortality 3
Co wound mortality 4
Wounds by location
Arm/Hand/Finger
Leg/Foot/Toe
Body
Head/Face
Unclassified
Illnesses by type
Typhoid
Smallpox
Measles
Diarrhea
Respiratory infections
Malaria
Tuberculosis
Rheumatism
Syphilis
Hernia
Adjusted R2
F

Mean

(1)
ln (1870 total wealth)
Estimate
P-value

(2)
ln (1870 personal wealth)
Estimate
P-value

(3)
ln (1870 real wealth)
Estimate
P-value

0.212
0.275
0.182
0.331

NI
-0.3093
-0.4098
-0.5054

NI
0.1621
0.1092
0.0320

NI
-0.4065
-0.5806
-0.5199

NI
0.0661
0.0231
0.0270

NI
0.0816
0.0358
-0.3773

NI
0.7214
0.8918
0.1225

0.063
0.094
0.042
0.017
0.054

-0.3581
-0.5629
-0.1711
0.1571
-0.4348

0.2393
0.0270
0.6393
0.7770
0.1876

-0.1624
-0.4373
-0.1509
0.1747
-0.3702

0.5931
0.0854
0.6790
0.7526
0.2615

-0.4547
-0.1418
0.0270
0.5266
-0.2481

0.1487
0.5897
0.9430
0.3590
0.4674

0.043
0.016
0.057
0.301
0.070
0.194
0.013
0.103
0.006
0.011

0.2506
0.2718
-0.2576
-0.3089
-0.2313
0.2603
0.1175
-0.0661
-0.2951
-0.4170
0.3088
9.91

0.4856
0.6371
0.4129
0.0639
0.4206
0.1769
0.8527
0.7861
0.7495
0.5431

0.2695
0.3675
-0.0390
-0.4621
-0.1277
0.4411
0.3269
-0.0414
-1.0401
-0.4159
0.1973
5.90

0.4528
0.5232
0.9014
0.0056
0.6564
0.0221
0.6053
0.8651
0.2600
0.5439

0.1335
-0.0053
0.0130
-0.0691
0.4365
-0.1917
0.5120
-0.1734
-0.0031
0.6537
0.6092
32.08

0.7190
0.9929
0.9682
0.6886
0.1424
0.3358
0.4346
0.4921
0.9975
0.3573

0.0001

0.0001

0.0001

Note: The same sample and specification as those used in the regressions reported in Table 5 are used, except the variables on
wounds and illnesses.

42

Table 7
Effects of Wounds and Diseases on Wealth Accumulation: Results of Instrumental Variable Estimations

1. Wounds, all types

(1)
Simple regression
Parameter
P-value
-0.4579
0.0070

(2)
IV-1: Company mortality
Parameter
P-value
-1.6868
0.0188

(3)
IV-2: Year of enlistment
Parameter
P-value
-1.6693
0.0126

(4)
IV-3: Month of enlistment
Parameter
P-value
-2.9892
0.0050

(5)
IV-4: (2), (3), and (4)
Parameter
P-value
-1.6373
0.0026

2. Wounds, arm/hand

-0.5808

0.0507

-6.3792

0.0114

-5.7479

0.0239

-8.3084

0.0226

-5.2954

0.0038

3. Wounds, leg/foot

-0.7000

0.0047

-3.3933

0.0206

-3.2489

0.0179

-4.9916

0.0260

-2.4307

0.0171

4. Wounds, body

-0.4489

0.2127

-10.1916

0.0612

-10.0160

0.0102

-3.0717

0.4291

-3.8607

0.0652

0.0338

0.9511

-18.1200

0.0307

-15.0994

0.0195

-8.8700

0.0737

-8.7281

0.0162

6. Wounds, unclassified

-0.7839

0.0133

-6.0233

0.0135

-6.8657

0.0115

-5.8359

0.0495

-4.6294

0.0100

7. Illnesses, all types

-0.1038

0.5343

-1.4884

0.0217

-1.2378

0.0169

-1.5486

0.0080

-1.2838

0.0029

8. Typhoid

0.1659

0.6411

-11.4262

0.0284

-11.1665

0.0353

-6.6112

0.1075

-3.6982

0.1860

9. Smallpox

0.2767

0.6278

1.6974

0.7057

3.4489

0.5290

-3.8802

0.4632

1.8088

0.4386

10. Measles

-0.2992

0.3398

-9.8024

0.0978

-6.6747

0.0778

-2.4535

0.5376

-3.1341

0.2102

11. Diarrhea

-0.3500

0.0298

-1.6178

0.0788

-1.8046

0.0358

-2.2036

0.0044

-1.6406

0.0086

12. Respiratory

-0.3051

0.2823

-0.4836

0.8200

-5.3152

0.0503

-4.7593

0.0276

-1.0077

0.5049

13. Malaria

0.1282

0.4944

-3.3155

0.0137

-1.9788

0.0512

-2.0689

0.0226

-1.7091

0.0218

14. Tuberculosis

0.0404

0.9489

-27.787

0.0154

-16.0966

0.1604

2.1421

0.8682

-8.9689

0.0958

15. Rheumatism

-0.1299

0.5906

-5.9791

0.0472

-6.1987

0.0132

-1.3998

0.5902

-2.9427

0.0833

16. Syphilis

-0.2238

0.8089

1.9186

0.9139

-31.3746

0.0320

-23.9275

0.0888

-9.1093

0.2383

17. Hernia

-0.2327

0.7338

0.7230

0.9635

-15.3799

0.1603

-10.1719

0.4430

-4.2872

0.4688

5. Wounds, head/face

Note: The same sample and specification as those used in the regressions reported in Table 5 are used, except the choice of variables on wartime medical experiences. Only
the results for the variables on wounds and illnesses obtained from 85 different regressions are presented here.

43

Table 8
OLS Regressions: Effects of Wartime Medical Experiences on Wealth Accumulation by Occupation
(1)
Farmer (N=393)

(2)
White-collar/Skilled (N=224)

(3)
Unskilled (N=352)

Variable
Company Mortality
Co wound mortality 2
Co wound mortality 3
Co wound mortality 4
Wounds
Illnesses
Company Mortality
Co wound mortality 2
Co wound mortality 3
Co wound mortality 4
Wounds by location
Arm/Hand/Finger
Leg/Foot/Toe
Body
Head/Face
Unclassified
Illnesses by type
Typhoid
Smallpox
Measles
Diarrhea
Respiratory infections
Malaria
Tuberculosis
Rheumatism
Syphilis
Hernia
IV estimations
Wounds
Arm/hand
Leg/foot
Body
Head/face
Unclassified
Illnesses
Typhoid
Smallpox
Measles
Diarrhea
Respiratory
Malaria
Tuberculosis
Rheumatism
Syphilis
Hernia

Estimate

P-value

Estimate

P-value

Estimate

P-value

-0.1146
-0.0279
-0.1964
-0.1807
0.2043

0.3545
0.8332
0.1245
0.0464
0.0311

-0.1588
-0.8692
-0.6146
0.1461
-0.3394

0.7769
0.2296
0.2762
0.7578
0.4353

-1.1122
-1.2433
-0.8674
-1.0123
0.0305

0.0165
0.0237
0.0942
0.0050
0.9348

-0.1249
-0.0429
-0.1906

0.3632
0.7683
0.1733

-0.0258
-0.5758
-0.3501

0.9637
0.4554
0.5298

-1.0060
-1.0354
-0.7663

0.0263
0.0578
0.1374

-0.0092
0.0438
-0.2333
0.0558
-0.4289

0.9588
0.7817
0.2579
0.8344
0.0305

-1.1532
0.7124
0.5922
3.3715
-0.9684

0.1108
0.3317
0.5440
0.1280
0.3012

0.1619
-1.3772
-0.6351
-0.5642
-1.0856

0.8250
0.0059
0.4475
0.6611
0.1370

0.1168
0.3735
0.0636
0.0615
-0.0830
0.0170
0.2924
-0.2857
-0.6439
0.8583

0.5608
0.2910
0.7370
0.5117
0.6104
0.8823
0.4296
0.0465
0.2706
0.0710

-1.0834
-0.7358
-1.0439
-0.6504
0.8191
-0.1089
NI
0.0088
NI
-2.2207

0.2860
0.7996
0.3306
0.1814
0.3784
0.8425
NI
0.9901
NI
0.1946

0.8882
-0.0127
-0.4162
-0.4744
-0.7741
0.6581
0.2028
-0.1699
-0.9213
-0.3117

0.2515
0.9894
0.4645
0.1804
0.1663
0.0949
0.8403
0.7350
0.5685
0.8087

-0.2083
1.0220
-0.6488
-0.7325
0.4189
0.4069
0.0016
1.6068
0.8571
-0.7563
0.0682
0.5715
0.3143
0.6967
-0.4187
-0.3566
2.2460

0.4753
0.1708
0.2076
0.3256
0.6273
0.6428
0.9939
0.1167
0.2133
0.2859
0.7888
0.3212
0.4007
0.7566
0.5539
0.8275
0.0992

-1.4776
-6.3810
-1.3125
-3.9368
-4.6623
-4.0521
-1.7487
-4.2497
-2.5999
-6.1596
-1.7103
-1.4892
-2.4425
0.0728
0.7127
-24.0243
-14.6420

0.2170
0.0213
0.4295
0.1143
0.4454
0.1449
0.0714
0.2224
0.5038
0.1027
0.1909
0.5845
0.0903
0.6676
0.6676
0.0523
0.0017

-2.5148
-2.7980
-2.8613
-2.9288
-9.8564
-3.5935
-1.9228
-1.4266
-1.5631
-1.5910
-2.4272
-3.5650
-1.4168
4.3247
-2.3980
-0.3467
5.1700

0.0294
0.2734
0.1550
0.3228
0.0946
0.2422
0.0272
0.6833
0.5588
0.6831
0.0418
0.1463
0.3107
0.3772
0.4291
0.9225
0.3634

Note: The same specification as those used in the regressions reported in Table 5 is used, except the choice of variables on
wartime medical experiences and occupation. Only the results for the variables on wounds and illnesses obtained from 57
different regressions are presented here. Instrumental variables include fourth-order polynomials of the company mortality from
wounds, dummy variables for the year of enlistment, and dummy variables for the month of enlistment.

44

50
40
30
20
10

Decade

45

20
s

19

10
s

19

00
s

19

90
s

18

80
s

18

70
s

18

60
s

0

18

Percentage

Figure 1
Percentage Distribution of the Decade of First Pension
Application by Status of Linkage and Wound

All, Not
Wounded
All,
Wounded
Linked, Not
Wounded
Linked,
Wounded

