NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE REFORM AND HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
OF LOW-INCOME FAMILIES
Robert Kaestner
Neeraj Kaushal
Working Paper 10033
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10033
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Robert Kaestner and Neeraj Kaushal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Welfare Reform and Health Insurance Coverage of Low-Income Families
Robert Kaestner and Neeraj Kaushal
NBER Working Paper No. 10033
October 2003
JEL No. I18, I38
ABSTRACT
We study whether welfare reform adversely affected the health insurance coverage of low-educated
single mothers and their children. Specifically, we investigate whether changes in the welfare
caseload during the 1990s were associated with changes in Medicaid participation, private insurance
coverage, and the number of uninsured among single mothers and their children. Estimates suggest
that between 1996 and 1999, the 42 percent decrease in the welfare caseload was associated with
the following changes in insurance coverage among low-educated, single mothers: a seven to nine
percent decrease in Medicaid coverage; an increase in employer-sponsored, private insurance
coverage of six percent; and a two to nine percent increase in the proportion uninsured. Among
children of low-educated, single mothers, effects were somewhat smaller. Since welfare policy was
responsible for only part (e.g., one-third) of the decline in the caseload, welfare reform per se had
significantly smaller effects on the health insurance status of low-income families. However, we
found limited evidence that changes in the caseload due to state and federal welfare policy had fewer
adverse consequences on insurance status than changes in the caseload due to other factors. This
implies even smaller effects of welfare reform.
Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois at Chicago
815 W. Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu
Neeraj Kaushal
School of Social Work
Columbia University
622 West 113th Street
New York, NY 10025

Introduction
The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) eliminated
entitlement to cash assistance, required recipients to meet new work requirements, and instituted lifetime time
limits on participation. One of the main goals of the program was to move recipients of cash assistance (i.e.,
welfare), who are mostly women with children, off public assistance and into the workforce as quickly as
possible. Many state welfare reform efforts that preceded PRWORA shared this emphasis on employment as a
means to leaving public assistance. Partly as a consequence of these efforts, the number of welfare recipients
dropped 62 percent between January 1993 and March 2001, from about 14.1 million recipients in 1993 to 5.4
million recipients in 2001.
A decline in the welfare caseload of this magnitude has the potential to reduce significantly the
prevalence of health insurance among low-income families, particularly those headed by unmarried women.
Health insurance coverage of these families may be adversely affected because those who leave, or are deterred
from entering, the welfare program may find it difficult to obtain Medicaid coverage due to administrative
hurdles, and because many of the jobs that low-skilled women typically obtain after leaving welfare do not offer
private health insurance. This scenario is consistent with evidence from studies of former welfare recipients,
which show that many women and children who left welfare are without insurance (Guyer 2000).
If welfare reform led to loss of health insurance coverage, it would most likely reduce low-income
families’ health care utilization and possibly adversely affect the health of persons in these families (Currie and
Grogger 2002). Knowledge of such unintended consequences would almost certainly influence the debate over
the efficacy of current welfare policy. In fact, the original Congressional deliberations over welfare reform led
to bipartisan support to insure, through provisions in the legislation, that welfare reform did not affect health
insurance coverage.
In sum, the effect of welfare reform on health insurance coverage is an important and timely public
policy issue that is under-researched. In spite of the relatively sparse scientific literature on the subject, it is
widely believed that welfare reform has adversely affected the health insurance coverage of low-income
families. However, much of the information that is available on the issue has been produced by advocacy

1

groups and is of questionable scientific value. Moreover, the few studies of this problem by social scientists
have not reached a consensus on this issue underscoring the need for additional research.
In this article, we study whether welfare reform adversely affected the health insurance coverage of loweducated women and their children. Specifically, we obtain estimates of the effect of the welfare caseload and
state and federal welfare reform policies on Medicaid participation, private insurance coverage, and the number
of uninsured among low-income families. To obtain these estimates we use multivariate regression methods
that control for the influence of the economy and other measured factors on health insurance coverage. To
bolster the causal interpretation of our estimates, we use a pre- and post-test with a comparison group research
design. For this procedure, we obtain regression estimates of the effect of the welfare caseload and welfare
reform policy on insurance coverage for low-income families likely to be affected by welfare reform, and
similar estimates for low-income families unlikely to be affected by welfare reform. The difference in these
estimates is the effect of the welfare caseload and welfare reform policy on health insurance coverage of the
affected group.

Background and Literature Review
It is widely believed that an unintended consequence of welfare reform was the loss of health insurance
coverage among low-income families. This belief is based on several pieces of information: studies of welfare
“leavers,” which find that a substantial proportion of former welfare recipients are uninsured in the year after
leaving welfare (Moffitt and Slade 1997; Guyer 2000; Garrett and Holahan 2000; Garrett and Hudman 2002);
studies of the effect of welfare reform on Medicaid enrollment, which find a significant decline in Medicaid
enrollment among low-income women and children after the implementation of welfare reform (Families USA
Foundation 1999; Kronebusch 2001; Ku and Garrett 2000); and evidence that administrative hurdles limit
enrollment in Medicaid for low-income families not receiving public assistance (Ellwood 1999). We take a
more critical view of this evidence and argue that the widely held view that welfare reform resulted in a loss of
health insurance is not well founded.
Consider the evidence from “leaver” studies. These studies cannot differentiate between women and
children who left public assistance because of welfare reform, and those who left public assistance voluntarily—

2

i.e., those who would have left public assistance even in the absence of reform. Recent evidence suggests that
between one-tenth and one-third of the decline in welfare caseloads is a result of welfare reform (Blank 2002).
Thus, only a portion of the families in “leaver” studies are relevant to the question of the effect of welfare
reform on health insurance status. Since the motivation for leaving welfare is by definition different between
the two groups—one was induced to leave by legislation and the other left voluntarily—this suggests that the
circumstances surrounding, and the consequences of leaving, welfare may also be very different for these two
groups. In addition, leaver studies fail to consider the experiences of those who were diverted from welfare
because of changes in policy. In sum, “leaver” studies cannot in general identify the effect of welfare reform on
health insurance.
In addition to “leaver” studies, the belief that welfare reform adversely affected health insurance
coverage is supported by a few studies that show a steep decline in Medicaid coverage about the same time
welfare reform was implemented. Probably the most widely cited of these is a study by Families USA
Foundation (1999). This study has had a particularly powerful impact on public opinion and is cited by
numerous groups advocating for changes in welfare policy. Ku and Garrett (2000) and Kronebusch (2001) also
report that welfare reform was associated with a significant loss in Medicaid coverage among low-income
families.
There are several problems with these studies. Two of these studies do not link the implementation of
welfare reform to changes in Medicaid coverage as purported. Instead, these studies measure the change in
Medicaid coverage for a group of low-income families between certain years (e.g., 1995 and 1997) during
which time some welfare reform took place. This strategy ignores the fact that many states implemented
welfare reform at different times, some prior to the years studied and some after the years studied.1 Another
shortcoming of these studies is their failure to examine changes in private insurance coverage and the number of
uninsured associated with welfare reform. This is surprising, because research has demonstrated that welfare
reform significantly increased the employment rate of low-income women (Blank 2002; Kaushal and Kaestner

1

For example, according to data in the Families USA Foundation (1999) report, Medicaid coverage declined in California
by approximately 30 percent between 1995 and 1997. However, during this period there was no welfare reform in
California. California had an AFDC waiver that was implemented prior to 1995 and California did not implement federally
mandated reform until 1998.

3

2001; CEA 2000). As a result, it is possible that a greater portion of these women will be covered by private
insurance and this increase in private insurance could explain part of the decline in Medicaid coverage. Finally,
these studies do not adequately control for changes in Medicaid and the number of uninsured that are unrelated
to welfare reform.2
Is it possible that welfare reform increased the number of low-income women and children without
health insurance? The answer is clearly yes. There are a variety of ways that welfare reform may have affected
health insurance coverage. Women who leave welfare are eligible for transitional Medicaid benefits, but these
benefits end after one year, and administrative hurdles may cause take-up rates for transitional benefits to be low
among welfare leavers. There are no transitional benefits for women who were deterred from entry into
AFDC/TANF by welfare reform, and since many of these women are working, their earnings may push them
over the very low Medicaid income-eligibility thresholds for adults. Offsetting these adverse effects is the
possibility that some low-income women induced to work by welfare reform will have access to employerprovided health insurance. However, the relatively low-paying jobs that these women usually obtain do not
frequently provide subsidized benefits. As a result, we would expect the number of uninsured to rise after
welfare reform.
Is there existing evidence that establishes this fact? The answer appears to be no. Therefore, additional
research is warranted. Our study makes several contributions. First, we examine both “exit” and “entry” effects
of welfare reform on health insurance coverage. Second, we explicitly link both state and federal welfare
reform to changes in insurance coverage by examining the relationship between changes in the welfare caseload
and the timing of welfare reform policies to changes in insurance status. Finally, we use a research design that
addresses in a more complete way than past research the possibility that unmeasured trends may confound
estimates of the effect of welfare reform on health insurance status.

2

This problem may be particularly severe in Chavkin et al. (2000) because they do not limit their sample to those most
likely affected by welfare reform—i.e., low-income families. For example, including the unemployment rate controls for
the effect of economic conditions on the health insurance coverage of a heterogeneous group of persons and not the group
of interest. This may bias estimates.

4

Research Design and Statistical Methods
The hypothesis underlying our empirical analysis is straightforward: welfare reform reduced the number
of low-income women and children on public assistance and as a result may have increased the number of
uninsured persons in these groups because of declines in Medicaid coverage that were not fully offset by
increases in private insurance coverage. Therefore, the most straightforward way to assess the effect of welfare
reform on the insurance status of low-income families is to obtain estimates of the association between the
welfare caseload and insurance coverage. This is the strategy pursued by Currie and Grogger (2002) with regard
to Medicaid for the pre-PRWORA period. Accordingly, we begin by estimating the following model:

(1)

Ins ijt = β j + δ t + γ Caseload jt + Z jt Φ + X ijt Γ + u ijt
i = 1,..., N (persons)
j = 1,...,51 (states)
t = 1992,...,1999 ( years)

In equation (1), health insurance status (e.g., Medicaid) of person i in state j and year t is a function of the
welfare caseload in state j and year t; time-varying state characteristics ( Z jt ) such as the Medicaid income
eligibility threshold, the unemployment rate, and per-capita income; individual characteristics ( X ijt ) such as
age, race and family composition; state fixed effects ( β j ); and year effects ( δ t ). Estimates of equation (1) can
be obtained using a variety of statistical methods including ordinary least squares—the method we have
selected.
One disadvantage of equation (1) is that it assumes that welfare reform was responsible for all of the
change in the welfare caseload. In fact, evidence suggests that most of the change in the caseload was not due to
policy, particularly prior to the implementation of PRWORA in 1996 (Blank 2002). Therefore, estimates of the
association between the welfare caseload and insurance status represent upper bound estimates of the effect of
welfare reform. For example, if welfare reform was responsible for one-third of the decline in the caseload, then
estimates from equation (1) should be divided by three to derive the effect of welfare reform. However, it is
possible that those who leave welfare because of government policy may have different experiences than those

5

who leave for other reasons such as robust economic growth. If so, then it is not appropriate to simply apportion
the effect the caseload to estimate the effect of welfare reform.
A preferable model would be one in which we allowed the effect of the welfare caseload on insurance to
differ by the cause of the change in the caseload, as in the following:
(2) Ins ijt = β j + δ t + γ 1 Case(Policy) jt + γ 2 Case(Re sidual) jt + Z jt Φ + X ijt Γ + u ijt
In equation (2), the variables Case(Policy) and Case(Residual) are the portions of the welfare caseload related to
welfare policy and other factors, respectively. The coefficient on Case(Policy) provides an estimate of the effect
of welfare reform on insurance status. The two caseload variables in equation (2) are derived from the
following:
(3) Caseload jt = α j + ρ t + λ1TANFjt + λ 2 (AFDC Waiver) + Z jt Ψ + v jt
(4) Case(Policy) jt = λ1 (TANF) jt + λ 2 (AFDC Waiver) jt
(5) Case(Re sidual) jt = Caseload jt − Case(Policy) jt
Equation (3) is the structural model determining the welfare caseload, which we assume depends on welfare
policies, AFDC waivers and TANF (Temporary Assistance to Needy Families), and other factors. Equations (4)
and (5) simply decompose the caseload into that due to policy [Case(Policy)] and that due to other factors
[Case(Residual)]. To estimate equation (2) requires that we first estimate equation (3) and then construct the
variables of interest. However, obtaining estimates of the effect of welfare policy on the welfare caseload has
been a controversial area of research (Blank 2002). The fundamental problem has been that it is difficult to
distinguish the effect of policy from the effect of other factors such as the unemployment rate.3 If equation (3)
is incorrectly specified, then using estimates from it to construct the variables Case(Policy) and Case(residual)
will result in biased estimates of equation (2). In effect, any specification error in equation (3) will be
transmitted to equation (2).
We can avoid this problem by substituting equations (4) and (5) into equation (2) and estimating the
following model:

6

(6)

Ins ijt = β j + δ t + (γ 1 − γ 2 )λ1 (TANF) jt + (γ 1 − γ 2 )λ 2 (AFDC Waiver) jt +

γ 2 Caseload jt + Z jt Φ + X ijt Γ + u ijt

Equation (6) allows us to test whether the effect of changes in the caseload caused by welfare policy ( γ 1 ) differs
from the effect of changes in the caseload due to other factors ( γ 2 ), but it avoids having to estimate equation
(3). The coefficients on the welfare policy variables (TANF and AFDC Waivers) measure the difference
between the effect of the caseload due to policy and the effect of the caseload due to other factors. Note that

λ1 and λ2 , the effects of policy on the welfare caseload, are expected to be negative, so the coefficients on the
policy variables will have the opposite sign of the true difference. Another advantage of equation (6) is that it
allows changes in the caseload associated with TANF and AFDC waivers to have different effects on insurance
status.
To a large extent, equations (1) and (6) address the fundamental identification problem associated with
this analysis, which is to isolate the effect of changes in the welfare caseload or changes in government policy
from other determinants of women’s, or children’s, health insurance coverage that vary over time, across states
and over time within states. The primary remaining weakness is that there may be omitted variables that vary by
state and year that affect health insurance coverage of persons in low-income families and that are correlated
with the welfare caseload or government policy.
To address this problem, we rely on a comparison group approach. To implement this approach, we
estimate equations (1) and (6) for two groups: those likely to participate in the cash assistance program and
therefore likely to be affected by welfare reform, and those unlikely to participate in the cash assistance program
and therefore unlikely to be affected by welfare reform. We refer to the former as the target group and the latter
as the comparison group. A critical assumption underlying this strategy is that in the absence of welfare reform
(e.g., changes in the welfare caseload) changes in health insurance status would be similar between the target
group—for example, low-educated unmarried women, and the comparison group.
The counterpart of equation (1) for the comparison group is the following:

3

Our task would be particularly difficult since we would need to estimate state-specific effects of policy so that the
predicted caseload variables would have state-time variation. Restricting the effect of policy to be constant across states
would leave no state-time variation and only limited time variation in the predicted caseload variable.

7

~
~
~
~
(7) Ins ijt = β j + δ t + γ~ Caseload jt + Z jt Φ + X ijt Γ + e ijt
The key point to note about equation (7) is that the coefficient on the welfare caseload variable, γ~ , should be
zero since this group is not at risk of welfare receipt and changes in the welfare caseload should not affect their
insurance status. A non-zero estimate of this parameter indicates that there are omitted variables that affect
health insurance that are correlated with the welfare caseload. Therefore, we can subtract this effect from the
corresponding estimate ( γ )in equation (1) to obtain an estimate of the effect of the caseload on health insurance
that controls for these omitted variables. This approach is commonly referred to as a difference-in-differences
(DD) and estimates can be obtained directly by combining equations (1) and (7):

~
~
~
~
Ins ijt = α~ + (α − α~ )Treat i + β j + ( β j − β j )Treat i + δ t + (δ t − δ t )Treat i + γ~ Caseload jt +
~
~
~
(8)
(γ − γ~ ) (Caseload jt x Treat i ) + Z jt Φ + ( Z jt x Treat i )(Φ − Φ ) + X ijt Γ +
~
(X ijt x Treat i )(Γ − Γ) + v ijt
The only new variable in equation (8) is “Treat,” which is a dichotomous variable equal to one if the person is in
the target group and equal to zero if the person is in the comparison group. The DD estimate of the effect of the
welfare caseload is γ − γ~ . Equation (8) is the least restrictive specification possible. In fact, although not
reflected in equation (8), we include dummy variables for each state-year combination instead of the caseload
variable itself.4 The only identifying restriction is that in the absence of welfare reform, unmeasured state-year
influences on health insurance status would affect the target and comparison group equally. If this assumption is
valid, then the parameter γ~ captures the influence of these unmeasured determinants that are correlated with the
welfare caseload.
Clearly, the choice of target and comparison groups is crucial to the success of the difference-indifferences design. Identifying a target group is relatively straightforward. Welfare reform was intended to
decrease the welfare caseload, which consists primarily of low-educated, single mothers. Accordingly, we
define our target group to be single mothers with 12 or fewer years of education, and the children of these
women. 5 The comparison group is more difficult. We choose two groups: low-educated (education ≤ 12

4

Statistical tests rejected more restrictive specifications of equation (8).
It is possible that welfare reform affected fertility and marriage, so selecting the sample on these characteristics may result
in changes in sample composition. Based on existing evidence, however, we believe the bias due to sample selection will

5

8

years), single women without children; and low-educated (education ≤ 12 years), married mothers. Obviously,
the first comparison group is not relevant for the analysis of the effect of welfare reform on children’s health
insurance status.
A cursory way to assess the adequacy of the comparison groups is to compare the mean rates of
insurance coverage of the target group to the mean rates of insurance coverage of the comparison groups.
Means of roughly similar magnitudes suggest that the insurance status of the two groups may be influenced by
similar factors. These figures are shown in Table 1. We focus on the initial year of our analysis, 1992, which
predated most welfare reform legislation.
The figures in Table 1 show that the target and comparison groups have rates of employer-sponsored
insurance in the respondent’s own name and rates of uninsured that are quite similar, but that the proportion of
each group covered by Medicaid and private insurance is noticeably different. As expected, women and
children in the target group have much higher rates of Medicaid coverage and much lower rates of private
insurance coverage. These disparities reflect the higher rates of labor force participation among families
(including spouse) in the comparison group and the higher rates of welfare participation among families in the
target group. Welfare participation and Medicaid coverage are substitutes for employment (and marriage) and
private insurance coverage. The key question for our analysis is whether the two groups would have similar
insurance coverage in the absence of a cash assistance program.
The answer appears to be yes. To see why, note that approximately 50 percent of low-educated, single
mothers are on public assistance. 6 Thus, figures in Table 1 suggest that 31 percent of the remaining women in
this group are covered by private insurance. This implies that approximately 62 percent of the women in the
target group who are not on public assistance are covered by private health insurance. This 62 percent figure is
quite similar to the percentage of women covered by private insurance in the two comparison groups. While
these calculations are rough, and ignore selection effects that would likely reduce the 62 percent figure for the
target group, they make the point that the comparison groups selected are reasonable in the sense that their
insurance coverage appears to be similar to that of target group members who are not on public assistance. This
be insignificant. See Schoeni and Blank (2000), Kaushal and Kaestner (2001), and Grogger et al. (2002) for evidence on
the effect of welfare reform on marriage and fertility.

9

is exactly the group that is relevant to our analysis since the purpose of our analysis is to examine what happens
to insurance coverage when women leave public assistance because of welfare reform.
The only insurance state for which there is not an adequate comparison group is Medicaid for adult
women. Women in the comparison groups are for the most part ineligible for Medicaid and therefore there is
little likelihood of observing significant changes in Medicaid coverage that are correlated with welfare reform.7
Thus, for Medicaid coverage of adult women, the comparison group approach is not very useful, and therefore
we will not rely on it. The story is somewhat different for children of married mothers—the comparison group
for children of single mothers. Expansions in Medicaid eligibility affected many children in this category, as
evidenced by the significant increase in Medicaid coverage of this group between 1992 and 1996 (see Table 2).
So for children’s Medicaid coverage, the comparison group approach is appropriate.

Data

Our primary data source is the March Current Population Survey (CPS) for the years 1993 to 2000,
which provides information on the health insurance status for the years 1992-1999. It was during this period
that nearly all of the state and federal welfare reform occurred. We focus on low-educated women and their
children because these are the target group of welfare reform. Specifically, we define the target group to be
unmarried mothers between the ages of 18 and 44 who have 12 or fewer years of education. We limit the
sample of children of these women to those between the ages of 0-14 years. As previously noted, we use two
comparison groups in the analysis of women’s insurance: low-educated (education ≤12 years), single women
without children; and low-educated (education ≤12 years), married mothers. Both comparison groups are
restricted to women between the ages of 18 and 44. In the analysis of children’s insurance, we use children of
married mothers with 12 or fewer years of education.

6

Data in the CPS indicate that 43 percent of this group received AFDC income in the past year.
A small portion of women in the two comparison groups may be eligible for Medicaid, or other state-funded health
insurance. For example, married women will be eligible for AFDC and Medicaid through the AFDC-UP program.
Similarly, some states provide cash assistance to single adults (general assistance programs) and provide public health
insurance coverage. Approximately five percent of women in the comparison groups reported receiving AFDC benefits in
the past year.
7

10

The CPS contains most of the data necessary to complete our analysis. Most importantly, the CPS
provides information on the insurance status in the last year including whether the person was covered by
Medicaid, private insurance, employer-sponsored insurance in her own name, or some other type of public
insurance.8 We define four categories of insurance: private insurance, which includes employer-sponsored and
other group or individual private insurance plans; employer-sponsored insurance in respondent’s own name;
public insurance, which includes Medicaid, SCHIP and other publicly provided insurance; and uninsured.9 One
limitation of the CPS is that Medicaid coverage is under-reported relative to administrative data. Whether or not
the under-reporting is systematically related to welfare reform, however, is unknown. Many analyses have used
the CPS to study the effect of public policies such as the Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage, and
some have adjusted for the under-reporting of Medicaid (e.g., Dubay and Kenney 1996). Taking account of the
under-reporting does not appear to make a significant difference.
The CPS also contains basic demographic information that can be used to construct control variables
and that allow us to link children to their mothers. As noted, we define our target and comparison groups on the
basis of education and marital status. Other personal characteristics included in the model include: family size,
“other” family income, mother’s age, mother’s race, total number of kids and number of young kids in the
family.10
Finally, the CPS provides respondents’ state of residence, which allows us to append state-level
information. We use the following: state and federal welfare policy; annual welfare caseload, as measured by
average number of families on welfare per month; Medicaid income eligibility threshold; current unemployment
rate and one-year lag; and real per-capita income.11 For women, state Medicaid eligibility variables are defined
on the basis of Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women; we use the following categories: 0 to 133 percent of
federal poverty line, 134 to 199 percent of federal poverty line, and above 200 percent of the federal poverty
line. For children, Medicaid eligibility is specific to a child’s age and is the higher of the Medicaid or SCHIP
8

There is some question as to whether respondents are referring to last year or the current period when providing
information about health insurance coverage. We assume that it refers to the last year as specified in the question and
accordingly, we match the welfare caseload information to the last calendar year.
9
We exclude persons covered by CHAMPUS or Indian Health Service from both the private and public insurance
categories.
10
Other family income= family earnings – woman’s earnings + interest income + dividends + rental income.
11
Aaron Yellowitz graciously provided us with the Medicaid income eligibility data.

11

income eligibility threshold; we use the following categories: 0 to 49 percent of the federal poverty line; 50 to
100 of federal poverty line; 101 to 133 percent of the federal poverty line; 134 to 199 percent of the federal
poverty line; and above 200 percent of the federal poverty line.
The annual welfare caseload data is taken from the Administration for Children and Families and refers
to the average number of families receiving benefits in the year. We measure the caseload as the natural
logarithm of the caseload.12 The data on welfare policies is drawn from Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation of the Department of Health and Human Services, as well as from the Urban Institute
(www.urban.org/content/Research/NewFederalism/Data/StateDatabase/StateDatabase.htm) and the State
Documentation Project of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (www.cbpp.org). We follow the earlier
literature on the effects of welfare reform and use dummy variables for whether a state had implemented an
AFDC waiver or TANF. We set the waiver variable to zero when TANF is implemented. In cases where the
state implemented reform during the year, we use the fraction of the year that the policy was in place. All state
level variables are merged to the CPS in the year prior to the survey year. So the 1998 welfare caseload is
merged to the 1999 CPS survey.

Results
Descriptive Analysis

Table 1 presents sample proportions of health insurance coverage. In 1992, half of all single mothers,
the group most likely to be affected by welfare reform, received Medicaid and around 30 percent of women in
this group were covered by private insurance, leaving the remaining 20 percent or so uninsured.13 Between
1992 and 1996, during which a number of states implemented welfare reform under AFDC waivers, the
proportion of single mothers covered by Medicaid fell around five percentage points and the proportion covered
by private insurance increased approximately two percentage points; the proportion uninsured rose by about five
percentage points. This general trend in the insurance coverage of this group became more marked after 1996,

12

All models were also estimated using the “welfare rate”, which is the caseload divided by the population. Results using
this alternative measure were similar to those presented below and are therefore not reported.
13
Row percentages do not add to 100 because some respondents indicate coverage by more than one type of insurance.

12

when federal welfare reform was enacted; Medicaid coverage declined, and private insurance increased, even
more rapidly than in the earlier period. However, the rate of uninsured grew more slowly.
Among the children of single mothers, a slightly different story emerges. Between 1992 and 1996 there
is a slight increase in Medicaid coverage and little change in the proportion covered by private insurance and the
proportion uninsured. After 1996, the trends for children of single mothers are similar to that of their mothers:
Medicaid coverage declines, private insurance coverage increases and the proportion uninsured grows modestly.
The critical question is how much of these observed changes are due to welfare reform and how much
are due to other factors? Some insight into this question can be gleaned by examining changes in health
insurance coverage of groups unaffected by welfare reform. Doing so reveals that for women in the two
comparison groups, there has been little change in insurance coverage during this period. This suggests that
most of the changes in insurance coverage of the target group are due to welfare reform. Once more, a slightly
different story emerges for children; between 1992 and 1996, Medicaid coverage increased, private insurance
coverage decreased, and the proportion uninsured increased among children living with two parents. After
1996, there was little change in the insurance coverage of this group. This suggests that some of the changes in
insurance coverage during the 1992 to 1996 period may have been due to other factors besides welfare reform.
One important change during this period was the expansion of income eligibility thresholds in the Medicaid
program.
In sum, the descriptive data in Table 1 suggests that welfare reform had an effect on the health insurance
coverage of low-income families. These data also suggest that other factors may have influenced health
insurance coverage and that in order to identify the effect of welfare reform it will be necessary to control for
these influences in the statistical analysis. To investigate these issues, we now turn to the multivariate analysis.

Multivariate Analysis-Women

To review, our research strategy involves obtaining estimates of equations (1) and (6) for the target and
comparison groups, and difference-in-differences estimates. All estimates are obtained by ordinary least squares
and standard errors of the estimates are calculated under the assumption that observations from the same state
are not independent (Bertrand et al. 2002).

13

Table 2 presents estimates of the effect of the welfare caseload and welfare policy on the insurance
status of low-educated single mothers. Row one presents estimates of equation (1) and row two presents
estimates of equation (6). Estimates of the effects of Medicaid eligibility and unemployment are also presented,
and these estimates come from the same model as estimates in row two. Estimates in row one indicate that
decreases in the welfare caseload are associated with a decrease in Medicaid coverage, an increase in employersponsored insurance coverage, and an increase in the proportion uninsured. Only the effect of the welfare
caseload on Medicaid is statistically significant. Between 1996 and 1999 the natural logarithm of the caseload
decreased by approximately 0.5 log points, or 42 percent (www.acf.dhhs.gov), so the estimates in row one
indicate that changes in the caseload during this period resulted in the following: a 4.0 percentage point decrease
in Medicaid coverage, which represents only 40 percent of the actual decline during this period; a 2.0 percentage
point increase in employer-sponsored insurance; and a 1.6 percentage point increase in the proportion uninsured.
With regard to Medicaid income eligibility thresholds and unemployment, there are only a few
statistically significant effects. Unemployment, specifically, the one-year lag, is negatively associated with
employer-sponsored insurance coverage; a one percentage point increase in the lagged unemployment rate is
associated with a 1.3 percentage point decrease in the proportion of single mothers covered by employersponsored insurance. The only significant (marginally) estimate associated with the Medicaid dummy variables
is for employer-sponsored insurance; coverage is lower in states with Medicaid income eligibility thresholds for
pregnant women of 185 percent or more of the federal poverty level.14
Row two presents estimate from equation (6), which include the welfare policy variables in addition to
the welfare caseload. The coefficients on the policy variables measure the difference between the effect of
changes in the caseload due to policy ( γ 1 ) and the effect of changes in the caseload due to other factors ( γ 2 ).
Specifically, the coefficient on TANF measures (γ 1 − γ 2 )λ1 ; and the coefficient on AFDC waivers measures

(γ 1 − γ 2 )λ1 . The parameters λ1 and λ 2 are the effect of TANF and AFDC waivers on the log caseload,
respectively. Evidence shows that these parameters are negative and in the range of -0.1 to -0.3; AFDC waivers

14

We also estimated models that included the Medicaid income eligibility levels for children less than six years of age to
see whether there may be some spillover effects due to family coverage. None of the Medicaid eligibility levels associated
for children had a significant effect on mother’s insurance status.

14

and TANF reduced the welfare caseload by between 10 and 30 percent (Blank 2002). Therefore, a positive
(negative) coefficient on the policy variables implies that the effect of changes in the caseload due to policy is
smaller (larger) than the effect of changes in the caseload due to other factors.
Estimates in row two for Medicaid indicate that the coefficients on TANF and AFDC waivers are
positive, which suggests that the effect of changes in the welfare caseload due to policy have a smaller (less
positive) effect on Medicaid than changes in the caseload due to other reasons. Neither of the estimates
associated with the policy variables is statistically significant. To obtain an estimates of γ 1 , we assume that

λ1 = λ 2 = −0.3 , which is at the high range of estimates of the effect of welfare reform policy on the log
caseload, and use the coefficient on the caseload as an estimate of γ 2 . The calculated estimates of γ 1 for
TANF and AFDC waivers are presented in Table 2. These estimates suggest that decreases in the caseload due
to TANF were associated with an increase in Medicaid receipt, and that decreases in the caseload due to AFDC
waivers were associated with a decrease in Medicaid receipt.15
In the case of employer-sponsored insurance, the coefficients on TANF and AFDC waivers are positive,
which implies that changes in the caseload due to policy had a larger negative effect on employer-sponsored
insurance than did changes in the caseload due to other factors. Here too the estimates are not statistically
significant. Finally, for the uninsured dependent variable, the coefficients on the policy variables are negative
and the estimate associated with AFDC waivers is statistically significant. Thus, changes in the caseload due to
policy had a less negative effect on the proportion uninsured than did changes in the caseload due to other
factors. In fact, the implied estimates of γ 1 are positive—suggesting that state and federal welfare reform
reduced the number of uninsured.
In sum, the addition of the welfare policy variables to the model had little effect from a statistical point
of view. Nearly all the estimates associated with the policy variables are statistically insignificant, and the
estimates of the effect of the welfare caseload itself were not greatly affected by the addition of the policy

15

In the case of TANF, the calculation is as follows: γ 1 =

γ1 =

0.027
+ 0.085 = −0.05 . For AFDC waivers:
− 0 .2

0.015
+ 0.085 = 0.01 .
− 0.2

15

variables. This suggests that changes in the caseload due to policy had the same effect on insurance status as
changes in the caseload due to other reasons. Estimates in row one of Table 2 suggest that the 42 percent
decrease in the welfare caseload between 1996 and 1999 resulted in the following insurance status changes
among low-educated single mothers: a nine percent decrease in Medicaid coverage; a six percent increase in
employer-sponsored insurance coverage; and a six percent increase in the proportion uninsured. If we interpret
the insignificant coefficients on the policy variables as evidence that changes in the caseload due to policy had
the same effect as changes in the caseload due to other factors, and assume that welfare policy was responsible
for one-third of the decline in the caseload, then between 1996 and 1999, welfare reform per se was associated
with a three percent decrease in Medicaid coverage; a two percent increase in employer-sponsored insurance
coverage; and a two percent increase in the proportion uninsured.
Although not statistically significant, the coefficients on the policy variables indicated that decreases in
the caseload associated with welfare policies had a smaller adverse impact on Medicaid and the proportion
uninsured, and a larger beneficial effect on employer-sponsored insurance, than did changes in the caseload due
to other reasons. In fact, calculations suggest that changes in the caseload due to welfare policy resulted in a
decrease in the proportion uninsured, although given the statistical insignificance of the underlying estimates
and the somewhat subjective assumption as to the effect of policy on the caseload used in these calculations, we
do not place too much weight on this evidence.
We now turn to the difference-in-differences estimates, which address the possibility that estimates in
Table 2 may be confounded by unmeasured, state-specific effects. Table 3 presents the difference-in-differences
(DD) estimates related to equation (1), which are in row one, and equation (6), which are in row two.16 For each
insurance category, there are DD estimates corresponding to two comparison groups—married women with
children and single women with no children. In general, the DD estimates in row one are very similar to the
corresponding estimates in Table 2. Indeed, as estimates in Appendix Table 1 show, the welfare caseload is
never significantly related to the insurance status of either of the comparison groups. DD estimates in row one
16

We show the estimates of the effect of the welfare caseload on Medicaid for the sake of completeness, but, as previously
noted, the comparison groups that we use are not adequate for this outcome because most members of the comparison
groups are not eligible for Medicaid and any changes in Medicaid are likely to be small and idiosyncratic. Therefore, we

16

indicate that the decline in the welfare caseload in the late 1990s (0.5 log points) was associated with the
following changes in the health insurance status of low-educated, single mothers: between a 3.1 to 4.0
percentage-point (seven and eight percent) decrease in Medicaid coverage; a 2.5 percentage-point (nine percent)
increase in employer-sponsored insurance coverage; and between a 0.5 and 2.3 percentage-point (two to nine
percent) increase in the proportion uninsured. The magnitudes of the effects are similar to those of estimates in
Table 2, but not all of the DD estimates are statistically significant. However, most approach standard
thresholds of statistical significance.
Estimates of the effect of the welfare caseload in row two are very similar to those in row one. In
addition, estimates associated with the welfare reform policy variables in row two are not statistically
significant. This suggests that there is no difference between the effect on insurance status of changes in the
welfare caseload due to policy and the effect of changes in the welfare caseload due to other factors. Thus, the
effects of welfare reform per se would be approximately one-third the size of the effects of the caseload,
assuming that welfare reform was responsible for one-third of the change in the caseload. But here too, the
signs of the coefficients on the policy variables suggest that changes in the caseload due to welfare reform had
less adverse consequences. Calculated estimates of γ 1 in Table 3 indicate that decreases in the welfare caseload
due to TANF and AFDC waivers were associated with smaller declines in Medicaid, larger increases in
employer-sponsored insurance coverage, and smaller increases in the proportion uninsured, than were decreases
in the caseload due to other reasons.

Multivariate Analysis-Children

We also investigated the effect of welfare reform and changes in the welfare caseload on the insurance
status of children. The target group is children living with single mothers, and the comparison group is children
living with married mothers. Our empirical strategy is the same as that used for adults and estimates are
presented in Table 4, which has the same format as previous tables.

would not expect any variable, including the welfare caseload, to be correlated with the Medicaid coverage of this group.
Estimates in Appendix Table 1 support this statement.

17

Estimates in row one obtained using the sample of children in the target group indicate that decreases in
the welfare caseload were associated with a significant decrease in Medicaid coverage, a significant increase in
private coverage, and an insignificant increase in the proportion uninsured. To put these estimates in
perspective, we again use the actual change in the caseload between 1996 and 1999 of 0.5 log points (42
percent) to predict the changes in insurance status implied by the estimates. During this period, decreases in the
caseload were associated with: a 3.1 percentage point (five percent) decrease in Medicaid coverage; a 2.4
percentage point (nine percent) increase in private insurance coverage; and a 1.2 percentage point (seven
percent) increase in the proportion uninsured. DD estimates in row one are not statistically significant and
suggest that decreases in the welfare caseload in the late 1990s were associated with a 1.7 percentage-point
(three percent) decrease in Medicaid coverage, and 1.9 percentage point (11 percent) increase in the proportion
uninsured with no change in private insurance coverage.
Row two presents the estimates of equation (6), which includes the welfare policy variables. The
estimates associated with the welfare caseload in row two are very similar to those in row one. As for the policy
variables, the coefficients on TANF and AFDC waivers are not statistically significant. So again, from a
statistical point of view, the evidence in Table 4 suggests that changes in the welfare caseload due to policy had
the same effect on the insurance status of children in low-income families as did changes in the welfare caseload
due to other factors. Therefore, the effect of welfare reform on low-income children’s insurance status would be
significantly less, for example one-third the size, than the estimates associated with changes in the caseload. In
all cases, however, the coefficients on the policy variables imply that changes in the caseload due to policy had
less adverse consequences than did changes in the caseload due to other factors.
Other estimates of note in Table 4 are those pertaining to Medicaid income eligibility. These estimates
suggest that expansions in Medicaid income eligibility thresholds were associated with a significant increase in
Medicaid participation and a significant decrease in the proportion of uninsured children. There is little
evidence that the Medicaid expansions resulted in a decline in private insurance coverage, contrary to some of
the earlier literature in this area (Cutler and Gruber 1996).

18

VI. Conclusions

There is a widespread belief that an unintended consequence of welfare reform was loss of health
insurance coverage among low-income families. This belief is supported by findings from “leaver” studies,
which show that a significant number, perhaps 40 to 50 percent, of women and children who leave welfare are
uninsured in the year after leaving welfare, and descriptive statistics from national data sources that show a
significant decrease in Medicaid enrollment during the period of welfare reform. Moreover, the low rates of
employer-sponsored insurance on jobs typically obtained by low-educated women, and the administrative
hurdles associated with Medicaid enrollment, are consistent with the above belief. In this study, we investigated
the empirical evidence to substantiate this belief.
Results from our study indicate that changes in the welfare caseload were associated with an increase in
the proportion of low-educated women and their children who are without health insurance. However, the
increase in the proportion uninsured is significantly less than that implied by “leaver” studies and approximately
half of the actual decrease in Medicaid coverage. Estimates from our analysis suggest that the 42 percent
decrease in the caseload between 1996 and 1999 were associated with the following changes in the insurance
status of low-educated single mothers:
•

a decrease in Medicaid participation of between three and four percentage points (between
seven and nine percent);

•

an increase in employer-sponsored insurance coverage of two percentage points (six percent);

•

and an increase in the proportion uninsured of between 0.5 and 2.5 percentage points (two to
nine percent).

For children in these families, the decline in the caseload between 1996 and 1999 was associated with the
following:
•

a decrease in Medicaid participation of between two to three percentage points (three to five
percent);

•

an increase in private insurance coverage of between zero and two percentage points (zero to
nine percent);

19

•

and an increase in the proportion uninsured of between one and two percentage points (six and
eleven percent).

A few points are worth noting. First, the increase in the proportion uninsured is less than the decline in
Medicaid coverage; there is clear evidence that changes in the caseload and the resulting greater work effort of
low-educated single mothers resulted in some increase in employer-sponsored coverage. Second, the increase in
the proportion of low-educated, single mothers without health insurance is less than that implied by “leaver”
studies. To see why, note that between 1996 and 1999, the proportion of low-educated single mothers receiving
cash assistance in our sample decreased by 13.6 percentage points (40%). If 40 percent of these women were
uninsured, as suggested by “leaver” studies, the proportion of all low-educated, single mothers that are
uninsured would have increased by 5.4 (0.4 x 13.6) percentage points. Our estimates suggest that it increased by
between 0.5 to 2.5 percentage points, which is only 10 to 50 percent of the increase in uninsured implied by
“leaver” studies. One possible reason for the difference between estimates is that “leaver” studies ignore entry
effects; there may be significant heterogeneity in the health insurance coverage of women deterred from
entering welfare and those induced to leave welfare.
We also obtained estimates of the effect of changes in the caseload due to state and federal welfare
reform policy on the health insurance status of low-income families. On the one hand, these estimates indicated
that changes in the caseload due to welfare policy had the same effect on insurance status as did changes in
caseload due to other factors. This implies that the effect of welfare reform on insurance status was about one
third the size of the effects listed above, assuming that welfare policy was responsible for one-third of the
decline in the caseload. On the other hand, these estimates suggest, albeit with significant qualification, that
decreases in the caseload caused by government policy had less adverse effects on health insurance coverage
than did decreases in the caseload due to other factors. This is a reasonable result. Women induced to leave, or
not enter, welfare because of government policy may be much more likely to take advantage of transitional
Medicaid benefits and to find jobs that provide health insurance than women induced to leave the program
because of a strong economy. The latter women may have better labor market opportunities and better long
range economic prospects that include obtaining private health insurance. They also may be healthier and have

20

healthier children and less likely to need Medicaid and therefore less likely to enroll in Medicaid. Further study
is required to sort out these possibilities.
What are the implications of these findings? Mostly, the significantly smaller adverse consequences
found here as compared to other studies weaken the argument that PROWRA and Medicaid has failed to
provide insurance to low-educated women who have exited welfare. For example, Kronebusch (2001) states:
“The evidence … indicates that the states have largely failed in the task of protecting Medicaid coverage of lowincome children (p.110).” In light of our findings, this appears to be somewhat of an overstatement. It is true
that declines in the welfare caseload have adversely affected health insurance coverage of low-income women
and children, but the effects are not as large as previously thought and they do not suggest a general failure of
the Medicaid program, as implied by Kronebusch (2001). Moreover, they are apparently not solely due to
changes in government policy, but also because of declines in the caseload related to other factors such as better
economic conditions.
The relatively small effects also suggest that welfare reform and the declines in the welfare caseload has
not led to a significant decrease in access to health care that may adversely impact the health of low-income
families. Of course, some families who have become uninsured as a result of not being on welfare will suffer
some financial hardship and possibly some adverse health consequences. However, the relatively small increase
in the proportion of low-income families without insurance associated with welfare reform does not suggest that
there was a fundamental problem with the safeguards provided in PRWORA to protect health insurance
coverage of former welfare recipients. This is particularly true since some portion of uninsured persons is
eligible for Medicaid and will enroll in the program at the time medical services are required.
Similarly, the results of this study weaken the argument that cite the loss of health insurance as a
consequence of welfare reform as justification for an expansion of Medicaid and the State Children’s Health
Insurance Program (SCHIP) to adults (Holahan and Weil 2001). Proponents of this argument suggest that the
large number of uninsured welfare “leavers” illustrates the problem of relying on the labor market to provide
health insurance coverage. But the smaller effects found in this study suggest that many women who were
deterred from entering or who left welfare remained insured, particularly those induced to leave welfare because
of government policies, either by using their transitional Medicaid benefits, or by obtaining employer-sponsored

21

insurance. Indeed, some may argue that these findings show that low-income workers may have more
opportunity to obtain employer-sponsored insurance than was previously thought possible. Currie and Yelowitz
(2000) show that among working single mothers, over 60 percent were covered by private insurance in 1996, a
figure that has undoubtedly increased because of welfare reform. Currie and Yelowitz (2000) also show that
over 75 percent of low-educated workers are offered employer-sponsored health insurance. So an alternative to
expanding Medicaid to near-poor adults is to help low-income workers buy into employer-sponsored insurance.
This may be a more cost effective way to increase health insurance coverage and protect health than expanding
Medicaid and SCHIP, which basically provide a voucher for free and unlimited health care that results in a
significant amount of over utilization (i.e., moral hazard), and which risks causing many families with
employer-sponsored insurance to drop such insurance (Cutler and Gruber 1996).

Acknowledgement: The authors thank Timothy Goodspeed, Michael Grossman, Ted Joyce, Sanders Korenman,
Robert Schoeni, and David Cutler for helpful suggestions.

22

References

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., and Mullainathan, S. 2002. “How much should we trust difference-in-differences
estimates?” NBER WP 8841. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Blank, R. 2002. “Evaluating welfare reform in the United States.” Journal of Economic Literature 40(4):1-43.
Chavkin, W., Romero, D., and Wise, PH. “State welfare reform policies and declines in health insurance.”
American Journal of Public Health 90(6):900-908.
Council of Economic Advisers, 1999. "Technical report: The effects of welfare policy and economic expansion
on welfare caseloads: An update." Washington, D.C: Executive Office of the President of the United
States.
Cunningham, P.J., Schaefer, E., and Hogan, C. 1999. “Who declines employer-sponsored health insurance and
is uninsured?” Issue Brief 22, Washington,DC: Center for Studying Health System Change.
Currie, J., and Yellowitz, A. 2000. “Health insurance and less skilled workers.” In Finding Jobs: Work and
Welfare Reform, eds. Card, D., and Blank, R.M., New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Currie, J., and J. Grogger. 2002. “Medicaid expansions and welfare contractions: offsetting effects on prenatal
care and infant health.” Journal of Health Economics 21(2): 313-336.
Cutler, D., and Gruber, J. 1996. “Does public insurance crowd out private insurance?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111:391-430.
Dubay, L., and Kenney, G. 1996. “Did the Medicaid Expansions For Pregnant Women Crowd
Out Private Coverage?” Washington D.C.: The Urban Institute. Unpublished Manuscript.
Ellwood, M. 1999. “The Mediciad eligibility maze: coverage expands but enrollment problems persist.”
Assessing the New Federalism Occasional Paper #30. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Families USA Foundation. 1999. “Losing Health Insurance: the Unintended Consequences of Welfare Reform.”
Washington, DC: The W.K. Kellogg Foundation, the George Gund Foundation and the Nathan
Cummings Foundation: May 1999.
Garrett, B. and Holohan J. “Health insurance coverage after welfare.” Health Affairs. Jan-Feb. 2000.
Garrett, B. and Hudman, J. 2002. “Women who left welfare: Health care coverage, access and use of
health services.” The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, Washington, DC.
Gladden, T., and Taber, C. 2000. “Wage progression among less skilled workers.” In Finding Jobs: Work and
Welfare Reform, eds. Card, D., and Blank, R.M., New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Grogger, Jeff, Lynn Karoly, and Jacob Klerman. 2002. Consequences of welfare reform: A research
synthesis. DRU-2676-DHHS.
Guyer, B. 2000. “Medicaid and Prenatal Care: Necessary but Not Sufficient.” Journal of the American Medical
Association 264:2264-2265.
Holahan, J., and Weil, A. 2001. “Health insurance, welfare and work.” Welfare Reform and Beyond: Policy
Brief, Washington, DC: Brookings Institute.
Joyce, T, Kaestner, R., and Korenman, S. 2002. “Welfare reform and non-marital fertility in the 1990s.”
unpublished manuscript, Baruch College of the City University of New York, NY.
Kronebusch, K. 2001. “Medicaid for children: Federal mandates, welfare reform, and policy backsliding.”
Health Affairs, 20:97-111.
Ku and Garrett. 2000.”How welfare reform and economic factors affected Medicaid participation: 1984 -96.
Discussion Paper, Assessing the New Federalism. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Kaushal, N., and Kaestner, R. 2001. “From welfare to work: Has welfare reform worked?” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 20(4): 740-761.
Moffitt R, and Slade, E. 1997. Healthcare coverage for children who are on and off welfare. The Future of
Children, 7(1):87-98.
Schoeni, R. F. and Blank, R.M. 2000. "What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on welfare
participation, employment, income, poverty and family structure." National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper No. 7627. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

23

Table 1
Health Insurance Status of Women and Children: 1992-1999
Women Ages 18-44 Years, Education <= 12 Years; Children Ages 0-14

1992

1996

1999

1992

1996

1999

Proportion
Employer Sponsored
Insurance in Own
Name
1992 1996 1999

21599

0.509

0.456

0.356

0.313

0.330

0.400

0.268

0.277

45199

0.098

0.102

0.084

0.687

0.690

0.693

0.257

28412

0.169

0.181

0.146

0.507

0.516

0.524

Single Mothers

35778

0.592

0.614

0.559

0.280

0.278

Married Mothers

80726

0.130

0.210

0.209

0.667

0.636

Sample Description
Women
Target Group
Single mothers
Comparison Groups
Married mothers
Single, no children

Sample
Size 1

Covered by Public
Insurance

Covered by Private
Insurance

Covered by Champus2
Uninsured
1992

1996

1999

1992

1996

1999

0.341

0.010

0.020

0.015

0.209

0.263

0.294

0.279

0.253

0.043

0.042

0.034

0.203

0.218

0.230

0.323

0.282

0.293

0.016

0.022

0.025

0.337

0.334

0.347

0.329

--

--

--

0.011

0.024

0.021

0.170

0.173

0.179

0.649

--

--

--

0.041

0.042

0.034

0.202

0.189

0.170

Children living with

Notes: 1 Sample size pertains to the combined total for years 1992-1999.
2
Including Military Health Care, Indian Health Care, and Champus-Veteran's Affairs.

24

Table 2
OLS Estimates of the Effect of AFDC/TANF Caseload, Welfare Policy, Unemployment Rates and State Medicaid Eligibility on
the Health Insurance Status of Low-educated, Single Mothers; Women Ages 18-44, Education <= 12 Years
Explanatory Variables
Log Caseload

0.081**
(0.025)

Employer Sponsored Insurance
in Own Name
-0.040
(0.029)

Log Caseload

0.085**
(0.026)

-0.038
(0.029)

-0.038
(0.026)

TANF

0.027
(0.035)

0.005
(0.030)

-0.016
(0.021)

γ 1 = −0.005

γ 1 = −0.054

γ 1 = 0.015

0.015
(0.016)

0.015
(0.011)

-0.034*
(0.016)

γ 1 = 0.035

γ 1 = −0.088

γ 1 = 0.075

Medicaid Eligibility
134-184 % of FPL

-0.020
(0.015)

-0.000
(0.012)

-0.004
(0.016)

Medicaid Eligibility
>184 % of FPL

0.004
(0.016)

-0.032
(0.017)

0.002
(0.017)

Unemployment Rate

-0.002
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

Lagged Unemployment Rate

0.006
(0.005)

-0.013**
(0.004)

0.005
(0.005)

AFDC Waivers

Medicaid Coverage

Uninsured
-0.032
(0.025)

Notes: Estimates in top two panels are from separate regressions. Dependent variables are listed in column headings. Each regression controls for family size,
other family income, age, race, number of kids and number of young kids, state Medicaid eligibility, unemployment rate – current and one-year lag, state and
year fixed effects and real state per capita income. State Medicaid eligibility variables are defined on the basis of Medicaid eligibility for pregnant women.
Standard errors (assuming non-independence within states) are in parentheses. * 0.01<p=<0.05, ** p=<0.01

25

Table 3
Difference-in-differences Estimates of the Effect of AFDC/TANF Caseload, Welfare Policy, Unemployment Rates and State Medicaid Eligibility on the
Health Insurance Status of Low-educated, Single Mothers; Women Ages 18-44, Education <= 12 Years
Explanatory Variables
Comparison Group

Medicaid Coverage

Log Caseload

0.079**
(0.020)

Single,
No Kids
0.061*
(0.029)

Log Caseload

0.077**
(0.019)

0.062*
(0.029)

-0.050
(0.033)

TANF

0.010
(0.028)

0.036
(0.036)

γ 1 = 0.043

Uninsured

-0.047
(0.035)

Single,
No Kids
-0.010
(0.030)

-0.045
(0.038)

-0.055
(0.035)

-0.015
(0.030)

-0.004
(0.026)

-0.014
(0.033)

0.005
(0.033)

-0.013
(0.028)

γ 1 = −0.058

γ 1 = −0.037

γ 1 = 0.002

γ 1 = −0.072

γ 1 = 0.028

0.010
(0.016)

0.011
(0.016)

0.024
(0.017)

0.012
(0.017)

-0.022
(0.016)

-0.024
(0.020)

γ 1 = 0.043

γ 1 = 0.025

γ 1 = −0.130

γ 1 = −0.085

γ 1 = 0.018

γ 1 = 0.065

Medicaid Eligibility
134-184 % of FPL

-0.016
(0.014)

-0.021
(0.017)

0.003
(0.014)

0.007
(0.017)

-0.008
(0.017)

-0.006
(0.021)

Medicaid Eligibility
>184 % of FPL

0.001
(0.017)

0.003
(0.018)

-0.026
(0.017)

-0.025
(0.023)

-0.009
(0.020)

0.003
(0.020)

Unemployment Rate

-0.006
(0.006)

-0.004
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.008)

0.002
(0.009)

-0.001
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.009)

AFDC Waivers

Married Mothers

Employer Sponsored Insurance
in Own Name
Married Mothers
Single,
No Kids
-0.050
-0.048
(0.030)
(0.037)

Married Mothers

Lagged Unemployment Rate

0.009
0.009
-0.018**
-0.014*
0.003
0.003
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.007)
Notes: See notes to Table 2. All controls are introduced separately for the target and comparison groups. Each regression also controls for state*year effects.
*0.01<p=<0.05, **p=<0.01.

26

Table 4
OLS Estimates of the Effect of AFDC/TANF Caseload, Welfare Policy, Unemployment Rates and State Medicaid Eligibility on
the Health Insurance Status of Children of Single Mothers; Women Ages 18-44, Education <= 12 Years; Children Ages 0-14
Explanatory Variable
Medicaid Coverage
Private Insurance
Uninsured
Log Caseload

Target Group Only
0.062*
(0.027)

DD Estimates
0.034
(0.029)

Target Group Only
-0.048*
(0.024)

DD Estimates
-0.008
(0.030)

Target Group Only
-0.024
(0.025)

DD Estimates
-0.037
(0.024)

Log Caseload

0.070**
(0.026)

0.035
(0.030)

-0.044
(0.024)

0.000
(0.036)

-0.031
(0.023)

-0.046*
(0.019)

TANF

0.033
(0.032)

0.033
(0.036)

0.024
(0.019)

0.026
(0.024)

-0.036
(0.025)

-0.037
(0.041)

γ 1 = −0.040

γ 1 = −0.075

γ 1 = −0.124

γ 1 = −0.087

γ 1 = 0.089

γ 1 = 0.077

0.026
(0.015)

0.028
(0.016)

0.017
(0.009)

-0.016
(0.014)

-0.023
(0.014)

-0.007
(0.016)

γ 1 = −0.017

γ 1 = −0.058

γ 1 = −0.101

γ 1 = 0.053

γ 1 = 0.046

γ 1 = −0.023

Medicaid Eligibility Income
50-100% of FPL

0.016
(0.013)

0.019
(0.014)

0.013
(0.012)

0.014
(0.016)

-0.019
(0.011)

-0.024
(0.014)

Medicaid Eligibility Income
101-133% of FPL

0.055**
(0.014)

0.044**
(0.016)

0.006
(0.015)

0.012
(0.020)

-0.046**
(0.013)

-0.045**
(0.015)

Medicaid Eligibility Income
134-199% of FPL

0.039*
(0.018)

0.031
(0.017)

0.010
(0.013)

-0.002
(0.020)

-0.031
(0.017)

-0.014
(0.015)

Medicaid Eligibility Income
>199% of FPL

0.051*
(0.020)

0.044
(0.027)

0.007
(0.021)

-0.027
(0.033)

-0.034*
(0.016)

-0.005
(0.019)

Unemployment Rate

0.002
(0.006)

0.004
(0.007)

0.000
(0.006)

0.008
(0.009)

0.001
(0.005)

-0.001
(0.007)

Lagged Unemployment Rate

0.002
(0.006)

0.002
(0.007)

-0.006
(0.004)

-0.010*
(0.005)

0.001
(0.005)

0.003
(0.005)

AFDC Waivers

27

Notes: Estimates in top two panels are from a separate regression. Dependent variables are listed in column headings. Each regression controls for family size,
family income, age, race, number of kids and number of young kids, state Medicaid eligibility, unemployment rate – current and one-year lag, state and year
fixed effects and real state per capita income. For the DD estimates, children living with married mothers are the comparison group and all controls are
introduced separately for the target and comparison groups. DD regressions also control for state*year effects. Standard errors (assuming non-independence
within states) are in parentheses. *0.01<p=<0.05, ** p=<0.01

28

Appendix Table 1
OLS Estimates of the Effect of AFDC/TANF Caseload, Welfare Policy, Unemployment Rates and State Medicaid Eligibility on the
Health Insurance Status of Low-educated, Married Mothers and Single Women; Women Ages 18-44, Education <= 12 Years
Explanatory Variables
Sample

Medicaid Coverage
Married Mothers

Employer Sponsored Insurance
in Own Name
Married Mothers

Uninsured

Log Caseload

0.002
(0.012)

Single,
No Kids
0.020
(0.017)

Married Mothers

0.010
(0.015)

Single,
No Kids
0.008
(0.018)

0.015
(0.022)

Single,
No Kids
-0.022
(0.024)

Log Caseload

0.004
(0.013)

0.020
(0.017)

0.009
(0.015)

0.010
(0.018)

0.011
(0.022)

-0.024
(0.025)

TANF

0.021
(0.011)

-0.011
(0.018)

0.006
(0.015)

0.020
(0.016)

-0.022
(0.017)

-0.005
(0.019)

AFDC Waivers

0.005
(0.007)

0.002
(0.011)

-0.010
(0.011)

0.004
(0.013)

-0.016
(0.009)

-0.012
(0.011)

Medicaid Eligibility
134-184 % of FPL

-0.005
(0.007)

0.002
(0.010)

-0.006
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.014)

0.006
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.014)

Medicaid Eligibility
>184 % of FPL

0.002
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.009)

-0.007
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.012)

0.014
(0.009)

0.001
(0.013)

Unemployment Rate

0.004
(0.003)

0.002
(0.005)

0.002
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.007)

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.007)

Lagged Unemployment Rate

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.003)

0.005
(0.003)

0.000
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

0.003
(0.005)

Notes: See notes to Table 2.

29

Appendix Table 2
OLS Estimates of the Effect of AFDC/TANF Caseload, Welfare Policy, Unemployment Rates and State Medicaid Eligibility on
the Health Insurance Status of Children of Married Mothers; Women Ages 18-44, Education <= 12 Years; Children Ages 0-14 years
Explanatory Variable
Log Caseload

Medicaid Coverage
0.028
(0.022)

Private Insurance
-0.041
(0.020)

Uninsured
0.013
(0.021)

Log Caseload

0.027
(0.023)

-0.033
(0.022)

0.009
(0.021)

TANF

0.000
(0.014)

0.001
(0.018)

-0.003
(0.020)

AFDC Waivers

-0.007
(0.010)

0.037**
(0.011)

-0.017
(0.011)

Medicaid Eligibility Income
50-100% of FPL

-0.004
(0.008)

-0.000
(0.009)

0.006
(0.008)

Medicaid Eligibility Income
101-133% of FPL

0.010
(0.011)

-0.004
(0.011)

-0.001
(0.008)

Medicaid Eligibility Income
134-199% of FPL

0.006
(0.013)

0.015
(0.013)

-0.015
(0.012)

Medicaid Eligibility Income
>199% of FPL

0.008
(0.018)

0.033
(0.021)

-0.025
(0.013)

Unemployment Rate

-0.003
(0.005)

-0.008
(0.005)

0.002
(0.005)

Lagged Unemployment Rate

0.001
(0.004)

0.002
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.004)

Notes: See notes to Table 4.

30

