                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FORECASTING THE TERM STRUCTURE
                               OF GOVERNMENT BOND YIELDS

                                           Francis X. Diebold
                                               Canlin Li

                                          Working Paper 10048
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10048


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




The National Science Foundation, the Wharton Financial Institutions Center, and the Guggenheim Foundation
provided research support. For helpful comments we are grateful to the Editor (Arnold Zellner), the Associate
Editor, and three referees, as well as Dave Backus, Rob Bliss, Michael Brandt, Todd Clark, Qiang Dai, Ron
Gallant, Mike Gibbons, David Marshall, Monika Piazzesi, Eric Renault, Glenn Rudebusch, Til Schuermann,
and Stan Zin, and seminar participants at Geneva, Georgetown, Wharton, the European Central Bank, and
the National Bureau of Economic Research. We, however, bear full responsibility for all remaining flaws.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Francis X. Diebold and Canlin Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Forecasting the Term Structure of Government Bond Yields
Francis X. Diebold and Canlin Li
NBER Working Paper No. 10048
October 2003
JEL No. G1, E4, C5

                                            ABSTRACT

Despite powerful advances in yield curve modeling in the last twenty years, comparatively little
attention has been paid to the key practical problem of forecasting the yield curve. In this paper we
do so. We use neither the no-arbitrage approach, which focuses on accurately fitting the cross
section of interest rates at any given time but neglects time-series dynamics, nor the equilibrium
approach, which focuses on time-series dynamics (primarily those of the instantaneous rate) but pays
comparatively little attention to fitting the entire cross section at any given time and has been shown
to forecast poorly. Instead, we use variations on the Nelson-Siegel exponential components
framework to model the entire yield curve, period-by-period, as a three-dimensional parameter
evolving dynamically. We show that the three time-varying parameters may be interpreted as factors
corresponding to level, slope and curvature, and that they may be estimated with high efficiency.
We propose and estimate autoregressive models for the factors, and we show that our models are
consistent with a variety of stylized facts regarding the yield curve. We use our models to produce
term-structure forecasts at both short and long horizons, with encouraging results. In particular, our
forecasts appear much more accurate at long horizons than various standard benchmark forecasts.

Francis X. Diebold
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Phiadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu

Canlin Li
University of California, Riverside
canlin.li@ucr.edu
1. Introduction
          The last twenty-five years have produced major advances in theoretical models of the term
structure as well as their econometric estimation. Two popular approaches to term structure modeling
are no-arbitrage models and equilibrium models. The no-arbitrage tradition focuses on perfectly fitting
the term structure at a point in time to ensure that no arbitrage possibilities exist, which is important for
pricing derivatives. The equilibrium tradition focuses on modeling the dynamics of the instantaneous
rate, typically using affine models, after which yields at other maturities can be derived under various
assumptions about the risk premium.1 Prominent contributions in the no-arbitrage vein include Hull and
White (1990) and Heath, Jarrow and Morton (1992), and prominent contributions in the affine
equilibrium tradition include Vasicek (1977), Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985), and Duffie and Kan
(1996).
          Interest rate point forecasting is crucial for bond portfolio management, and interest rate density
forecasting is important for both derivatives pricing and risk management.2 Hence one wonders what the
modern models have to say about interest rate forecasting. It turns out that, despite the impressive
theoretical advances in the financial economics of the yield curve, surprisingly little attention has been
paid to the key practical problem of yield curve forecasting. The arbitrage-free term structure literature
has little to say about dynamics or forecasting, as it is concerned primarily with fitting the term structure
at a point in time. The affine equilibrium term structure literature is concerned with dynamics driven by
the short rate, and so is potentially linked to forecasting, but most papers in that tradition, such as de Jong
(2000) and Dai and Singleton (2000), focus only on in-sample fit as opposed to out-of-sample
forecasting. Moreover, those that do focus on out-of-sample forecasting, notably Duffee (2002),
conclude that the models forecast poorly.
          In this paper we take an explicitly out-of-sample forecasting perspective, and we use neither the
no-arbitrage approach nor the equilibrium approach. Instead, we use the Nelson-Siegel (1987)
exponential components framework to distill the entire yield curve, period-by-period, into a three-
dimensional parameter that evolves dynamically. We show that the three time-varying parameters may


          1
          The empirical literature that models yields as a cointegrated system, typically with one
underlying stochastic trend (the short rate) and stationary spreads relative to the short rate, is similar in
spirit. See Diebold and Sharpe (1990), Hall, Anderson, and Granger (1992), Shea (1992), Swanson and
White (1995), and Pagan, Hall and Martin (1996).
          2
         For comparative discussion of point and density forecasting, see Diebold, Gunther and Tay
(1998) and Diebold, Hahn and Tay (1999).

                                                       1
be interpreted as factors. Unlike factor analysis, however, in which one estimates both the unobserved
factors and the factor loadings, the Nelson-Siegel framework imposes structure on the factor loadings.3
Doing so not only facilitates highly precise estimation of the factors, but, as we show, it also lets us
interpret the factors as level, slope and curvature. We propose and estimate autoregressive models for
the factors, and then we forecast the yield curve by forecasting the factors. Our results are encouraging;
in particular, our models produce one-year-ahead forecasts that are noticeably more accurate than
standard benchmarks.
        Related work includes the factor models of Litzenberger, Squassi and Weir (1995), Bliss (1997a,
1997b), Dai and Singleton (2000), de Jong and Santa-Clara (1999), de Jong (2000), Brandt and Yaron
(2001) and Duffee (2002). Particularly relevant are the three-factor models of Balduzzi, Das, Foresi and
Sundaram (1996), Chen (1996), and especially the Andersen-Lund (1997) model with stochastic mean
and volatility, whose three factors are interpreted in terms of level, slope and curvature. We will
subsequently discuss related work in greater detail; for now, suffice it to say that little of it considers
forecasting directly, and that our approach, although related, is indeed very different.
        We proceed as follows. In section 2 we provide a detailed description of our modeling
framework, which interprets and extends earlier work in ways linked to recent developments in multi-
factor term structure modeling, and we also show how it can replicate a variety of stylized facts about the
yield curve. In section 3 we proceed to an empirical analysis, describing the data, estimating the models,
and examining out-of-sample forecasting performance. In section 4 we offer interpretive concluding
remarks.
2. Modeling and Forecasting the Term Structure I: Methods
        Here we introduce the framework that we use for fitting and forecasting the yield curve. We
argue that the well-known Nelson-Siegel (1987) curve is well-suited to our ultimate forecasting purposes,
and we introduce a novel twist of interpretation, showing that the three coefficients in the Nelson-Siegel
curve may be interpreted as latent level, slope and curvature factors. We also argue that the nature of the
factors and factor loadings implicit in the Nelson-Siegel model facilitate consistency with various
empirical properties of the yield curve that have been cataloged over the years. Finally, motivated by our
interpretation of the Nelson-Siegel model as a three-factor model of level, slope and curvature, we
contrast it to various multi-factor models that have appeared in the literature.


        3
         Classic unrestricted factor analyses include Litterman and Scheinkman (1991) and Knez,
Litterman and Scheinkman (1994).

                                                       2
Constructing “Raw” Yields
        Let us first fix ideas and establish notation by introducing three key theoretical constructs and the
relationships among them: the discount curve, the forward curve, and the yield curve. Let Pt( ) denote
the price of a -period discount bond, i.e., the present value at time t of $1 receivable periods ahead, and
let yt( ) denote its continuously-compounded zero-coupon nominal yield to maturity. From the yield
curve we obtain the discount curve,

                                                                                   y t( )
                                               P t( )              e                           ,


and from the discount curve we obtain the instantaneous (nominal) forward rate curve,

                                                                    
                                           f t( )           P t ( ) / P t( ) .


The relationship between the yield to maturity and the forward rate is therefore

                                                                            
                                                                        
                                                               1
                                            y t( )                             f t(u)du ,
                                                                            0


which implies that the zero-coupon yield is an equally-weighed average of forward rates. Given the yield
curve or forward curve, we can price any coupon bond as the sum of the present values of future coupon
and principal payments.
        In practice, yield curves, discount curves and forward curves are not observed. Instead, they
must be estimated from observed bond prices. Two popular approaches to constructing yields proceed by
estimating a smooth discount curve and then converting to yields at the relevant maturities via the above
formulae. The first discount-curve approach to yield construction is due to McCulloch (1975) and
McCulloch and Kwon (1993), who model the discount curve with a cubic spline. The fitted discount
curve, however, diverges at long maturities instead of converging to zero. Hence such curves provide a
poor fit to yield curves that are flat or have a flat long end, which requires an exponentially decreasing
discount function.
        A second discount-curve approach to yield construction is due to Vasicek and Fong (1982), who
fit exponential splines to the discount curve, using a negative transformation of maturity instead of
maturity itself, which ensures that the forward rates and zero-coupon yields converge to a fixed limit as
maturity increases. Hence the Vasicek-Fong model is more successful at fitting yield curves with flat

                                                                3
long ends. It has problems of its own, however, because its estimation requires iterative nonlinear
optimization, and it can be hard to restrict the implied forward rates to be positive.
        A third and very popular approach to yield construction is due to Fama and Bliss (1987), who
construct yields not via an estimated discount curve, but rather via estimated forward rates at the
observed maturities. Their method sequentially constructs the forward rates necessary to price
successively longer-maturity bonds, often called an “unsmoothed Fama-Bliss” forward rates, and then
constructs “unsmoothed Fama-Bliss yields” by averaging the appropriate unsmoothed Fama-Bliss
forward rates. The unsmoothed Fama-Bliss yields exactly price the included bonds. Throughout this
paper, we model and forecast the unsmoothed Fama-Bliss yields.
Modeling Yields: The Nelson-Siegel Yield Curve and its Interpretation
        At any given time, we have a large set of (Fama-Bliss unsmoothed) yields, to which we fit a
parametric curve for purposes of modeling and forecasting. Throughout this paper, we use the Nelson-
Siegel (1987) functional form, which is a convenient and parsimonious three-component exponential
approximation. In particular, Nelson and Siegel (1987), as extended by Siegel and Nelson (1988), work
with the forward rate curve,

                                                                                                                   
                                                                                             t                          t
                                             f t( )   
                                                                   1t          2t e                   3t t   e                  .


The Nelson-Siegel forward rate curve can be viewed as a constant plus a Laguerre function, which is a
polynomial times an exponential decay term and is a popular mathematical approximating function.4 The
corresponding yield curve is

                                                                                                                    
                                                                        1 e      t
                                                                                                        1 e                t                
                                                                                                                                               t
                            y t( )   
                                              1t              2t                                 3t                                    e          .
                                                                           t                                     t


The Nelson-Siegel yield curve also corresponds to a discount curve that begins at one at zero maturity
and approaches zero at infinite maturity, as appropriate.
        Let us now interpret the parameters in the Nelson-Siegel model. The parameter                                                                  t   governs the
exponential decay rate; small values of                   t   produce slow decay and can better fit the curve at long
maturities, while large values of        t   produce fast decay and can better fit the curve at short maturities.                                                        t




        4
            See, for example, Courant and Hilbert (1953).

                                                                                      4
also governs where the loading on                                       3t   achieves its maximum.5
            We interpret                 1t ,      2t   and        3t     as three latent dynamic factors. The loading on                                    1t   is 1, a constant
that does not decay to zero in the limit; hence it may be viewed as a long-term factor. The loading on                                                                              2t
             
                t
is (1  e            )/      t    , a function that starts at 1 but decays monotonically and quickly to 0; hence it may be
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                             t                        t
viewed as a short-term factor. The loading on                                           3t   is ((1  e          )/   t   ) e             , which starts at 0 (and is thus
not short-term), increases, and then decays to zero (and thus is not long-term); hence it may be viewed as
a medium-term factor. We plot the three factor loadings in Figure 1. They are similar to those obtained
by Bliss (1997a), who estimated loadings via a statistical factor analysis.6
            An important insight is that the three factors, which following the literature we have thus far
called long-term, short-term and medium-term, may also be interpreted in terms of level, slope and
curvature. The long-term factor                                    1t ,   for example, governs the yield curve level. In particular, one can
easily verify that yt( )                     1t .    Alternatively, note that an increase in                            1t   increases all yields equally, as the
loading is identical at all maturities, thereby changing the level of the yield curve.
            The short-term factor                           2t   is closely related to the yield curve slope, which we define as the ten-
year yield minus the three-month yield. In particular, yt(120)  y t(3)  .78                                                            2t   .06   3t .   Some authors such
as Frankel and Lown (1994), moreover, define the yield curve slope as yt( )  y t(0) , which is exactly
equal to        
                      2t .       Alternatively, note that an increase in                           2t   increases short yields more than long yields,
because the short rates load on                               2t    more heavily, thereby changing the slope of the yield curve.
            We have seen that                          1t   governs the level of the yield curve and                             2t       governs its slope. It is
interesting to note, moreover, that the instantaneous yield depends on both the level and slope factors,
because yt(0)                    1t   2t .     Several other models have the same implication. In particular, Dai and
Singleton (2000) show that the three-factor models of Balduzzi, Das, Foresi and Sundaram (1996) and
Chen (1996) impose the restrictions that the instantaneous yield is an affine function of only two of the
three state variables, a property shared by the Andersen-Lund (1997) three-factor non-affine model.
            Finally, the medium-term factor                                     3t   is closely related to the yield curve curvature, which we
define as twice the two-year yield minus the sum of the ten-year and three-month yields. In particular,



            5
                Throughout this paper, and for reasons that will be discussed subsequently in detail, we set                                                                    t    =
0.0609 for all t.
            6
          Factors are typically not uniquely identified in factor analysis. Bliss (1997a) rotates the first
factor so that its loading is a vector of ones. In our approach, the unit loading on the first factor is
imposed from the beginning, which potentially enables us to estimate the other factors more efficiently.

                                                                                               5
2yt(24)  y t(3)  yt(120)  .00053   2t   .37      3t .    Alternatively, note that an increase in                           3t   will have little
effect on very short or very long yields, which load minimally on it, but will increase medium-term
yields, which load more heavily on it, thereby increasing yield curve curvature.
             Now that we have interpreted Nelson-Siegel as a three-factor of level, slope and curvature, it is
appropriate to contrast it to Litzenberger, Squassi and Weir (1995), which is highly related yet distinct.
First, although Litzenberger et al. model the discount curve Pt( ) using exponential components and we
model the yield curve yt( ) using exponential components, the yield curve is a log transformation of the
discount curve because yt( )  log P t( )/ , so the two approaches are equivalent in the one-factor case.
In the multi-factor case, however, a sum of factors in the yield curve will not be a sum in the discount
curve, so there is generally no simple mapping between the approaches. Second, both we and
Litzenberger et al. provide novel interpretations of the parameters of fitted curves. Litzenberger et al.,
however, do not interpret parameters directly as factors.
             In closing this sub-section, it is worth noting that what we have called the “Nelson-Siegel curve”
is actually a different factorization than the one originally advocated by Nelson and Siegel (1987), who
used

                                                                                
                                                                       1 e       t                
                                                                                                     t
                                           y t( )         b1t   b2t                     b3t e          .
                                                                           t


Obviously the Nelson-Siegel factorization matches ours with b1t                                 1t ,   b2t    2t   3t ,   and b3t           3t .   Ours is
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                         t
preferable, however, for reasons that we are now in a position to appreciate. First, (1  e                                                  )/     t    and
     
       t
e          have similar monotonically decreasing shape, so if we were to interpret b2 and b3 as factors, then
their loadings would be forced to be very similar, which creates at least two problems. First,
conceptually, it would be hard to provide intuitive interpretations of the factors in the original Nelson-
Siegel framework. Second, operationally, it would be difficult to estimate the factors precisely, because
the high coherence in the factors produces multicolinearity.
Stylized Facts of the Yield Curve and the Model’s Potential Ability to Replicate Them
             A good model of yield curve dynamics should be able to reproduce the historical stylized facts
concerning the average shape of the yield curve, the variety of shapes assumed at different times, the
strong persistence of yields and weak persistence of spreads, and so on. It is not easy for a parsimonious
model to accord with all such facts. Duffee (2002), for example, shows that multi-factor affine models
are inconsistent with many of the facts, perhaps because term premia may not be adequately captured by
affine models.

                                                                       6
        Let us consider some of the most important stylized facts and the ability of our model to replicate
them, in principle:
        (1) The average yield curve is increasing and concave. In our framework, the average yield
                curve is the yield curve corresponding to the average values of                  1t ,   2t   and    3t .    It is
                certainly possible in principle that it may be increasing and concave.
        (2) The yield curve assumes a variety of shapes through time, including upward sloping,
                downward sloping, humped, and inverted humped. The yield curve in our framework
                can assume all of those shapes. Whether and how often it does depends upon the
                variation in         1t ,   2t   and   3t .

        (3) Yield dynamics are persistent, and spread dynamics are much less persistent. Persistent
                yield dynamics would correspond to strong persistence of                1t ,   and less persistent spread
                dynamics would correspond to weaker persistence of               2t .

        (4) The short end of the yield curve is more volatile than the long end. In our framework, this is
                reflected in factor loadings: the short end depends positively on both                       1t   and      2t ,

                whereas the long end depends only on              1t .

        (5) Long rates are more persistent than short rates. In our framework, long rates depend only on

                  1t .   If   1t   is the most persistent factor, then long rates will be more persistent than short
                rates.
Overall, it seems clear that our framework is consistent, at least in principle, with many of the key
stylized facts of yield curve behavior. Whether principle accords with practice is an empirical matter, to
which we now turn.
3. Modeling and Forecasting the Term Structure II: Empirics
        In this section, we estimate and assess the fit of the three-factor model in a time series of cross
sections, after which we model and forecast the extracted level, slope and curvature components. We
begin by introducing the data.
The Data
        We use end-of-month price quotes (bid-ask average) for U.S. Treasuries, from January 1985
through December 2000, taken from the CRSP government bonds files. CRSP filters the data,
eliminating bonds with option features (callable and flower bonds), and bonds with special liquidity
problems (notes and bonds with less than one year to maturity, and bills with less than one month to
maturity), and then converts the filtered bond prices to unsmoothed Fama-Bliss (1987) forward rates.
Then, using programs and CRSP data kndly supplied by Rob Bliss, we convert the unsmoothed

                                                              7
Fama-Bliss forward rates into unsmoothed Fama-Bliss zero yields.
        Although most of our analysis does not require the use of fixed maturities, doing so greatly
simplifies our subsequent forecasting exercises. Hence we pool the data into fixed maturities. Because
not every month has the same maturities available, we linearly interpolate nearby maturities to pool into
fixed maturities of 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 30, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84, 96, 108, and 120 months, where a
month is defined as 30.4375 days. Although there is no bond with exactly 30.4375 days to maturity, each
month there are many bonds with either 30, 31, 32, 33, or 34 days to maturity. Similarly we obtain data
for maturities of 3 months, 6 months, etc.7
        The various yields, as well as the yield curve level, slope and curvature defined above, will play
a prominent role in the sequel. Hence we focus on them now in some detail. In Figure 2 we provide a
three-dimensional plot of our yield curve data. The large amount of temporal variation in the level is
visually apparent. The variation in slope and curvature is less strong, but nevertheless apparent. In Table
1, we present descriptive statistics for the yields. It is clear that the typical yield curve is upward sloping,
that the long rates are less volatile and more persistent than short rates, that the level (120-month yield) is
highly persistent but varies only moderately relative to its mean, that the slope is less persistent than any
individual yield but quite highly variable relative to its mean, and the curvature is the least persistent of
all factors and the most highly variable relative to its mean.8 It is also worth noting, because it will be
relevant for our future modeling choices, that level, slope and curvature are not highly correlated with
each other; all pairwise correlations are less than 0.40. In Figure 3 we display the median yield curve
together with pointwise interquartile ranges. The earlier-mentioned upward sloping pattern, with long
rates less volatile than short rates, is apparent. One can also see that the distributions of yields around
their medians tend to be asymmetric, with a long right tail.
Fitting Yield Curves
        As discussed above, we fit the yield curve using the three-factor model,

                                                                           
                                                   1 e      t
                                                                      1 e      t            
                                                                                               t
                            y t( )   
                                         1t   2t                 3t                    e          .
                                                      t                  t




        7
          We checked the derived dataset and verified that the difference between it and the original
dataset is only one or two basis points.
        8
        That is why affine models don’t fit the data well; they can’t generate such high variability and
quick mean reversion in curvature.

                                                             8
                                    
We could estimate the parameters        t    {   1t,   2t,   3t,    t}   by nonlinear least squares, for each month t.
Following standard practice tracing to Nelson and Siegel (1987), however, we instead fix                          t   at a
prespecified value, which lets us compute the values of the two regressors (factor loadings) and use
ordinary least squares to estimate the betas (factors), for each month t. Doing so enhances not only
simplicity and convenience, but also numerical trustworthiness, by enabling us to replace hundreds of
potentially challenging numerical optimizations with trivial least-squares regressions. The question
arises, of course, as to an appropriate value for             t.    Recall that    t   determines the maturity at which the
loading on the medium-term, or curvature, factor achieves it maximum. Two- or three-year maturities are
commonly used in that regard, so we simply picked the average, 30 months. The                           t   value that
maximizes the loading on the medium-term factor at exactly 30 months is                         t =0.0609.

        Applying ordinary least squares to the yield data for each month gives us a time series of
estimates of { ˆ 1t, ˆ 2t, ˆ 3t} and a corresponding panel of residuals, or pricing errors. Note that, because
the maturities are not equally spaced, we implicitly weight the most “active” region of the yield curve
most heavily when fitting the model.9 There are many aspects to a full assessment of the “fit” of our
model. In Figure 4 we plot the implied average fitted yield curve against the average actual yield curve.
The two agree quite closely. In Figure 5 we dig deeper by plotting the raw yield curve and the three-
factor fitted yield curve for some selected dates. Clearly the three-factor model is capable of replicating
a variety of yield curve shapes: upward sloping, downward sloping, humped, and inverted humped. It
does, however, have difficulties at some dates, especially when yields are dispersed, with multiple
interior minima and maxima. Overall, however, the residual plot in Figure 6 indicates a good fit.
        In Table 2 we present statistics that describe the in-sample fit. The residual sample
autocorrelations indicate that pricing errors are persistent. As noted in Bliss (1997b), regardless of the
term structure estimation method used, there is a persistent discrepancy between actual bond prices and
prices estimated from term structure models. Presumably these discrepancies arise from persistent tax
and/or liquidity effects.10 However, because they persist, they should vanish from fitted yield changes.
        In Figure 7 we plot { ˆ 1t, ˆ 2t, ˆ 3t} along with the empirical level, slope and curvature defined
earlier. The figure confirms our assertion that the three factors in our model correspond to level, slope



        9
        Other weightings and loss functions have been explored by Bliss (1997b), Soderlind and
Svensson (1997), and Bates (1999).
        10
          Although, as discussed earlier, we attempted to remove illiquid bonds, complete elimination is
not possible.

                                                                    9
and curvature. The correlations between the estimated factors and the empirical level, slope, and
curvature are  ( ˆ 1t , lt) = 0.97,  ( ˆ 2t , st) = -0.99, and  ( ˆ 3t , ct) = 0.99, where (lt, s t, ct) are the empirical
level, slope and curvature of the yield curve. In Table 3 and Figure 8 (left column) we present
descriptive statistics for the estimated factors. From the autocorrelations of the three factors, we can see
that the first factor is the most persistent, and that the second factor is more persistent than the third.
Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests suggest that ˆ 1 and ˆ 2 may have a unit roots, and that ˆ 3 does not.11
Finally, the pairwise correlations between the estimated factors are not large.
Modeling and Forecasting Yield Curve Level, Slope and Curvature
         We model and forecast the Nelson-Siegel factors as univariate AR(1) processes. The AR(1)
models can be viewed as natural benchmarks determined a priori: the simplest great workhorse
autoregressive models. The yield forecasts based on underlying univariate AR(1) factor specifications
are:

                                                                                                                                    
                                                ˆ                     ˆ                1 e                      ˆ               1 e                  
                         ŷt    h/t( )     
                                                    1,t  h/t              2,t  h/t                                 3,t  h/t                    e          ,


where

                                                         ˆ                             
                                                             i,t  h/t       ĉi          ˆ i ˆ it,     i      1, 2, 3,



and ĉi and  ˆ i are obtained by regressing ˆ it on an intercept and ˆ i,t  h .12
         For comparison , we also produce yield forecasts based on an underlying multivariate VAR(1)
specification, as:

                                                                                                                                    
                                                ˆ                     ˆ                1 e                      ˆ               1 e                  
                         ŷt    h/t(   )   
                                                    1,t  h/t              2,t  h/t                                 3,t  h/t                    e          ,


where


         11
           We use SIC to choose the lags in the augmented Dickey-Fuller unit-root test. The MacKinnon
critical values for rejection of hypothesis of a unit root are -3.4518 at the one percent level, -2.8704 at the
five percent level, and -2.5714 at the ten percent level.
         12
          Note that we directly regress factors at t+h on factors at t, which is a standard method of
coaxing least squares into optimizing the relevant loss function, h-month-ahead RMSE, as opposed to the
usual 1-month-ahead RMSE. We estimate all competitor models in the same way, as described below.

                                                                                             10
                                                                        
                                                 ˆ                   ĉ ˆ ˆ t.
                                                     t  h/t 




We include the VAR forecasts for completeness, although one might expect them to be inferior to the AR
forecasts for at least two reasons. First, as is well-known from the macroeconomics literature,
unrestricted VARs tend to produce poor forecasts of economic variables even when there is important
cross-variable interaction, due to the large number of included parameters and the resulting potential for
in-sample overfitting.13 Second, our factors indeed display little cross-factor interaction and are not
highly correlated, so that an appropriate multivariate model is likely close to a stacked set of univariate
models.
          In Figure 8 (right column) we provide some evidence on the goodness of fit of the AR(1) models
fit to the estimated level, slope and curvature factors, showing residual autocorrelation functions. The
autocorrelations are very small, indicating that the models accurately describe the conditional means of
level, slope and curvature .
Out-of-Sample Forecasting Performance of the Three-Factor Model
          A good approximation to yield-curve dynamics should not only fit well in-sample, but also
forecast well out-of-sample. Because the yield curve depends only on { ˆ 1t, ˆ 2t, ˆ 3t} , forecasting the yield
curve is equivalent to forecasting { ˆ 1t, ˆ 2t, ˆ 3t} . In this section we undertake just such a forecasting
exercise. We estimate and forecast recursively, using data from 1985:1 to the time that the forecast is
made, beginning in 1994:1 and extending through 2000:12.
          In Tables 4-6 we compare h-month-ahead out-of sample forecasting results from Nelson-Siegel
models to those of several natural competitors, for maturities of 3, 12, 36, 60 and 120 months, and
forecast horizons of h = 1, 6 and 12 months. Let us now describe the competitors in terms of how their
forecasts are generated.
          (1) Random walk:

                                                 ŷt    h/t(    )      yt( ).

                 The forecast is always “no change.”
          (2) Slope regression:


          13
           That, of course, is the reason for the ubiquitous use of Bayesian analysis, featuring strong
priors on the VAR coefficients, for VAR forecasting, as pioneered by Doan, Litterman and Sims (1984).

                                                                 11
                                                                                                                   
                                         ŷt    h/t(   )  y t( )                               ĉ( )                ˆ ( ) (y t( )  yt(3)).



                The forecasted yield change is obtained from a regression of historical yield changes on
                yield curve slopes.
        (3) Fama-Bliss forward rate regression:

                                                                                                                                        h
                                         ŷt    h/t(   )  y t( )                       ĉ( )                        ˆ ( ) (f t ( )  y t( )),

                        h
                where ft ( ) is the forward rate contracted at time t for loans from time t h to time
                t h   . Hence the forecasted yield change is obtained from a regression of historical
                yield changes on forward spreads. Note that, because the forward rate is proportional to
                the derivative of the discount function, the information used to forecast future yields in
                forward rate regressions is very similar to that in slope regressions.
        (4) Cochrane-Piazzesi (2002) forward curve regression:

                                                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                                                                               12k
                           ŷt    h/t( )  y t( )            ĉ( )                              ˆ 0( ) y t(12)                         
                                                                                                                                                           ˆ k( ) ft (12).
                                                                                                                                              k 1



                Note that the Fama-Bliss forward regression is a special case of the Cochrane-Piazzesi
                forward regression.14
        (5) AR(1) on yield levels:

                                                                                                                                
                                                             ŷt    h/t(             )             ĉ( )                          ˆ yt( ).

        (6) VAR(1) on yield levels:

                                                                                                                        
                                                                      ŷt                            ĉ                        ˆy.
                                                                                      h/t                                           t



                                                                                                                                                   
                where yt     
                                    [y t(3), yt(12), y t(36), yt(60), y t(120)] .
        (7) VAR(1) on yield changes:
                                                                                                                            
                                                                       ẑt                               ĉ                    ˆz,
                                                                                      h/t                                           t



        14
          Note that this is an unrestricted version of the model estimated by Cochrane and Piazzesi.
Imposition of the Cochrane-Piazzesi restrictions produced qualitatively identical results.

                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                  where zt    
                                  [y t(3)  yt  1(3), yt(12)  yt  1(12), y t(36)  yt  1(36), yt(60)  yt  1(60), y t(120)  yt  1(120)] .
         (8) ECM(1) with one common trend:

                                                                                                      
                                                                         ẑt    h/t              ĉ ˆ zt,
                                                                                                                                                                           
                  where zt    
                                  [y t(3)  yt  1(3), yt(12)  y t(3), yt(36)  y t(3), yt(60)  y t(3), yt(120)  y t(3)] .
         (9) ECM(1) with two common trends:

                                                                                                            
                                                                       ẑt                      ĉ             ˆz,
                                                                               h/t                                      t

                                                                                                                                                                               
                  where zt    
                                  [y t(3)  yt  1(3), yt(12)  yt  1(12), y t(36)  yt(3), y t(60)  yt(3), y t(120)  yt(3)] .
         (10) Direct regression on three AR(1) principal components
                  We first perform a principal components analysis on the full set of seventeen yields yt ,
                  effectively decomposing the yield covariance matrix as Q  Q T , where the diagonal
                  elements of          are the eigenvalues and the columns of Q are the associated eigenvectors.
                  Denote the largest three eigenvalues by                                                       1,           2,    and    3,   and denote the associated
                  eigenvectors by q1, q2, and q3 . The first three principal components xt                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                   [x1t, x2t, x3t]
                                                                   
                  are then defined by xit  qi y t , i                                        1, 2, 3. We then use a univariate AR(1) model to
                  produce h-step-ahead forecasts of the principal components:

                                                                                         
                                                 x̂i,t    h/t        ĉi                   ˆ i xit,           i            1, 2, 3,
                                                                                                                                                                       
                  and we produce forecasts for yields yt                                                
                                                                                                                [y t(3), yt(12), y t(36), yt(60), y t(120)] as


                                  ŷt  h|t( )        q1( ) x̂1,t            h|t               q2( ) x̂2,t                h|t     q3( ) x̂3,t  h|t,


                  where qi( ) is the element in the eigenvector qi that corresponds to maturity .
We define forecast errors at t+h as yt  h( )  ŷt                         h/t(            ) . Note well that, in each case, the object being
forecast ( yt  h( ) ) is a future yield, not a future Nelson-Siegel fitted yield. We will examine a number of
descriptive statistics for the forecast errors, including mean, standard deviation, root mean squared error
(RMSE), and autocorrelations at various displacements.
         Our model’s 1-month-ahead forecasting results, reported in Table 4, are in certain respects
humbling. In absolute terms, the forecasts appear suboptimal: the forecast errors appear serially
correlated. In relative terms, RMSE comparison at various maturities reveals that our forecasts, although

                                                                                               13
slightly better than the random walk and slope regression forecasts, are indeed only very slightly better.
Finally, the Diebold-Mariano (1995) statistics reported in Table 7 indicate universal insignificance of the
RMSE differences between our 1-month-ahead forecasts and those from random walks or Fama-Bliss
regressions.
        The 1-month-ahead forecast defects likely come from a variety of sources, some of which could
be eliminated. First, for example, pricing errors due to illiquidity may be highly persistent and could be
reduced by including variables that may explain mispricing. It is worth noting, moreover, that related
papers such as Bliss (1997b) and de Jong (2000) also find serially correlated forecast errors, often with
persistence much stronger than ours.
        Matters improve radically, however, as the forecast horizon lengthens. Our model’s 6-month-
ahead forecasting results, reported in Table 5, are noticeably improved, and our model’s 12-month-ahead
forecasting results, reported in Table 6, are much improved. In particular, our model’s 12-month ahead
forecasts outperform those of all competitors at all maturities, often by a wide margin in both relative and
absolute terms. Seven of the ten Diebold-Mariano statistics in Table 7 indicate significant 12-month-
ahead RMSE superiority of our forecasts at the five percent level. The strong yield curve forecastability
at the 12-month-ahead horizon is, for example, very attractive from the vantage point of active bond
trading and the vantage point of credit portfolio risk management.15 Moreover, our 12-month-ahead
forecasts, like their 1- and 6-month-ahead counterparts, could be improved upon, because the forecast
errors remain serially correlated.16
        It is worth noting that Duffee (2002) finds that even the simplest random walk forecasts dominate
those from the Dai-Singleton (2000) affine model, which therefore appears largely useless for
forecasting. Hence Duffee proposes a less-restrictive “essentially-affine” model and shows that it
forecasts better than the random walk in most cases, which is appropriately viewed as a victory. A



        15
           Note that Nelson-Siegel loadings imply a very smooth yield curve, which in turn suggests that
our model, although not arbitrage-free, would not likely generate extreme portfolio positions.
Competitors such as regression on principal components, in contrast, have no smooth cross-sectional
restrictions and may well generate extreme portfolio positions in practice. This is one important way in
which our approach is superior to directs regression on principal components, despite the fact that our
estimated factors are close to the first three principal components. (Four more are given below.)
        16
           We report 12-month-ahead forecast error serial correlation coefficients at displacements of 12
and 24 months, in contrast to those at displacements of 1 and 12 months reported for the 1-month-ahead
forecast errors, because the 12-month-ahead errors would naturally have moving-average structure even
if the forecasts were fully optimal, due to the overlap.

                                                    14
comparison of our results and Duffee’s, however, reveals that our three-factor model produces larger
percentage reductions in out-of-sample RMSE relative to the random walk than does Duffee’s best
essentially-affine model. Our forecasting success is particularly notable in light of the fact that Duffee
forecasts only the smoothed yield curve, whereas we forecast the actual yield curve.17
        Finally, we note that although our approach is closely related to direct principal components
regression, neither our approach nor our results are identical. Interestingly, there is reason to prefer our
approach on both empirical and theoretical grounds. Empirically, our results indicate that our approach
has superior forecasting performance on our sample of yields. Theoretically, other methods, including
regression on principal components and regression on ad hoc empirical level, slope and curvature, often
have unappealing features, including:
        (1) they can not be used to produce yields at maturities other than those observed in the data,
        (2) they do not guarantee a smooth yield curve and forward curve,
        (3) they do not guarantee positive forward rates at all horizons, and
        (4) they do not guarantee that the discount function starts at 1 and approaches 0 as maturity
                approaches infinity.
4. Concluding Remarks
        We have re-interpreted the Nelson-Siegel yield curve as a modern three-factor dynamic model of
level, slope and curvature, and we have explored the model’s performance in out-of-sample yield curve
forecasting. Although the 1-month-ahead forecasting results are no better than those of random walk and
other leading competitors, the 1-year-ahead results are much superior.
        A number of authors have proposed extensions to Nelson-Siegel to enhance flexibility, including
Bliss (1997b), Soderlind and Svensson (1997), Björk and Christensen (1999), Filipovic (1999, 2000),
Björk (2000), Björk and Landén (2000) and Björk and Svensson (2001). From the perspective of interest
rate forecasting accuracy, however, the desirability of the above generalizations of Nelson-Siegel is not
obvious, which is why we did not pursue them here. For example, although the Bliss and Soderlind-
Svensson extensions can have in-sample fit no worse than that of Nelson-Siegel, because they include
Nelson-Siegel as a special case, there is no guarantee of better out-of-sample forecasting performance.
Indeed, accumulated experience suggest that parsimonious models are often more successful for out-of-




        17
          We note, however, that our enthusiasm must be tempered by the fact that our in-sample and
out-of-sample periods are not identical to Duffee’s, so definitive comparisons can not be made.

                                                     15
sample forecasting.18
        Some of the extensions alluded to above are designed to make Nelson-Siegel consistent with no-
arbitrage pricing. It is not obvious to us, however, that use of arbitrage-free models is necessary or
desirable for producing good forecasts.19 Indeed we have shown that our model (which is not arbitrage-
free) produces good forecasts, whereas Duffee (2002) and others have recently shown that the popular
affine no-arbitrage models produce very poor forecasts. Moreover, although our model is not
theoretically arbitrage-free, we expect it to be empirically nearly arbitrage-free. The U.S. Treasury bond
market is very liquid, which should make Treasury bond yields nearly arbitrage-free, so that given the
very good fit of our model, it should also be nearly arbitrage-free.
        In closing, we would like to elaborate on the likely reason for the forecasting success of our
approach, which relies heavily on a broad interpretation of the shrinkage principle. The essence of our
approach is intentionally to impose substantial a priori structure, motivated by simplicity, parsimony,
and theory, in an explicit attempt to avoid data mining and hence enhance out-of-sample forecasting
ability. This includes our use of a tightly-parametric model that places strict structure on factor loadings
in accordance with simple theoretical desiderata for the discount function, our decision to fix , our
emphasis on simple univariate modeling of the factors based upon our theoretically-derived interpretation
of the model as one of approximately orthogonal level, slope and curvature factors, and our emphasis on
the simplest possible AR(1) factor dynamics. All of this is in keeping with a broad interpretation of the
“shrinkage principle,” which has a firm foundation in Bayes-Stein theory, in empirical intuition, and in
an accumulated track record of good performance (e.g., Garcia-Ferrer et al., 1987; Zellner and Hong,
1989; Zellner and Min, 1993). Here we interpret the shrinkage principle as the insight that imposition of
restrictions, which will of course degrade in-sample fit, may nevertheless be helpful for out-of-sample
forecasting, even if the restrictions are false. The fact that the shrinkage principle works in the yield-
curve context, as it does in so many other contexts, is precisely what theory and empirical experience
would lead one to expect. This is not to say, of course, that our specification is in any sense uniquely
best, and we make no claims to that effect. Rather, the broad lesson of the paper is to show in the yield-
curve context that the shrinkage perspective, which tends to produce seemingly-naive but truly
sophisticatedly-simple models (of which ours is one example), may be very appealing when the goal is


        18
             See Diebold (2004).
        19
          See Dai and Singleton (2002) for an interesting analysis that explores certain aspects of the
tradeoff between freedom from arbitrage and forecasting performance.

                                                      16
forecasting. Put differently, the paper emphasizes in the yield curve context Zellner’s (1992) “KISS
principle” of forecasting – “Keep It Sophisticatedly Simple.”




                                                   17
                                                 References

Andersen, T.G. and Lund, J. (1997), “Stochastic Volatility and Mean Drift in the Short Term Interest
       Rate Diffusion: Source of Steepness, Level and Curvature in the Yield Curve,” Working Paper
       214, Department of Finance, Kellogg School, Northwestern University.

Balduzzi, P., Das, S.R., Foresi, S., and Sundaram, R. (1996), “A Simple Approach to Three-Factor Affine
       Term Structure Models,” Journal of Fixed Income, 6, 43-53.

Bates, D. (1999), “Financial Markets’ Assessment of EMU,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
        Public Policy, 51, 229-269.

Björk, T. (2000), “A Geometric View of Interest Rate Theory,” Handbook of Mathematical Finance,
        forthcoming. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Björk, T. and Christensen, B. (1999), “Interest Rate Dynamics and Consistent Forward Rate Curves,”
        Mathematical Finance, 9, 323-348.

Björk, T. and Landén, C. (2000), “On the Construction of Finite Dimensional Realizations for Nonlinear
        Forward Rate Models,” Manuscript, Stockholm School of Economics.

Björk, T. and Svensson, L. (2001), “On the Existence of Finite Dimensional Realizations for Nonlinear
        Forward Rate Models,” Mathematical Finance, 11, 205-243.

Bliss, R. (1997a), “Movements in the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Economic Review, Federal
        Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 82, 16-33.

Bliss, R. (1997b), “Testing Term Structure Estimation Methods,” Advances in Futures and Options
        Research, 9, 97–231.

Brandt, M.W. and Yaron, A. (2001), “Time-Consistent No-Arbitrage Models of the Term Structure,”
        Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

Chen, L. (1996), Stochastic Mean and Stochastic Volatility - A Three Factor Model of the Term Structure
       of Interest Rates and its Application to the Pricing of Interest Rate Derivatives. London:
       Blackwell Publishers.

Cochrane, J.H. and Piazzesi, M. (2002), “Bond Risk Premia,” Manuscript, University of Chicago and
       UCLA.

Courant, E. and Hilbert, D. (1953), Methods of Mathematical Physics. New York: John Wiley.

Cox, J.C., Ingersoll, J.E. and Ross, S.A. (1985), “A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,”
        Econometrica, 53, 385-407.

Dai, Q. and Singleton, K. (2000), “Specification Analysis of Affine Term Structure Models,” Journal of
        Finance, 55, 1943-1978.

Dai, Q. and Singleton, K.J. (2002), “Expectation Puzzles, Time-varying Risk Premia, and Affine Models
        of the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 63, 415-441.

de Jong, F. (2000), “Time Series and Cross Section Information in Affine Term Structure Models,”
        Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 18, 300-314.

de Jong, F. and Santa-Clara, P. (1999), “The Dynamics of the Forward Interest Rate Curve: A
        Formulation with State Variables,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 31, 131-157.

Diebold, F.X. (2004), Elements of Forecasting (Third Edition). Cincinnati: South-Western.

Diebold, F.X., Gunther, T. and Tay, A.S. (1998), “Evaluating Density Forecasts, with Applications to
       Financial Risk Management,” International Economic Review, 39, 863-883.

Diebold, F.X., Hahn, J. and Tay, A.S. (1999), “Multivariate Density Forecast Evaluation and Calibration
       in Financial Risk Management: High-Frequency Returns on Foreign Exchange,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 81, 661-673.

Diebold, F.X. and Mariano, R.S. (1995), “Comparing Predictive Accuracy,” Journal of Business and
       Economic Statistics, 13, 253-263.

Diebold, F.X. and Sharpe, S. (1990), “Post-Deregulation Bank Deposit Rate Pricing: The Multivariate
       Dynamics,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 8, 281-293.

Doan, T., Litterman, R. and Sims, C. (1984), “Forecasting and Conditional Projection Using Realistic
       Prior Distributions,” Econometric Reviews, 3, 1-100.

Duffee, G. (2002), “Term premia and interest rate forecasts in affine models,” Journal of Finance, 57,
        405-443.

Duffie, D. and Kan, R. (1996), “A Yield-Factor Model of Interest Rates,” Mathematical Finance, 6,
        379-406.

Fama, E. and Bliss, R. (1987), “The Information in Long-Maturity Forward Rates,” American Economic
       Review, 77, 680-692.

Filipovic, D. (1999), “A Note on the Nelson-Siegel Family,” Mathematical Finance, 9, 349-359.

Filipovic, D. (2000), “Exponential-Polynomial Families and the Term Structure of Interest Rates,”
        Bernoulli, 6, 1-27.

Frankel, J. A. and Lown, C.S. (1994), “An Indicator of Future Inflation Extracted from the Steepness of
        the Interest Rate Yield Curve along its Entire Length,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109,
        517-530.

Garcia-Ferrer, A., Highfield, R.A., Palm, F. and Zellner, A. (1987), “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using
       Pooled International Data,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 5, 53-67.

Hall, A.D., Anderson, H.M. and Granger, C.W.J. (1992), “A Cointegration Analysis of Treasury Bill
        Yields,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 74, 116-126.
Heath, D., Jarrow, R. and Morton, A. (1992), “Bond Pricing and the Term Structure of Interest Rates: A
        New Methodology for Contingent Claims Valuation,” Econometrica, 60, 77-105.

Hull, J. and White, A. (1990), “Pricing Interest-Rate-Derivative Securities,” Review of Financial Studies,
         3, 573-592.

Knez, P., Litterman, R. and Scheinkman, J. (1994), “Exploration into Factors Explaining Money Market
       Returns,” Journal of Finance, 49, 1861-1882.

Litterman, R. and Scheinkman, J. (1991), “Common Factors Affecting Bond Returns,” Journal of Fixed
        Income, 1, 54-61.

Litzenberger, R., Squassi, G. and Weir, N. (1995), “Spline Models of the Term Structure of Interest
       Rates and Their Applications,” Working Paper, Goldman, Sachs and Company.

McCulloch, J.H. (1975), “The Tax Adjusted Yield Curve,” Journal of Finance, 30, 811-830.

McCulloch, J.H. and Kwon, H. (1993), “U.S. Term Structure Data, 1947-1991,” Working Paper 93-6,
      Ohio State University.

Nelson, C.R. and Siegel, A.F. (1987), “Parsimonious Modeling of Yield Curves,” Journal of Business,
        60, 473-489.

Pagan, A.R., Hall, A.D. and Martin, V. (1996), “Modeling the Term Structure,” in C.R Rao and G.S.
       Maddala (eds.), Handbook of Statistics, 91-118. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Shea, G.S. (1992), “Benchmarking the Expectations Hypothesis of the Interest-Rate Term Structure: An
       Analysis of Cointegration Vectors,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 10, 347-366.

Siegel, A.F. and Nelson, C.R. (1988), “Long-term Behavior of Yield Curves,” Journal of Financial and
        Quantitative Analysis, 23, 105-110.

Soderlind, P. and Svensson, L.E.O. (1997), “New Techniques to Extract Market Expectations from
        Financial Instruments,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 40, 383-430.

Swanson, N.R. and White, H. (1995), “A Model-Selection Approach to Assessing the Information in the
      Term Structure Using Linear Models and Artificial Neural Networks,” Journal of Business and
      Economic Statistics, 13, 265-275.

Vasicek, O. (1977), “An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial
       Economics, 5, 177-188.

Vasicek, O.A. and Fong, H.G. (1982), “Term Structure Modeling Using Exponential Splines,” Journal of
       Finance, 37, 339-348.

Zellner, A. (1992), “Statistics, Science and Public Policy” (ASA Presidential Address), Journal of the
        American Statistical Association, 87, 1-6.

Zellner, A. and Hong, C. (1989), “Forecasting International Growth Rates Using Bayesian Shrinkage and
       Other Procedures,” Journal of Econometrics, 40, 183-202.

Zellner, A. and Min, C. (1993), “Bayesian and Non-Bayesian Methods for Combining Models and
        Forecasts with Applications to Forecasting International Growth Rates,” Journal of
        Econometrics, 56, 89-118.
                                     Table 1
                       Descriptive Statistics, Yield Curves

                                                                                     
 Maturity     Mean     Standard      Minimum     Maximum          ˆ (1)       ˆ (12)       ˆ (30)
(Months)               Deviation
    3         5.630      1.488         2.732       9.131      0.978       0.569        -0.079
    6         5.785      1.482         2.891       9.324      0.976       0.555        -0.042
    9         5.907      1.492         2.984       9.343      0.973       0.545        -0.005
    12        6.067      1.501         3.107       9.683      0.969       0.539        0.021

    15        6.225      1.504         3.288       9.988      0.968       0.527        0.060
    18        6.308      1.496         3.482       10.188     0.965       0.513        0.089

    21        6.375      1.484         3.638       10.274     0.963       0.502        0.115
    24        6.401      1.464         3.777       10.413     0.960       0.481        0.133
    30        6.550      1.462         4.043       10.748     0.957       0.479        0.190
    36        6.644      1.439         4.204       10.787     0.956       0.471        0.226
    48        6.838      1.439         4.308       11.269     0.951       0.457        0.294
    60        6.928      1.430         4.347       11.313     0.951       0.464        0.336
    72        7.082      1.457         4.384       11.653     0.953       0.454        0.372
    84        7.142      1.425         4.352       11.841     0.948       0.448        0.391
    96        7.226      1.413         4.433       11.512     0.954       0.468        0.417
   108        7.270      1.428         4.429       11.664     0.953       0.475        0.426
120 (level)   7.254      1.432         4.443       11.663     0.953       0.467        0.428
  slope       1.624      1.213        -0.752       4.060      0.961       0.405        -0.049
curvature     -0.081     0.648        -1.837       1.602      0.896       0.337        -0.015
                                          Table 2
                       Descriptive Statistics, Yield Curve Residuals

                                                                                              
Maturity   Mean     Standard    Min.      Max.     MAE     RMSE            ˆ (1)       ˆ (12)       ˆ (30)
(Months)            Deviation


   3       -0.018    0.080      -0.332   0.156     0.061    0.082      0.777       0.157        -0.360
   6       -0.013    0.042      -0.141   0.218     0.032    0.044      0.291       0.257        -0.046
   9       -0.026    0.062      -0.200   0.218     0.052    0.067      0.704       0.216        -0.247
  12       0.013     0.080      -0.160   0.267     0.064    0.081      0.563       0.322        -0.266

  15       0.063     0.050      -0.063   0.243     0.067    0.080      0.650       0.139        -0.070
  18       0.048     0.035      -0.048   0.165     0.052    0.059      0.496       0.183        -0.139
  21       0.026     0.030      -0.091   0.101     0.033    0.040      0.370       -0.044       -0.011
  24       -0.027    0.045      -0.190   0.082     0.037    0.052      0.667       0.212        0.056
  30       -0.020    0.036      -0.200   0.098     0.029    0.041      0.398       0.072        -0.058
  36       -0.037    0.046      -0.203   0.128     0.047    0.059      0.597       0.053        -0.017
  48       -0.018    0.065      -0.204   0.230     0.052    0.067      0.754       0.239        -0.321
  60       -0.053    0.058      -0.199   0.186     0.066    0.079      0.758       -0.021       -0.175
  72       0.010     0.080      -0.133   0.399     0.056    0.081      0.904       0.278        -0.163
  84       0.001     0.062      -0.259   0.263     0.044    0.062      0.589       0.019        0.000
  96       0.032     0.045      -0.202   0.111     0.045    0.055      0.697       0.120        -0.144
  108      0.033     0.046      -0.161   0.132     0.047    0.057      0.669       0.081        -0.176

  120      -0.016    0.071      -0.256   0.164     0.057    0.073      0.623       0.252        -0.070
                                             Table 3
                            Descriptive Statistics, Estimated Factors

Factor   Mean     Std. Dev.      Minimum      Maximum                                ADF

         7.579      1.524          4.427        12.088     0.957    0.511   0.454    -2.410

         -2.098     1.608         -5.616        0.919      0.969    0.452   -0.082   -1.205

         -0.162     1.687         -5.249        4.234      0.901    0.353   -0.006   -3.516
                          Table 4
       Out-of-Sample 1-Month-Ahead Forecasting Results

               Nelson-Siegel with AR(1) Factor Dynamics
Maturity (J)       Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

  3 months         -0.045       0.170      0.176    0.247     0.017

   1 year          0.023        0.235      0.236    0.425     -0.213

   3 years         -0.056       0.273      0.279    0.332     -0.117

   5 years         -0.091       0.277      0.292    0.333     -0.116

  10 years         -0.062       0.252      0.260    0.259     -0.115

                            Random Walk
Maturity (J)       Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months          0.033        0.176     0.179     0.220     0.053

   1 year          0.021        0.240     0.241     0.340     -0.153

  3 years          0.007        0.279     0.279     0.341     -0.133

  5 years          -0.003       0.276     0.276     0.275     -0.131

  10 years         -0.011       0.254     0.254     0.215     -0.145

                            Slope Regression
Maturity (J)       Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months           NA           NA            NA     NA       NA

   1 year          0.048        0.242     0.247       0.328   -0.145

  3 years          0.032        0.286     0.288       0.373   -0.146

  5 years          0.019        0.284     0.285       0.318   -0.150

 10 years          0.013        0.260     0.260       0.245   -0.159

                 Fama-Bliss Forward Rate Regression
Maturity (J)       Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months          0.066        0.159     0.172       0.178   0.036

   1 year          0.066        0.233     0.242       0.313   -0.148

  3 years          0.024        0.286     0.287       0.380   -0.157

  5 years          0.038        0.277     0.280       0.273   -0.125

 10 years          0.041        0.251     0.254       0.200   -0.159
                      Table 4 (Continued)
        Out-of-Sample 1-Month-Ahead Forecasting Results

               Cochrane-Piazzesi Forward Curve Regression
Maturity (J)        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months            NA           NA         NA          NA       NA

   1 year          -0.038        0.238      0.241       0.282    -0.088

  3 years          -0.034        0.287      0.289       0.377    -0.108

  5 years          -0.068        0.292      0.300       0.364    -0.084

  10 years         -0.113        0.257      0.281       0.271    -0.097

                    Univariate AR(1)s on Yield Levels
Maturity (J)        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months           0.042        0.177      0.182       0.229    0.060

   1 year           0.025        0.238      0.239       0.341    -0.147

  3 years          -0.005        0.276      0.276       0.345    -0.125

  5 years          -0.030        0.274      0.276       0.280    -0.127

  10 years         -0.054        0.252      0.258       0.224    -0.144

                          VAR(1) on Yield Levels
Maturity ( )        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months          -0.013        0.176      0.176       0.229    0.128

   1 year          -0.026        0.262      0.263       0.447    -0.162

  3 years          -0.041        0.302      0.305       0.437    -0.154

  5 years          -0.064        0.303      0.310       0.429    -0.133

  10 years         -0.090        0.274      0.288       0.310    -0.123

                       VAR(1) on Yield Changes
Maturity ( )        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months           0.043        0.176      0.181       -0.019   0.156

   1 year           0.029        0.230      0.232       0.157    -0.149

  3 years           0.026        0.276      0.277       0.077    -0.049

  5 years           0.021        0.276      0.277       0.010    -0.002

  10 years          0.020        0.263      0.264       -0.017   -0.030
                           Table 5
        Out-of-Sample 6-month-Ahead Forecasting Results

               Nelson-Siegel with AR(1) Factor Dynamics
Maturity (J)       Mean      Std. Dev.    RMSE

 3 months          0.083       0.510      0.517       0.301   -0.190

   1 year          0.131       0.656      0.669       0.168   -0.174

  3 years         -0.052       0.748      0.750       0.049   -0.189

  5 years         -0.173       0.758      0.777       0.069   -0.273

 10 years         -0.251       0.676      0.721       0.058   -0.288

                            Random Walk
Maturity (J)       Mean      Std. Dev.    RMSE

 3 months          0.220       0.564      0.605       0.381   -0.214

   1 year          0.181       0.758      0.779       0.139   -0.150

  3 years          0.099       0.873      0.879       0.018   -0.211

  5 years          0.048       0.860      0.861       0.008   -0.249

 10 years         -0.020       0.758      0.758       0.019   -0.271

                           Slope Regression
Maturity (J)       Mean      Std. Dev.    RMSE

 3 months           NA          NA            NA      NA       NA

   1 year          0.422       0.811      0.914       0.109   -0.113

  3 years          0.281       0.944      0.985       0.116   -0.198

  5 years          0.209       0.939      0.962       0.103   -0.235

 10 years          0.145       0.832      0.845       0.096   -0.256

                 Fama-Bliss Forward Rate Regression
Maturity (J)       Mean      Std. Dev.    RMSE

 3 months          0.494       0.549      0.739       0.208   -0.072

   1 year          0.373       0.821      0.902       0.194   -0.150

  3 years          0.255       0.964      0.997       0.092   -0.211

  5 years          0.220       0.932      0.958       0.050   -0.248

 10 years          0.223       0.794      0.825       0.038   -0.268
                      Table 5 (Continued)
        Out-of-Sample 6-month-Ahead Forecasting Results

               Cochrane-Piazzesi Forward Curve Regression
Maturity (J)        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months            NA           NA         NA        NA       NA

   1 year          -0.155        0.845      0.859      0.220   -0.110

  3 years          -0.210        0.910      0.934      0.179   -0.218

  5 years          -0.224        0.910      0.937      0.193   -0.270

  10 years         -0.345        0.837      0.905      0.192   -0.287

                   Univariate AR(1)s on Yield Levels
Maturity (J)        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months           0.224        0.539      0.584      0.405   -0.210

   1 year           0.160        0.707      0.725      0.193   -0.155

  3 years          -0.030        0.800      0.801      0.075   -0.211

  5 years          -0.144        0.789      0.802      0.061   -0.253

  10 years         -0.286        0.699      0.755      0.073   -0.278

                          VAR(1) on Yield Levels
Maturity ( )        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months          -0.138        0.659      0.673      0.289   -0.160

   1 year          -0.195        0.880      0.901      0.133   -0.169

  3 years          -0.218        0.926      0.951      0.122   -0.240

  5 years          -0.258        0.919      0.955      0.140   -0.273

  10 years         -0.406        0.811      0.907      0.137   -0.293

                       VAR(1) on Yield Changes
Maturity ( )        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months           0.312        0.661      0.731      0.319   -0.256

   1 year           0.310        0.845      0.900      0.172   -0.181

  3 years           0.276        0.941      0.981      0.059   -0.210

  5 years           0.246        0.917      0.949      0.048   -0.242

  10 years          0.192        0.809      0.831      0.043   -0.259
                           Table 6
       Out-of-Sample 12-month-Ahead Forecasting Results

               Nelson-Siegel with AR(1) Factor Dynamics
Maturity (J)       Mean       Std. Dev.    RMSE

 3 months          0.150        0.724      0.739    -0.288   0.001

   1 year          0.173        0.823      0.841    -0.332   -0.004

  3 years          -0.123       0.910      0.918    -0.408   0.015

  5 years          -0.337       0.918      0.978    -0.412   0.003

  10 years         -0.531       0.825      0.981    -0.433   -0.003

               Nelson-Siegel with VAR(1) Factor Dynamics
Maturity (J)       Mean       Std. Dev.    RMSE

 3 months          -0.463       1.000      1.102    -0.163   -0.111

   1 year          -0.416       1.224      1.293    -0.265   -0.065

  3 years          -0.576       1.268      1.393    -0.317   -0.036

  5 years          -0.673       1.210      1.385    -0.315   -0.039

  10 years         -0.721       1.056      1.279    -0.299   -0.037

                             Random Walk
Maturity (J)       Mean       Std. Dev.    RMSE

 3 months          0.416        0.930      1.019    -0.118   -0.109

   1 year          0.388        1.132      1.197    -0.268   -0.019

  3 years          0.236        1.214      1.237    -0.419   0.060

  5 years          0.130        1.184      1.191    -0.481   0.072

  10 years         -0.033       1.051      1.052    -0.508   0.069

                            Slope Regression
Maturity ( )       Mean       Std. Dev.    RMSE

 3 months           NA           NA            NA    NA       NA

   1 year          0.896        1.235      1.526    -0.187   -0.024

  3 years          0.641        1.316      1.464    -0.212   0.024

  5 years          0.515        1.305      1.403    -0.255   0.035

  10 years         0.362        1.208      1.261    -0.268   0.042
                      Table 6 (Continued)
       Out-of-Sample 12-month-Ahead Forecasting Results

                  Fama-Bliss Forward Rate Regression
Maturity ( )        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months           0.942        1.010      1.381       -0.046   -0.096

   1 year           0.875        1.276      1.547       -0.142   -0.039

  3 years           0.746        1.378      1.567       -0.291   0.035

  5 years           0.587        1.363      1.484       -0.352   0.040

  10 years          0.547        1.198      1.317       -0.403   0.062

               Cochrane-Piazzesi Forward Curve Regression
Maturity (J)        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months            NA           NA         NA          NA       NA

   1 year          -0.162        1.275      1.285       -0.179   -0.079

  3 years          -0.377        1.275      1.330       -0.274   -0.028

  5 years          -0.529        1.225      1.334       -0.301   -0.021

  10 years         -0.760        1.088      1.327       -0.307   -0.020

                    Univariate AR(1)s on Yield Levels
Maturity (J)        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months           0.246        0.808      0.845       -0.213   -0.073

   1 year           0.182        0.953      0.970       -0.271   -0.004

  3 years          -0.113        0.996      1.002       -0.380   0.061

  5 years          -0.301        0.961      1.007       -0.433   0.058

  10 years         -0.603        0.835      1.030       -0.431   0.020

                          VAR(1) on Yield Levels
Maturity (J)        Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months          -0.276        1.006      1.043       -0.219   -0.099

   1 year          -0.390        1.204      1.266       -0.322   -0.058

  3 years          -0.467        1.240      1.325       -0.345   -0.015

  5 years          -0.540        1.201      1.317       -0.348   -0.012

  10 years         -0.744        1.060      1.295       -0.328   -0.010
                      Table 6 (Continued)
       Out-of-Sample 12-month-Ahead Forecasting Results

                    VAR(1) on Yield Changes
Maturity ( )    Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months       0.717       1.072      1.290     -0.068       -0.127

   1 year       0.704       1.240      1.426     -0.223       -0.041

  3 years       0.627       1.341      1.480     -0.399       0.051

  5 years       0.559       1.281      1.398     -0.459       0.070

  10 years      0.408       1.136      1.207     -0.491       0.072

                ECM(1) with one Common Trend
Maturity (J)    Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months       0.738       0.982      1.228     -0.163       -0.123

   1 year       0.767       1.143      1.376     -0.239       -0.072

  3 years       0.546       1.203      1.321     -0.278       -0.013

  5 years       0.379       1.191      1.250     -0.278       -0.003

  10 years      0.169       1.095      1.108     -0.224       0.009

               ECM(1) with Two Common Trends
Maturity (J)    Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months       0.778       1.037      1.296     -0.175       -0.129

   1 year       0.868       1.247      1.519     -0.286       -0.033

  3 years       0.586       1.186      1.323     -0.288       -0.034

  5 years       0.425       1.155      1.231     -0.304       -0.014

  10 years      0.220       1.035      1.058     -0.274       0.015

      Direct Regression on Three AR(1) Principal Components
Maturity (J)    Mean       Std. Dev.   RMSE

 3 months       0.162       0.785      0.802     -0.298       -0.020

   1 year       0.416       0.979      1.064     -0.305       0.042

  3 years       -0.127      1.014      1.022     -0.372       0.054

  5 years       -0.393      1.013      1.087     -0.335       0.038

  10 years      -0.394      0.929      1.009     -0.284       0.066
                  Table 7
Out-of-Sample Forecast Accuracy Comparisons

           1-Month Horizon     12-Month Horizon
Maturity
  (J)      against   against   against   against
            RW         FB       RW         FB

3 months   -0.27      0.18     -1.65*    -2.43*

 1 year    -0.64     -0.56     -2.04*    -2.31*

3 years    -0.02     -0.58     -2.11*    -2.18*

5 years     0.97      0.57      -1.61    -1.90*

10 years    0.49      0.34      -0.63    -1.35
                                                    Notes to Tables

Notes to Table 1:
We present descriptive statistics for monthly yields at different maturities, and for the yield curve level,
slope and curvature, where we define the level as the 10-year yield, the slope as the difference between
the 10-year and 3-month yields, and the curvature as the twice the 2-year yield minus the sum of the 3-
month and 10-year yields. The last three columns contain sample autocorrelations at displacements of 1,
12, and 30 months. The sample period is 1985:01-2000:12.

Notes to Table 2:
We fit the three-factor model,
                                                                             
                                                    1 e       t
                                                                        1 e      t            
                                                                                                 t
                             y t( )   
                                          1t   2t                  3t                    e          ,
                                                        t                  t

using monthly yield data 1985:01-2000:12, with t fixed at 0.0609, and we present descriptive statistics
for the corresponding residuals at various maturities. The last three columns contain residual sample
autocorrelations at displacements of 1, 12, and 30 months.

Notes to Table 3:
We fit the three-factor Nelson-Siegel model using monthly yield data 1985:01-2000:12, with t fixed at
0.0609, and we present descriptive statistics for the three estimated factors ˆ 1t , ˆ 2t , and ˆ 3t . The last
column contains augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) unit root test statistics, and the three columns to its left
contain sample autocorrelations at displacements of 1, 12, and 30 months.

Notes to Table 4:
We present the results of out-of-sample 1-month-ahead forecasting using eight models, as described in
detail in the text. We estimate all models recursively from 1985:1 to the time that the forecast is made,
beginning in 1994:1 and extending through 2000:12. We define forecast errors at t +1 as
yt  1( )  ŷt  1/t( ) , and we report the mean, standard deviation and root mean squared errors of the forecast
errors, as well as their first and twelfth sample autocorrelation coefficients.

Notes to Table 5:
We present the results of out-of-sample 6-month-ahead forecasting using eight models, as described in
detail in the text. We estimate all models recursively from 1985:1 to the time that the forecast is made,
beginning in 1994:1 and extending through 2000:12. We define forecast errors at t +6 as
yt  6( )  ŷt  6/t( ) , and we report the mean, standard deviation and root mean squared errors of the forecast
errors, as well as their sixth and eighteenth sample autocorrelation coefficients.

Notes to Table 6:
We present the results of out-of-sample 12-month-ahead forecasting using twelve models, as described in
detail in the text. We estimate all models recursively from 1985:1 to the time that the forecast is made,
beginning in 1994:1 and extending through 2000:12. We define forecast errors at t +12 as
yt  12( )  ŷt  12/t( ) , and we report the mean, standard deviation and root mean squared errors of the
forecast errors, as well as their twelfth and twenty-fourth sample autocorrelation coefficients.

Notes to Table 7:
We present Diebold-Mariano forecast accuracy comparison tests of our three-factor model forecasts
(using univariate AR(1) factor dynamics) against those of the Random Walk model (RW) and the Fama-
Bliss forward rate regression model (FB). The null hypothesis is that the two forecasts have the same
mean squared error. Negative values indicate superiority of our three-factor model forecasts, and
asterisks denote significance relative to the asymptotic null distribution at the ten percent level.
                                                                   Figure 1
                                                                Factor Loadings




                  1

                                                       β        Loadings
                                                           1


                 0.8




                                    β           Loadings
      Loadings




                 0.6                        2




                 0.4




                 0.2            β           Loadings
                                    3




                  0
                       0   20                          40                       60               80                             100                   120
                                                                τ (Maturity, in Months)




Notes to Figure 1: We plot the factor loadings in the three-factor model,

                                                                                               
                                                                  1 e      t
                                                                                          1 e      t            
                                                                                                                   t
                           y t( )       
                                                  1t       2t                        3t                    e
                                                                     t                       t
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                       1 e      t
                                                                                                                                             1 e      t            
                                                                                                                                                                      t
where the three factors are 1t ,                2t , and 3t , the associated loadings are 1,                                         , and                    e          ,
and denotes maturity. We fix                     t = 0.0609.
                                                                                                                          t                     t
                                            Figure 2
                                  Yield Curves, 1985.01-2000.12




Notes to Figure 2: The sample consists of monthly yield data from January 1985 to December 2000 at
maturities of 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 30, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84, 96, 108, and 120 months.
                                                             Figure 3
                                  Median Data-Based Yield Curve with Pointwise Interquartile Range


                             9


                            8.5
                                                                   75%

                             8


                            7.5
          Yield (Percent)




                                                                M edian
                             7


                            6.5


                             6

                                                                              25%
                            5.5


                             5

                                  0         20         40            60           80    100          120
                                                            M aturity (M onths)




Notes to Figure 3: For each maturity, we plot the median yield along with the twenty-fifth and seventy-
fifth percentiles.
                                                                    Figure 4
                                       Actual (Data-Based) and Fitted (Model-Based) Average Yield Curve

                             7.4


                             7.2


                              7


                             6.8
           Yield (Percent)




                             6.6


                             6.4


                             6.2


                              6
                                                                                  Fitted N elson-S iegel
                                                                                  A ctual
                             5.8


                             5.6
                                   0            20          40            60           80            100   120
                                                                 M aturity (M onths)




Notes to Figure 4: We show the actual average yield curve and the fitted average yield curve obtained by
evaluating the Nelson-Siegel function at the mean values of ˆ 1t , ˆ 2t and ˆ 3t from Table 3.
                                                                         Figure 5
                                                       Selected Fitted (Model-Based) Yield Curves


                                      Yield Curve on 3/31/1989                                                                              Yield Curve on 7/31/1989
                      9.8                                                                                                8


                      9.7
                                                                                                                     7.9

                      9.6

                                                                                                                     7.8
                      9.5
    Yield (Percent)




                                                                                                   Yield (Percent)
                      9.4                                                                                            7.7



                      9.3                                                                                            7.6


                      9.2
                                                                                                                     7.5

                      9.1

                                                                                                                     7.4
                       9


                      8.9                                                                                            7.3
                            0   20   40            60           80   100   120                                               0    20   40               60            80   100   120
                                          M aturity (M onths)                                                                                  M aturity (M onths)




                                      Yield Curve on 5/30/1997                                                                          Yie ld C urve on 8/31 /1998
                      6.8                                                                          5.05


                      6.6

                                                                                                                     5
                      6.4


                      6.2

                                                                                                   4.95
    Yield (Percent)




                                                                                 Yield (Percent)




                       6


                      5.8
                                                                                                            4.9

                      5.6


                      5.4
                                                                                                   4.85

                      5.2


                       5                                                                                    4.8
                            0   20   40            60           80   100   120                                           0       20    40              60            80    100   1 20
                                          M aturity (M onths)                                                                                 M aturity (M onths)




Notes to Figure 5: We plot fitted yield curves for selected dates, together with actual yields. See text for
details.
                                               Figure 6
                                Yield Curve Residuals, 1985.01 - 2000.12




Notes to Figure 6: We plot residuals from Nelson-Siegel yield curves fitted month-by-month. See text for
details.
                                              Figure 7
                   Model-Based Level, Slope and Curvature (i.e., Estimated Factors)
                             vs. Data-Based Level, Slope and Curvature
              14


              12


              10


               8


               6


               4
                      86       88         90            92           94      96        98   00


                                       Solid Line: ˆ 1t Dotted Line: Level
               6



               4



               2



               0



              -2
                      86       88         90            92           94      96        98   00


                                      Solid Line:       ˆ        Dotted Line: Slope
                                                             2t


               2



               1



               0



              -1



              -2
                      86       88         90            92           94      96        98   00


                                    Solid Line: 0.3 ˆ 3t Dotted Line: Curvature


Notes to Figure 7: We define the level as the 10-year yield, the slope as the difference between the 10-year
and 3-month yields, and the curvature as the twice the 2-year yield minus the sum of the 3-month and 10-
year yields.
                                             Figure 8
        Autocorrelations and Residual Autocorrelations of Level, Slope and Curvature Factors


                                    Autocorrelation of ˆ 1t                                                 Autocorrelation of ˆ 1t
                             1.0                                                                    0.2


                             0.8
                                                                                                    0.1
                             0.6




                                                                           Autocorrelation
           Autocorrelation




                             0.4
                                                                                                    0.0
                             0.2

                             0.0                                                                    -0.1

                             -0.2

                             -0.4                                                                   -0.2
                                    5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60                                    5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60


                                                Displacement                                                             Displacement



                                    Autocorrelation of ˆ 2t                                                 Autocorrelation of ˆ 2t
                             1.0                                                                    0.2

                             0.8

                             0.6                                                                    0.1
           Autocorrelation




                                                                           Autocorrelation



                             0.4
                                                                                                    0.0
                             0.2

                             0.0
                                                                                                    -0.1
                             -0.2

                             -0.4                                                                   -0.2
                                    5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60                                    5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60

                                                Displacement                                                             Displacement




                                    Autocorrelation of ˆ 3t                                                     Autocorrelation of ˆ 3t
                             1.0                                                                     0.2

                             0.8
                                                                                                     0.1
                             0.6
                                                                                  Autocorrelation
           Autocorrelation




                             0.4
                                                                                                     0.0
                             0.2

                             0.0
                                                                                                     -0.1
                             -0.2

                             -0.4                                                                    -0.2
                                    5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60                                    5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60

                                                Displacement                                                              Displacement




Notes to Figure 8: We plot the sample autocorrelations of the three estimated factors, ˆ 1t , ˆ 2t , and ˆ 3t , as
well as the sample autocorrelations of AR(1) models fit to the three estimated factors, along with Barlett’s
approximate 95% confidence bands.
