                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   AN OPTIMAL TAXATION APPROACH
                       TO FISCAL FEDERALISM



                         Roger H. Gordon



                      Working Paper No. 10014




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           October 1982




The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #1004
                                                                 October 1982




   AN OPTIMAL TAXATION APPROACH TO FISCAL FEDERALISM*
                                      Roger H. Gordon
                                      Bell Laboratories
                                Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974

                                         ABSTRACT

   In a Federal system of government, each unit of government decides independently how
much of each type of public good to provide, and what types of taxes, and which tax rates, to
use in funding the public goods. In this paper we explore what types of problems can arise
from this decentralized form of decision-making. In particular, we describe systematically the
types of externalities that one unit of government can create for nonresidents, through both its
public goods decisions and its taxation decisions. The paper also explores briefly what the
central government might do to lessen the costs of decentralized decision-making.
   AN OPTIMAL TAXATION APPROACH TO FISCAL FEDERALISM*
                                        Roger H. Gordon
                                       Bell Laboratories
                                 Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974

   In a Federal system of government, each unit of government decides independently how

much of each type of public good to provide, and what types of taxes, and which tax rates, to

use in funding the public goods. Many papers have worried about whether any unit of
government will act in the best interests of its citizens.1 In this paper, we ask the broader
question: assuming that each unit of government does in fact act in the best interests of its own

citizens, will the collection of units of government together act in the best interests of all their

citizens. Stated differently, what types of problems can arise from decentralized decision-

making?

   The main objective of this paper will be to describe sys.tematically the types of externalities

that a unit of government can create for nonresidents through both its public goods decisions

and its taxation decisions. While a unit of government, acting solely in the interests of its own

citizens, would ignore these externalities, overall social welfare would require that they be taken

into account.

   We will also explore briefly what the central government might do to lessen the costs of

decentralized decision-making. We will explore, for example, the merits of centralizing
provision of the public good, of restricting the types of taxes that local governments can use, of

subsidizing certain types of local government activity, or of transferring tax revenue from the

central government to local governments.

   Previous papers have laid some of the ground work for this study. For example, Arnott and

Grieson [1981] examined the optimal behavior of a local government, when nonresideñts pay

some of the taxes and use some of the public facilities. The analysis of local government
behavior here will generalize their study to include such complications as residential mobility

and endogenous prices. Starrett [1980] provides a nice treatment of externalities among units

of government in a setting where each community imposes lump sum taxes on its residents.
                                              -2-

The analysis here generalizes Starrett's model to incorporate use of distorting taxes by
communities.


                              I. General characteristics of the model

   The model has the following general characteristics. We assume that there are a finite set of

nonoverlapping communities, which together comprise a self-sufficient economic region. We

therefore examine just a two-tier Federal system — a central government and many local or

regional governments.2

   Individuals choose to live in that community which is most desirable, given their tastes.

They may, however, work elsewhere, enjoy public services elsewhere, and buy goods or own

property elsewhere, though mobility costs will, to varying degrees, implicitly limit the
attractiveness of these activities. Similarly firms in each community can hire factors from other

communities and sell their output in other communities, though transportation costs again limit

the attractiveness of this. Because of transportation costs, prices of goods and factors will vary

by community.

   Each unit of government may impose taxes on each of the factors employed by firms in its

community, and on each of the goods sold within (though not necessarily consumed within)

the community. We thus have focused the analysis on what are commonly referred to as
source based factor taxes and origin based commodity taxes. We will comment below on how

the results change with destination based commodity taxes or residence based income taxes —

taxes imposed on goods where consumed and on factors where owned.


   Public services are produced by each unit of government. They are made available free of

charge, without exclusion.

   Communities are assumed to choose tax and expenditure policies so as to maximize a
Benthamite social welfare function which includes the utility levels of its existing residents. We

therefore assume away a range of public choice problems, not because we think they are
                                                 -3-

unimportant, but so as to isolate the problems created by decentralized decision-making. In

choosing these policies, we assume that each community takes as given the policies of other
communities.


                                              II. Notation

   Let us now develop the specific notation used in the model. Commodities will be indexed

by j and communities by k. Thus p represents the price received by a firm for the jth good
in community k, while Vik represents the price paid by the firm for the jth factor in community

k. In general, prices vary by location. Similarly, qfk represents the price paid by consumers for

the jth good, while WJk represents the price received for the jth factor, both in community k.
The difference     = qk   —
                              Pjk   represents the excise tax paid on a unit of good j, while the
difference t3k = VJk — W1k is the tax on the jth factor, imposed by community k. The vectors

of prices in community k are denoted by P*k V*k, W*k             s,   and t*k while the extended

vectors of all prices are denoted by p, v'       w, q, s,, and
   The firms in community k collectively choose a vector of outputs y and a vector of inputs

X*k. Note    that their inputs must be hired in community k, but their outputs can be sold
anywhere. The firms' choices must satisfy the implicit production function f"(.y,x) =

Transportation costs, for shipping output to other communities, are reflected in negative entries

for some of the elements of y. The firm will choose y and X*k so as to maximize profits
         —
             V   X*k, subject to the production constraint. (Here, y denotes the inner

product of the two vectors.) It follows that maximum profits ik are implicitly a function of the

prices faced by the firm: 'w,,       Tk   (ps*,v*k). For simplification, we also assume that the

production functions have constant returns to scale, and that firms behave competitively, so
that in equilibrium, ik = 0. Let us denote aggregate output sold in community n by
Y*n _
                                                 -4-


      From duality theory, we know that
                                            ak   —y, and also that           = — XJk.4 We will use
                                                                      aVIk

these results in the analysis below.

   We turn next to the modeling of individual behavior. We assume that there are a finite
number of types of individuals. There are many individuals of each type, each with the same

tastes, the same human capital, and the same ownership of other factors. Since individuals are

mobile, all individuals of a given type will have the same utility. Let ulk represent the number

of individuals of type i who choose to locate in community k.

   We will treat ulk    as   a continuous variable, thereby assuming that an individual's location

decision has only marginal impact on other aspects of the model. Eliminating the discrete
choice aspect of individual locational decisions is the primary motivation underlying the

assumption of many types of individuals, each type spread over many communities.

   Each individual faces a vector of prices q, for goods and a vector of factor prices w. In

addition, each benefits from the availability of the extended vector of public service levels Q,

where       is the level of the jth service in the kth community.

   We assume in general that each type of individual has a unique type of human capital, i.e.,

one that is not a perfect substitute for the human capital of other types of individuals. (Perfect

substitutability will be a special case.) The purpose of this assumption is to provide some
mechanism to prevent all individuals of a given type from concentrating in the same one
community. If they do, their wage rate there will be bid down, while it will rise in other
communities, inducing them to spread out. Let h. denote the human capital of type i, where h.

is a vector of length equal to the number of types of individuals with zero in all entries except

the ith, and one in the ith entry.

   Individuals of type I will also own a vector of nonhuman factors z of various types in

various communities. Let z denote the combined vector of human and nonhuman factors h.

and       where   z   will be of the same dimensions as the vector of firm inputs x.
                                                  .5.

    In addition, individuals are assumed to be adversely affected by the degree of congestion Ck

in their community. Congestion may not only reduce the quality of a given supply of public

goods (e.g. roads or schools), but it may also reduce the quality of the environment (e.g. noise

or pollution). We leave unspecified what factors contribute to congestion, though presume that

the number of residents and the level of production in the community are included among
them.

   Individuals of type i in community k will maximize their utility subject to the prices they

face, their endowments of factors, the level of congestion in the community, and the
availability of public services. We can therefore denote their utility level indirectly, by

                                                        I
                                14k —
                                    —r        ,w            ,Ck, **,

Here, k appears explicitly since the attractiveness of purchasing or selling goods in any given

community depends on the community in which the individual lives. (As with the firms,
individuals must buy some of the transportation output in order to participate in the markets in

other communities.)


   From duality theory, we know that 8 V          = — akyj, where a•,, is the marginal utility of
                                            qjn

income of the ith person in the kth community5 and where jk is the demand by the ith person

                                                                                    8 Vik
in the kth community for the jth good sold in the nth community. Similarly,                   a,kxJ,
                                                                                       In
where   4   is   the amount of the jth factor supplied in the nth community. Note that the
individual need not supply all of the zf to the market. For example, he can consume leisure.

   The treatment of land as a factor merits comment. Since land in community k cannot be

supplied as an input in community 9, we assume that each production function recognizes that

the required transportation costs here are indefinitely large. Also, identical nonhuman factor
ownership for individuals of a given type living in different communities may seem implausible

when land is considered as a factor. We assume here that housing is a service to be purchased,

one of whose inputs is land in that community. Individuals living in a given community will
                                             -6-

buy relatively more of the housing service in that community, but will still own just a
representative share of the land in that community.

   Let us next consider the activities of the local governments. Tax revenues in community k

will equal Tk — S*k Y*k + l*k X*k. These tax revenues will be used to buy a vector of

factors b*k, at revenue cost Rk      v*k         Budget balance implies that Rk = Tk. The

production function for public services in community k will then be denoted by
gk(Q,b) = 0.
   The modeling of the types of taxes communities can use is rather abstract, but includes as

special cases most of the taxes that state or local governments use. For example, a sales tax is

a uniform set of tax rates      A nonresidential property tax and a corporate income tax are

both factor taxes on land and capital inputs to production. A residential property tax could be

viewed as a tax on housing services sold within the community. A wage tax on employees
would also be a factor tax, as would be a tax on natural resource inputs to production. Some

taxes, such as an income tax on residents, are currently omitted, mainly for notational

simplification.

   In order to close the model, all that is needed in addition are resource constraints and
market clearing constraints. In particular, we must assume that
                                                                  1k
                                                                            =   x+       in the

factor markets,   and that y = Y      in the output market.
                         ik



                      HI. Characterization of optimal government behavior

   Since the only taxes available to local governments are distorting, the model cannot in
general lead to a Tiebout equilibrium with full efficiency.6 Therefore, each level of government

faces a second-best problem of how to raise tax revenue with the least loss in welfare. In this

section we will characterize the tax rates and public services levels that communities will
choose.
                                                -7-

    In doing so, we assume that each level of government acts so as to maximize a Benthamite

social welfare function.7 In particular, we assume that the welfare function of community k is8

                                       Wk =      w1      uIcV1k


where individuals of type i are given welfare weight w,. Note that community k ignores the

utility of nonresidents when making decisions. Since its decisions may affect the utility of
nonresidents in a variety of ways, externalities will exist with decentralized decision-making. In

order to characterize these externalities, we examine in addition the optimal behavior of local

governments when they fully coordinate their behavior. In particular, we examine the optimal

policy when the coordinated objective function is9

                                     W=                    ik Vik
                                            I        k

Note that we have assumed the same welfare weights w for each local government, so do not

allow for inconsistent objectives. The motivation here is to isolate problems arising from
decentralization of decision-making, per Se.

   In this context, we cannot assume that the initial income distribution is optimal, so that the

social marginal utility of income for all individuals is the same. For any given type of
individual i, utility levels are equalized due to mobility, and Benthamite social welfare function

must give them equal weight. But marginal utilities of income may well vary across
communities for these individuals. Without restrictions on mobility, this is an inevitable
characteristic of the equilibrium.'0 We therefore must examine distributional as well as
efficiency considerations throughout the analysis.


I. Fully coordinated decision-making

   In examining the costs of decentralized decision-making, we start by characterizing tax and

spending behavior when all decisions are coordinated and then examine the decentralized
equilibrium. Assume therefore that the coordinated government can choose the vectors of tax
rates t and s, as well as public service inputs             and public service outputs Q, so as to
                                                     -8-

maximize social welfare. Its decision problem therefore is


      :     mgx        I      k
                                  u VIC +
                                                 k
                                                                    +     X* — V*k b*k)]   + vkk (A)

where z is a Lagrangian multiplier on the government budget constraint, and 'y is Lagrangian
multiplier on the public goods production constraint in the kth community. Note that we have

required only that the overall budget constraint be satisfied, and not that each community's

budget constraint be satisfied separately.

   When we carry out the differentiation, we derive the following results:


Proposition 1. Optimal coordinated government behavior can be characterized by the following

set of first-order conditions:"


a) For s,

                                  —                                                öTk
                        Y(t—O)+dO**                                                              (la)
                                                              k                k

                                         -           ôRk
                                                              =0
                                             k       t35Jf


b) For


                       xJ(M—O) + dO .                   +          ----- + z       -—            (ib)
                                                              k                k

                                        -            ôRk
                                                             =0
                                             k

c) for

                      .3g             aCk   aTk
                    (y—r-——zv.,)+dO**
                      ô0J9
                               _____
                                        +—+i—
                                ob k ôbjq k ob                                                   (ic)

                                              -              öRk
                                      —(z—O)k L7LJ

d) For
                                                             -9-


                                           ög                        ____ + ____ + j.t
                       w1u _____ +                      + d8                                  ____         (id)
                  1k        aQJ            ÔQJ                       8Qj   k ÔQJ            k 8Q
                                     - ôRk                     =0
                                  —(i---0)
                                        k
                                           ,

                                           —
                                                        w,uaJ(
                                                   1k
                             where         0=
                                                        1k


                                       dOlk =   iik          — 0


                                   ôJk —
                                  ______ —Uiki ik . _______ —                       ôq
                                                                                  ______



                                     aCk
                                               =1U ik aVil
                                                       uCj. Uj
                                                                            ôCk



                                     ôTk                 _____ +t             aXk
                                                    k                   k
                                     ô7f
                                            =   lv,1,
                                                             ÔV*k
                                                    k

                             all for        = sJf,tJ,bJf, or

Proof The straightforward derivation is found in the Appendix.

    Because of the generality of the model, the first-order conditions are rather messy, but the

economic interpretation is still straightforward. Each first-order condition above consists of five

terms. The first measures the direct impact of the policy change. For s and t, it measures
the gain from transferring income from the representative individual to the government. Here,

  represents the welfare value of an extra dollar of government revenue, while 0 represents the

welfare value of an extra dollar of income to the representative individual. If lump sum taxes

existed, z would equal 0. Since raising revenue creates efficiency losses, however, the value of
an extra dollar of government revenue, ,                     would   normally exceed the value of a dollar to
individuals, 0.

   The first term in the first order condition for                          represents the value of the relaxed
government production constraint relative to the social cost of purchasing the extra                       The
                                               - 10 -



first term in the equation for Q9 represents the utility gain to individuals of the extra Output

relative to the social cost of the increased production.'2

   The second through the fifth terms collectively measure the efficiency and equity costs
created in the process of transferring income to the government, or using the revenue to
provide public services. Their size depends on the degree to which individual behavior, and

equilibrium market prices, change in response to the government action. We see from
equations (la) and (lb) that the difference (i—O) reflects the magnitude of these efficiency and

equity costs created by raising government revenue.

   The second term in each equation captures any distributional effects of the policy change.

The expression dOk       measures   the social value of a dollar to an individual of type i in
community k, relative to the social value of a dollar to the 'representative individual. The

expression           measures the income effect on individuals of type i in community k of the
             t9o.j
policy change. The inner product then measures whether the income transfers created by the

policy change are weighted mainly towards the poor (positive value) or mainly towards the rich

(negative value).'3

   The third term captures any impact of the policy change on the severity of congestion costs.

Individuals may shift their residence, or production efforts may change location, in response to

the policy change. A move towards less congested communities would be beneficial, and
conversely. Individuals, in making their decisions, do not take into account these externalities.

   The fourth term measures any indirect tax revenue effects of the policy change, as
individuals change the amount or location of their market activity. As such, it captures any

efficiency effects arising from this change in behavior. When prices reflect the social costs of

commodities (or the marginal products of factors), changes in individual behavior have no
efficiency consequences. But when taxes exist, one component of the price individuals face,
the tax component, is not a true social cost. As a result, when an individual buys more of a
taxed commodity (or supplies more of a taxed factor), there is a social gain since the utility
                                              — 11—




gain to the individual exceeds the social cost of the output (or the utility loss to the individual

falls short of the marginal product) by an amount equal to the tax rate. In equations Ia and ib,

the most important element of this term is undoubtedly the response by individuals to the tax

induced increase in price of the good Yj or the factor x,,. This is the only part of the last four

terms not assumed to equal zero when deriving the Ramsey rule for tax rates.14

      The final term measures the social cost of raising any additional tax revenue required by

changes in the costs of factor inputs to government production. The difference Cu—O)
implicitly measures the social cost of transferring a dollar from individuals to the government.


2. Decentralized decision-making

      We proceed next to provide a formal characterization of the fiscal decisions made by
uncoordinated local governments. We assume that each local government acts independently,

taking as given the fiscal decisions made by other local governments. Clearly, local
governments do in part coordinate their behavior. The point here is not so much to provide a

good positive description of local government behavior as to describe the types of problems

which arise from decentralized decision-making. To what degree local governments have
managed to alleviate these problems in practice through coordination is a separate question.

      We assume then that the objective of each local government is to maximize the weighted

sum of the utility of its own residents, subject to a balanced budget constraint, and subject to

the public production function. That is, we assume that each local government behaves so as
to:


             s*, mgx
                 *' *' *
                             u'V +             .
                                                   Y+     .     —
                                                                      ' b*f]   +g
Note that any effects on other individuals or other units of government are ignored. Each local

government carries out this maximization simultaneously, taking as given the actions of other

local governments.
                                                         - 12 -



     When we carry out the differentiation, we derive the following results:


Proposition 2. Decentralized government behavior can be characterized by the following set of

first order conditions:


a) For s,

                                            —*       *                  t91*        t9C
                                                                                                       (2a)

                          ÔT          t9R                              äV
                          as           ôs1
                                                 —
                                                                                —y
b) For

                                      —* *
                                (xJf — Ou x) + dO : +
                                                                        81          c                  (2b)

                          aT                     —                     ôV
                                                                                                 1=0
                          ôtj          3tj                             f3tj               ôtjf

c) For

                                      e9g                              i91*         ÔC
                                ('-----1--—v1) +dO
                                      ab                               ö        +—                     (2c)


                                 +—+O0  tJVj
                                                         8R —
                                                         (JUj
                                                                              ôI,
                                                                              UVj

d)   For Q,

                                (    w.u' dV' + y
                                             dQf
                                                  a
                                                            ôQ
                                                                     ) + d&1,
                                                                                    ôQ
                                                                                                       (2d)

                                ac    ar                        aR   - a!,
                          +
                                aQ +L aQ                          Q +O aQ

Proof The derivation is a simple modification of the derivation for Proposition 1.

     The intuition underlying these first-order conditions is basically the same as for the fully
coordinated case. Of the six terms in each equation, for all but the last, analogous terms
appeared in the equations in Proposition 1. The key difference is that effects of fiscal decisions

on residents of other communities and on the fiscal position of other governments are all
                                                - 13 -



 ignored here.


    Let us examine the differences in the first-order conditions in Propositions I and 2 term by

 term. The first-term in each of the first-order conditions in Proposition 2 again measures the

 direct effects of the policy change. In equations 2a and 2b, however, while all the direct
 revenue effects of the tax change are taken into account, only the direct loss to residentsfrom

 paying taxes is taken into account. Utility loss to nonresidents from paying taxes is ignored.

 To the extent then that nonresidents pay the taxes, as with sales taxes or wage taxes on
 nonresidents, these taxes will be used excessively when fiscal authority is decentralized. For
 taxes like a corporate income tax, this effect may be substantial.

    A comparison of the first terms in equations Id and 2d gives the obvious result that with

decentralized decision making, the value of local public services to nonresidents is ignored.
This type of benefit spillover has been discussed at length in the literature.

    The second term continues to capture distributional effects of the policy change. With
decentralized decision-making, however, only redistribution effects on the residents of the
community are taken into account. The distributional pattern of income effects among
nonresidents is ignored. For example, a sales tax increase may be paid essentially equally by

rich and poor residents, but only poor nonresidents may have taken the time to travel in search
of a cheaper price.

   The third term captures the effect of any change in congestion in-community Q due to the

policy change. Effects on congestion elsewhere are ignored. In the fully coordinated case, this

term captured the difference in congestion costs when individuals or production move from one

community to another. In the decentralized case, communities will tend to tax excessively

congestion producing activities, since they experience any gains from decongestion, but ignore
the associated loss from extra congestion elsewhere.

   The fourth term captures the effect on tax revenues of any change in individual behavior.

While in the fully coordinated case, effects on total tax revenues are taken into account, in the
                                               - 14 -



decentralized case, effects only on the tax revenues of that community are taken into account.

If cross-price elasticities are zero, then there are no effects on the tax revenues of other
communities. However, in this context, where goods supplied in different communities are
defined to be different goods, the assumption that cross price elasticities are zero is untenable.

For example, the alternative extreme assumption, where a unit decrease in demand for a good

in community k is associated with approximately a unit increase in demand for the same good

in other communities, would frequently be quite plausible. In this case, with decentralization,

tax rates would be set low, due to the mobility of demand. Since in aggregate, demand would

be extremely inelastic, however, a uniform tax in all communities would be close to
nondistorting. In general, elasticity of demand in one community may have little relation to

the aggregate elasticity of demand, so that the set of tax rates arising in a decentralized setting

need have little relation to those which would be chosen in a coordinated setting. Ability to

relocate demand may be quite different from willingness to reduce demand when prices rise.

   The interpretation of the fifth term is similar to that of the previous terms, but the
externalities here are probably much less important. In a decentralized setting, the effect of the

policy change on revenue requirements in that community only is taken into account. In a
coordinated setting, the effect of the policy change on the revenue requirements of all
communities would matter.

   Finally, the sixth term in the equations for decentralized behavior did not appear explicitly

previously. This term captures the income effects on residents of community due to price
changes caused by the policy change. This term is analogous to the terms of trade effect which

appears in the optimal tariff literature. In the coordinated setting, the sum of these terms over

all communities appeared in the course of the derivation. Due to competition in production,

the value of inputs minus outputs in private production must remain zero so that in the
                                           —
                                                            ÔV*k
coordinated case this sum reduced to 0                  .          .   With decentralization, however,
                                               k

communities would try to gain at the expense of other communities.
                                               - 15 -



     Propositions   1 and 2 together provide a formal characterization of the reasons why
 decentralized decision-making itself can lead to a less efficient (equitable) outcome. This arises

 because one community's decision affects in many ways the utility level of residents of other

 communities, yet these effects are ignored in the decision-making. The types of externalities

 that appeared in the equations resulting from a given community's decisions were:

       (1) Nonresidents may pay some of the taxes.

       (2) Nonresidents may receive some of the benefits from public services.

       (3) Congestion costs faced by nonresidents may change.

       (4) Tax revenues received in other communities may change due to the spillover of
            economic activity.

       (5) Resource costs for public services in other communities may change.

       (6) Output and factor price changes may favor residents over nonresidents.

       (7) Distributional effects among nonresidents would be ignored.

    In certain special cases, externalities may tend to offset, in which case the costs of
decentralized decision-making are minimized. For example, consider the decision-making of a

central city surrounded by suburbs. The suburban residents benefit from using the city's public

services, benefits ignored in setting public service levels. However, suburban residents also pay

various taxes to the central city, such as sales taxes, wage taxes on nonresidents, etc. If the city

were to consider a uniform expansion of both taxes and services, it may well be that the benefit

spillover and the tax "spillin" essentially offset, leaving little net externality from these two
terms. 15


   As another example, consider the externalities created by an individual decision to change

residence as a result of a policy change. In his new community the individual pays extra taxes,

but also adds to congestion; while in his old community he no longer pays (as much in) taxes,

but he also no longer adds to congestion there. This is the setting of the Buchanan-Goetz
                                             - 16 -



[1972] analysis. If the marginal costs and benefits of gaining or losing a resident just offset,

then again there are no net externalities. That is, the congestion effects on other communities

and the tax revenue effects on other communities may essentially offset, again leaving no net

externality from these two terms.

   This is also the setting of the Tiebout [1956] model, at least as formalized by McGuire
[1974]. The above analysis makes clear how strong the assumptions must be to get a Tiebout

type result. To get a Tiebout result, where the public good is supplied in a decentralized setting

with no efficiency costs at all, there must be no net externalities and no net equity or efficiency

costs arising from government behavior. That is, the sum of the seven sources of externalities

listed above must be zero for each of the equations in Proposition 2, so that communities
would in effect act in a coordinated fashion. In addition, the sum of the second, third, fourth,

and fifth terms in each of the equations in Proposition 1, which together measure the equity

and efficiency effects of government behavior, must equal zero.

   How does the analysis charge if we have destination-residence based taxes rather than
source-origin based taxes. In particular, what if we tax factors where they are owned and goods

where they are consumed (rather than purchased)? In this case, the tax is paid entirely by
residents so that the first terms in equations la vs. 2a and lb vs. 2b will look the same. All
other externalities will remain, however.


                      IV. Analysis of Possible Federal Government Remedies

   In principle, local governments could negotiate together to correct any of the externalities

described above. However, given the difficulty of conducting negotiations among thousands of

local government units, few of the above externalities are likely to have been corrected for in

this manner. In this section, we therefore explore a number of policies which the Federal
government might use in response to the inefficiencies resulting from decentralized decision-

making)6
                                                - 17 -



 1. Centralized provision of public goods


    One obvious policy is to have the Federal government provide all public goods, so that
interactions among communities can be taken into account. However, the Federal government

would normally be constrained to provide a uniform level of public services, and charge
uniform tax rates, even though individual preferences differ. This may occur due to
constitutional constraints or due to inadequate information about local preferences. One of the

key advantages of decentralization is the resulting diversity of policies.

    If we accept the constraint requiring uniform public service quality, and uniform tax rates,

by each level of government within its jurisdiction, then it is possible to develop a theory for

the optimal degree of decentralization. The optimal centralized uniform service level, and tax

rates, would be inferior to the optimal diversified service levels described in Proposition 1, and

may or may not be preferable to the diversified service levels, and tax rates, with decentralized

decisions described in Proposition 2. A detailed comparison here would provide guidelines

concerning whether to (or, when there are more than two levels of government, the degree to

which to) decentralize the provision of any given public service.


2. Categorical grants

   Local governments will to a degree choose the wrong level and composition of expenditures,

since the size of the spillover to nonresidents will vary by type of expenditure. Categorical or

matching grants provide one device by which the Federal government can induce local
governments to shift their package of public services towards those which provide the most

benefits to nonresidents. An example of a good with large spillovers where such grants have
developed in the U.S. is interstate highways.


3. Tax deductibility of local government taxes

   Local governments may also choose too small a level of public services in general. Not only

do nonresidents benefit from extra public services, but also surrounding communities may
                                              - 18 -



receive increased tax revenue as economic activity migrates in response to higher tax rates. On

the other hand, nonresidents pay some of the taxes used to finance extra services, and also
suffer from extra congestion as economic activity shifts into their communities.

   If, on net, nonresidents tend to benefit (lose) from expanded public services, then there are

grounds for an overall Federal subsidy (tax) to local public services. One way this is done in

the U.S. is through allowing local public expenditures to be deductible under the Federal
income tax. This particular policy is unattractive, however, in that expenditures are deductible

only for the approximately 20% of tax payers who itemize (generally those with high incomes).

Also, among those who itemize, the subsidy rate equals the individual's marginal tax rate,
which varies substantially across individuals (being highest again for those with the highest

incomes). A refundable tax credit, however, would not be subject to these problems.


4. Revenue sh3ring

   Both previous policies change relative prices, and were designed to internalize the effects of

spillovers. They have commonly been argued for on these grounds. (See, for example, Oates
[1972]). The above analysis also suggests a rationalization for direct income transfers from the
Federal government to local governments.

   To make the point starkly, consider a tax on the return to capital, where capital is
completely mobile, has by assumption the same productivity everywhere, but is in fixed supply.

Since by assumption capital is perfectly mobile, it will all flow to the community with the lowest

tax rate. Communities will compete for this tax base, and in equilibrium the tax rate on capital

in each community will be driven to zero. However, since also by assumption capital is in fixed

supply, a uniform tax on capital in all locations is completely nondistorting. Therefore, with

centralized decision-making, the optimal tax rate on capital would be very high.

   The central government could then impose a uniform tax rate on capital, and redistribute

the revenues in something approximating a nondistorting way, allowing local governments
either to expand expenditures or to reduce other distorting taxes. In effect, the central
                                             - 19 -




government provides the mechanism by which local governments can coordinate their tax

policies and take into account the effect each local government's action has on the revenues of

other local governments.

   In general, the Federal government will not be indifferent to how the revenue is distributed

across local governments. For example, the size of the efficiency (equity) gain when a
community lowers its taxes, or increases its expenditures, in response to a dollar received in

revenue sharing may vary widely by community. The Federal government would then have the

incentive to give relatively more in revenue sharing to communities where the efficiency

(equity) gain would be largest.

   To the extent that the amount of revenue a community gets back depends on its actions,

however, complications arise due to these price distortions. For example, consider the situation

where all the revenues collected from a community are returned to that community. Then, the

community can completely offset the effects of the Federal action by lowering its own tax rate

by an amount equal to the Federal tax rate. In principle, the decentralized equilibrium would

remain unchanged by the Federal action. However, communities would normally be
constrained to charge positive tax rates. If the Federal tax rate exceeds the decentralized tax

rate, as we expect, then the Federal action would accomplish the desired end.


5. Federal reau!ation of permissible local tax bases

   In the case of revenue sharing, we considered the situation where in the decentralized
equilibrium a particular tax rate is relatively too low. The Federal government can then impose

a higher tax rate. In situations where nonresidents pay an important share of a particular tax,

however, the tax rate may be set too high. Examples of this situation may be severance fees,
and perhaps state corporate income taxes. What remedies exist in this case?

   The most obvious, and extreme, remedy is to forbid local governments from using such tax

bases at all. In some cases, this may be an improvement, though a zero tax rate may be
inefficiently low. An alternative might be to legislate a maximum permissible tax rate, set at
                                               - 20 -



the desired value.


                                           V. Conclusion


   There may be many advantages to decentralizing government decision-making. Local
governments, being "closer to the people," may better reflect individual preferences. The
diversity of policies of local governments allows individuals to move to that community best

reflecting their tastes. Competition among communities should lead to greater efficiency and

innovation. However, this paper has shown the many ways in which decentralized decision-

making can lead to inefficiencies, since a local government will ignore the effects of its
decisions on the utility levels of nonresidents.

   The paper shows that certain taxes may be used excessively, such as when nonresidents pay

an important fraction of the tax. Other taxes may be used too little, since for example the

increase in tax revenue in neighboring communities, as economic activity spills over to avoid a

tax increase, would not be taken into account when communities act independently. These

efficiency problems with decentralized decision-making imply the potential for efficiency gains

through regulation by the Federal government of what tax bases local governments can use,
and through transfer of Federal tax revenue to local governments.
                                                               APPENDIX


 Proof of Proposition 1. Direct differentiation of equation A with respect to s gives:


                             uik[
                                    ôVik ôq+ dV 8W ôVtk
                                                    +                                       ôCk
                                                                                                      +                   Ôuik
             I          k           ôq ôS.f             8w         8s.            ôCk
                                                                                                                    V1k
                                                                                                                            j     (A.!)


                                                                           ÔX*k —
                               +            + (s*k          ______ +                              8V*k       =
                                              k                                                       ôSj
Note that the second term equals zero, since Vik has the same value for all k, and since the

     ui is fixed. Note also that                     ôqlk — 8Pik
                                                                        except for i = j and k = , when                      LL =
 k                                                               8s                                                              8s9

1 + ---.
                              8w** 8v
                   AJso,                            Using duality theory, we can then reexpress the first term as
        8s                     l9Sjf        ôS

                                                                          + a1kx .
                                                                                            8v + ÔVIk öCk
                                    u' [cxIkyJ       aikY*
                    I          k                                                                 8
If we substitute for o,                 the expression 0 + d 0k' the first term becomes the following:

                                                                       ap,                              ôv
                                       1k
                                            U   1k ik_uIk 1k
                                                       1k
                                                               y       ÔSJf
                                                                                         UX                   ]                  (A.2)


                   + d 0ik [—u iky
                                 1k
                                                   8q       +ut!C 1k
                                                                       8w     1                              8V
                                                                                                            _____
                        1k                         8s                  ôs               1         k          c9Ck   8sJ
Since              y — Y and
                 u 1k 1k —                       u1*x,1k—
                                                        —
                                                          xp, +           the first term simplifies to:
        ik                                  1k



                                                                                            8v
                                                                           —x                     I                              (A.3)
                                                                   ôSjf


                                            +dO _____
                                                 ôSff
                                                               +k Sjf+OôC         —
                                                                                            ôRk


That profits remain zero in equilibrium implies that the second term in equation (A.3) equals

zero. Equation Ia in the text follows simply. Equations lb. lc, and ld follow in a similar
fashion.
                                        REFERENCES



Arnott, Richard and Ronald E. Grieson, "Optimal Fiscal Policy for a State or Local
       Government," Journal of Urban Economics, 9, 1981, pp. 23-48.

Bradford, David and Wallace Oates, "Suburban Exploitation of Central Cities and
       Governmental Structure," in Hal Hochman and George Peterson, eds., Redistribution
        Through Public Choice, New York, Columbia University Press, 1974.

Buchanan, James, The Demand and Supply of Public Goods, Chicago, Rand McNally, 1968.

Buchanan, James and C. J. Goetz, "Efficiency Limits of Fiscal Mobility: An Assessment of the
      Tiebout Model," Journal of Public Economics, 1, 1972, pp. 25-44.

Hamilton, Bruce W., "Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local Governments," Urban
       Studies, 12, 1975, Pp. 205-211.

McGuire, Martin C. "Group Segregation and Optimal Jurisdictions," Journal of Political
       Economy, 82, 1974, pp.   112-132.


Mieszkowski, Peter, "The Property Tax: An Excise Tax or a Profits Tax?," Journal of Public
       Economics, 1, 1972, pp. 73-96.

Mirrlees, James, "The Optimal Town," Swedish Journal of Economics, 74, 1972.

Niskanen, William, "The Peculiar Economics of Bureaucracy," American Economic Review, 58,
       1968, p. 293-305.

Oates, Wallace E., Fiscal Federalism, New York, Harcourt Bruce Jovanovich, Inc., 1972.

Samuelson, Paul, "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure," Review of    Economics and Statistics,
        1954, pp. 387-9.

Starrett, David A., "Measuring Externalities and Second Best Distortions in the Theory of Local
         Public Goods," Econometrica, 48, 1980, pp. 627-642.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "The Theory of Local Public Goods," in Martin S. Feldstein and
        Robert P. Inman, eds., Economics of Public Services, London, Macmillan, pp. 274-333.

Tiebout, C., "A Pure Theory of Local Public Expenditure," Journal of Political Economy, 64,
        1956, pp. 416-424.
                                                 FOOTNOTES



 *     This paper was presented at the ISPE Conference on Taxation in Federal Systems in
       Canberra, Australia, on August 25, 1982. I would like to thank Fischer Black, Dieter Bös,
       Bhajan Grewel, Michelle White, and especially Charles E. McLure, Jr., for comments on
       an earlier draft. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author, and do not
       represent those of Bell Laboratories or of the Bell System.
 1.    See, for example, Buchanan [1968] and Niskanen [19681.
 2.    Nothing of substance would be changed if the analysis were extended to three levels of
       government.
 3.    For simplification, we ignore any contribution of public goods to production.
 4.    To show this, note that rk =p .          — V*k X*k, evaluated at the optimal values of
       and X*k. Differentiating with respect to Pjn gives:

                               ____
                                 Pn     =Yjn+PjVjk
                                            k
                                                         Pjn       j
                                                                             BX1k

                                                                              Pin

      When y,, and X*k         are   chosen so as to maximize profits subject to the production
      constraint, we have first-order conditions: p = — X -— and                    Vik   =X          Substituting
                                                                       oyi                     ôXjk
                                all-k   =             8fk
      and simplifying gives:
                                UPjn
                                                — A -'-——. Since   fk = 0 always, the result follows.
                                                     h'Pjn
5.    While utility is the same across communities for the ith type, marginal utility need not be
      the same, a point emphasized by Mirrlees [1972].
6.    If the supply of a factor has zero elasticity, as with land, then a tax on that factor is
      nondistorting. However, even in this setting, a Tiebout equilibrium may still not arise for
      many of the reasons described below. For example, if new residents add more (or less)
      to congestion costs than they do to tax revenues, then locational decisions will still create
      externalities. Hamilton [1975] has shown that if communities can impose quantity
      restrictions, e.g. zoning, then a Tiebout type equilibrium might be possible. We do not
      allow for such restrictions here.
7.    These welfare functions could be reinterpreted as merely representing Pareto optimizing
      behavior by each government. The objective of a Pareto optimizing government would be
      to maximize the utility level of type Q individuals subject to the constraints that V& V"
      for all other types ik, for some utility levels V. Put algebraically, the objective function,
      subject to constraints, would be
                                        max 0k    +     a, (Vik_V)

      where the w1 represent Lagrangian multipliers. If the Lagrangian weights here are the
      same as the welfare weights in the text, optimal behavior will also be the same.
8.    We assume that the utility of the residents at the time of the decision enters into the
      objective function, rather than the utility of those who would be present in response to
      any policy change.
9.    Optimal behavior when coordination occurs is not necessarily intended here as a
      description of policy if all decisions were made by the central government. For example,
                                                F-2



      we  will assume below that a central government would be required to provide uniform
      service levels, and charge uniform tax rates, in all jurisdictions.
10. For further discussion, see Mirrlees [1972].
11. While first-order conditions must be satisfied at the optimal outcome, they may also be
     satisfied elsewhere. Second-order conditions in this context need not necessarily be
     satisfied. See, for example, Stiglitz [19771. We assume in the discussion that the desired
      equilibrium has, in fact, been reached.
12. Note that, ignoring all but the first terms, the sum of equations ic and id gives the
      Samuelson [19541 optimal condition for pure public goods.
13. The tax incidence literature, which analyzes the degree to which labor, capital, or some
     other group, bears the burden of particular taxes, focuses on the nature of the equilibrium
     price changes which result from tax policy. For example, to what degree does a tax on
      capital income result in a rise in the before tax interest rate (due to a drop in the
      equilibrium capital stock), thereby lessening the loss to capital owners. In the analysis
      here, the direct effect of the tax payment appears in the first term, while the offsetting
      effect of price changes appears in the second term. We do not attempt to anJyze the
      magnitude of these offsetting price changes. Presumably, the effect of marginal changes
      in any one community's tax policy on market prices (the context of these first order
      conditions) is small, though the effect of these changes in aggregate could be large. See
      Mieszkowski [1972] for further discussion.
14.   Technically, in deriving the Ramsey rule, the Slutsky equation would be used to
      decompose the fourth term into price and income effects. All but the own price effects
      are then assumed to equal zero.
15. For further discussion, see Bradford and Oates [1974].
16.   If these policies are pursued, yet local governments do in fact coordinate their policies,
      then there may be overcorrection for the externalities, with resulting inefficiencies.
