                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                MARIJUANA AND CRIME:
                     IS THERE A CONNECTION BEYOND PROHIBITION?

                                        Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
                                             Beau Kilmer

                                         Working Paper 10046
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10046


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




Research presented in this paper was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(R01DA12724) to RAND. The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect
the opinions of the author’s institutions or funding agencies. Contact person: Rosalie Liccardo Pacula,
RAND, 1700 Main St., P.O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138. Email: Pacula@rand.org. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Beau Kilmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Marijuana and Crime: Is There a Connection Beyond Prohibition?
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Beau Kilmer
NBER Working Paper No. 10046
October 2003
JEL No. K14, K42, I18

                                            ABSTRACT

We examine the relationship between marijuana use and non-drug related crime using data on arrests
from the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) Program and Uniform Crime Reports. There
is a positive association between self-reported use at the time of the offence and non-drug related
violent, property and income-producing crime even after accounting for other substance use in the
ADAM data. Reduced form equations using both data sets only provide evidence supporting a causal
mechanism for property and income-producing crime. In the case of violent crime, we find a
statistically significant association with arrests but not reported crime, suggesting that marijuana use
may just influence the likelihood of getting caught committing these crimes.

Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
RAND
1700 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
pacula@rand.org

Beau Kilmer
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
beau_kilmer@kgsphd.harvard.edu
I. Introduction

         An extensive literature exists examining the relationship between substance abuse and

crime, the focus of which has typically centered on cocaine, heroin, and alcohol. Few studies

specifically examine the relationship between marijuana and crime despite consistent findings

that marijuana is the most commonly identified drug among arrestees. Reports from the United

States, England, and Australia, for example, all show that approximately 60% of arrestees test

positive for marijuana use and that marijuana is the drug whose metabolites are most frequently

found in arrestees’ urine (Taylor and Bennett, 1999; Makkai et al., 2000).

         There are two good reasons why inferences should not be made about the relationship

between marijuana and crime on the basis of urine tests of arrestees. First, very few arrestees

who test positive for marijuana have only used marijuana. Most of those who test positive for

marijuana also use other illicit drugs or alcohol (NIJ, 2000)1. The use of these other substances

may be what motivated the criminal behavior rather than marijuana. Second, unlike other illegal

substances, a positive urine sample for THC only indicates use in the past month; it does not

indicate that marijuana was used immediately prior to the offence taking place. Hence, a

positive urine test in the case of marijuana cannot be interpreted as evidence that the crime was

committed under the influence of marijuana.

         Despite its frequent use among arrestee populations, marijuana has generally been shown

to inhibit aggressive behavior and violence in humans and thus it is believed not to be a major

contributor to crime (Miczek et al., 1994; White and Gorman, 2000). However, in their review

of the literature on the topic, the National Research Council concluded that the long-term use of

marijuana may alter the nervous system in ways that do promote violence (National Research

1
  Data from the 1999 ADAM sample suggests this figure could exceed 70%. Of the 16,684 arrestees who tested
positive for marijuana, 7,748 (46.4%) tested also tested positive for another illicit drug and another 4,436 (26.6%)
reported use of alcohol in the previous 72 hours.
Council, 1993). Further, a consistent link between frequent cannabis use and violent crime and

property damage has been identified among juveniles (Dembo et al., 1991; Salmelainen, 1995;

Baker, 1998). Thus the issue of whether marijuana use causes crime, even if limited to a small

segment of the population, remains in question.

       The assumption that drugs and crime are causally related is a major reason for prohibiting

the use of illicit drugs in many developed countries. If marijuana use is not the cause of crime,

but merely defined as a crime, then one must consider all the criminal justice resources dedicated

to arresting, processing, and adjudicating marijuana offenders as a cost of prohibition when

weighing the cost and benefits of our current marijuana policy.

       In this paper, we begin to investigate the causal association between marijuana use and

crime. Using individual-level data from the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM)

Program, we examine the relationship between marijuana use and the probability of getting

arrested for a violent, property and income-producing and crime while controlling for concurrent

use of alcohol and cocaine. Models consider the sensitivity of results when marijuana use is

measured by a positive urine test, self-reported use in the past 3 days, and self-reported use at

time of the offence. We find that marijuana use is positively associated with the likelihood of

being arrested for a property and income-producing crime, with reduced form models supporting

the conclusion that at least some of the association is causal in nature. This finding is further

supported by additional analyses of the number of property and income-producing offence

arrests measured in the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR). Models estimating the likelihood of

being arrested for a violent crime using reduced form models are mixed, with no statistical

association found in the ADAM sample and a positive association between marijuana use and

violent crime arrests in the UCR sample.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we provide some

background on the hypothesized relationship between marijuana and crime and the findings to

date. In section III we present the theoretical framework. In Section IV, we discuss the

empirical model and the primary data sets used to estimate our models. In Section V we present

our results and in Section VI we offer some discussion and conclusions.



II. Background and Significance

       Surprisingly few studies have explicitly examined the relationship between cannabis use

and crime. Those studies that have been done generally examine the association within the

context of four alternative hypotheses based on Goldstein’s (1985) tripartite framework, where

the association between marijuana use and crime is explained by either psychopharmacological

factors, economic-compulsive behavior, systemic violence or common factors.

       The psychopharmacological model hypothesizes that drug users engage in violent and/or

non-violent crime because of the acute psychoactive effects of the substance (Goldstein, 1985).

There is very little support for this model in the case of marijuana, except for adolescents.

Laboratory studies generally show that marijuana, unlike alcohol, temporarily inhibits aggression

and violence (Mizcek et al, 1994; White and Gorman, 2000), raising doubt that any association

identified in the data is causal in nature. Still, there is some evidence showing a correlation

between chronic marijuana use and increased risk of violent behavior (White and Hansell, 1998;

Kaplan and Damphousse, 1995).

       Although cannabis use may temporarily inhibit aggression in the general population, it is

possible that cannabis use increases aggression in some individuals. In controlled laboratory

studies, for example, the relationship between alcohol use and aggression is influenced by
subject characteristics, such as gender, aggressive tendencies and cognitive abilities, as well as

experimental conditions, such as whether the subject was provoked (Bushman, 1997). Indeed,

Bushman’s (1990) meta-analysis found more aggression among marijuana smokers than placebo

controls in laboratory experiments, although he notes that the placebo controls showed

significantly less aggression than nondrug controls highlighting the importance of individual

heterogeneity in general tendencies toward aggression. Nonetheless, it may be the case, as

suggested by the US National Research Council (1993), that prolonged use of cannabis promotes

violent or aggressive behavior because of changes in the nervous system.

        There is far more convincing evidence of a link between frequent cannabis use and

violent crime and nonviolent delinquency among juveniles (Salmelainen, 1995; Fergusson and

Horwood, 1997; Baker, 1998).           In a study of 10,441 secondary students in New South Wales,

Australia, students who were frequent cannabis users were two times more likely to participate in

assault and malicious damage of property than students who did not use cannabis.                            The

relationship persisted after adjusting for differences in developmental characteristics,

demographics and other substance use (Baker, 1998).2                 In a longitudinal analysis of a New

Zealand birth cohort, Fergusson and Horwood (1997) considered four measures of delinquency in

their analysis of the consequences of adolescent marijuana use: three or more violent offences,

three or more property offences, arrested by police, and convicted of an offence in court. There

was a dose-response relationship between each of these outcomes and frequency of marijuana use

by age 16. This persisted after adjustment for covariates, suggesting that it was not wholly

explained by the characteristics of adolescents who become regular marijuana users by age 16. It


2
  The developmental factors controlled for in the model included parental supervision, family structure, school
performance and truancy. The demographic factors accounted for were gender and Aboriginality. Other substance
use indicators accounted for were infrequent and frequent use of alcohol and any use of opiates, stimulants, and
steroids.
also persisted after adjustment for drug use and criminal behaviour in the user’s peer group,

indicating that it was not explained by affiliating with delinquent and drug using peers.

         Economic crime is that which is motivated by the need to generate income to fund one’s

own drug use (Goldstein, 1985). By comparison with other illicit drugs, marijuana consumption

does not typically produce compulsive patterns of criminal behavior among users and it is not as

expensive as other illicit drugs. However, studies suggest that there may be some economically

motivated crime at least among youth.            In studies of juvenile offenders in the United States and

Australia, young offenders who reported frequent use of marijuana reported greater involvement

in theft than non-users (Dembo, et al. 1991; Salmelainen 1995; Stevenson and Forsythe 1998).

In addition, among juvenile offenders higher marijuana involvement was significantly correlated

with higher rates of offending for specific property crimes (Salmelainen, 1995; Stevenson and

Forsythe, 1998). The relationship was supported by Baker’s (1998) study of secondary students

from New South Wales, in which he found that frequent marijuana users were almost five times

more likely to report participation in acquisitive property crime than non-users, even after

controlling for individual characteristics, family background, and other substance use (Baker,

1998).3 What is perhaps most surprising about this study is the fact that frequent marijuana use

was found to have a larger effect on participation in property crime than frequent alcohol use or

any other illicit drug use.

         Systemic violence is that which arises when violence is used to enforce contracts or to

resolve “turf wars” in illicit drug markets. Such violence is motivated by the enormous profits

that are generated by illicit drug sales and by the absence of legitimate law enforcement to

resolve disputes. For a number of reasons it is doubtful that the experience of violence in heroin


3
 The author of the report defines acquisitive property crime as motor vehicle theft, breaking and entering, receiving
or selling stolen goods, and shoplifting goods worth $20 or more.
and cocaine markets is applicable to marijuana markets. There is some evidence that violence

has been generated by marijuana markets in a few places in the United States, but this has been

extremely rare and very localized (Goldstein et al., 1989; ONDCP, 2001).            For example,

Goldstein et al (1989) found in their assessment of 414 drug-related homicides in New York City

that only 6 were related to marijuana. Ethnographic work examining the drug market in New

York City showed that although marijuana dealers dominated outdoor parks and streets during

the early 1980s, the marijuana market was not associated with the violence seen in the crack

market. In the United States today, the majority of marijuana sales are done in private so dealers

do not see even see their competitors (ONDCP 2001, Taylor et al. 2001). Even the majority of

arrestees report purchasing marijuana indoors (median was 71%). The proportion of arrestees

who made outdoor purchases of marijuana exceeded 50 percent in only 4 sites (Taylor et al.,

2001).

         Marijuana use and criminal behavior may also be associated because both behaviors are

driven by a common cause, such as personal characteristics of individuals that motivate them to

become involved in both behaviors (Hirschi and Gottfredson, 1988; Fagan, 1990; White 1990).

Among the third factors that have been hypothesized to generate the association are: gang

involvement (Fagan, 1990), peer effects (Gorman and White, 1995), general problem behavior

during adolescence (Jessor and Jessor, 1977), and common environments or situational causes

(Skogan, 1990; Fagan, 1993).      There is evidence that substance use and delinquent behavior

share many common causes or predictors. For example, many of the childhood risk factors for

violence, such as hyperactivity, impulsiveness, risk taking, early school failure, peer rejection,

and inability to delay gratification, have been identified as risk factors for teenage drug use and

adult drug problems (Hawkins, Catalano, and Miller, 1992; Brook, Whiteman and Cohen, 1995).
        Although the common factor model is the model most commonly believed for marijuana,

there is evidence supporting a causal mechanism and thus the question regarding a causal link

even if limited to specific populations remains unanswered.           In this paper we explore the

relationship between marijuana use and criminal activity using data from two different data

sources on crime, the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring program (ADAM) and Uniform Crime

Reports (UCR). Reduced form models are used to test the appropriateness of conclusions

regarding the association between an individual’s marijuana use and the likelihood of getting

arrested for a violent, property, and income-producing crime.



III. The Theoretical Framework

        Following the theoretical work of Ehrlich (1973), we assume that criminals are risk-

neutral expected utility maximizers and make decisions about whether to commit specific crimes

based on whether the expected reward (benefit) is greater than the expected cost. The use of

mind-altering substances, including marijuana, may influence one’s perceptions of the expected

payoff or expected cost of engaging in specific crimes or it may reduce one’s natural inhibitions

for engaging in criminal activity. The direct mechanism through which marijuana and other

substances influences the individual’s decision to commit an offense is not of immediate interest

in this paper because the data are not sufficient to empirically test alternative causal mechanisms.

We therefore focus on a reduced-form equation of the number of offences that individual i living

in jurisdiction j chooses to become involved in at time t (Oijt), which can be specified as follows:

(1)   Oijt = O(Ejt, Yit, Zjt, Ait, MJit, ODit).

Here Ejt is a vector of variables representing the enforcement risk (expected cost) of committing

those offences in jurisdiction j at time t, Yit represents a vector of individual-level variables
influencing the marginal benefit of committing the offence at time t, and Zjt represents other

community economic factors that may influence either the marginal benefit or marginal cost of

committing an offence in jurisdiction j at time t. The variables Ait , Mit, and ODit, represent the

amount of alcohol, marijuana and other drugs, respectively, consumed by individual i during

time t. Reduced form demand functions for each of these substances are derived from

constrained maximization of the individual’s expected utility function, and can be represented as

follows:

(2) Ait = A (PAjt, PMjt, PODjt, Yit)

(3) MJit = MJ (PAjt, PMjt, PODjt, Yit)

(4) ODit = OD (PAjt, PMjt, PODjt, Yit)

where PA, PM , and POD represent the price of alcohol, marijuana and other illicit drugs,

respectively. Substituting equations (2) – (4) into equation (1) yields the following reduced-form

equation:

(5) Oijt = O(Ejt, Yit, Zjt, PAjt, PMjt, PODjt).

         If marijuana use does influence one’s willingness to engage in crime, either by reducing

one’s natural inhibitions or by changing one’s perceptions of the expected costs or benefits, then

we would expect that an increase in the price of marijuana, which reduces the consumption of

marijuana, would be negatively associated with the number of offences committed, or

∂Oijt/∂ PMjt < 0.4 It is quite plausible in light of physiological properties of marijuana, however,

that marijuana use only influences one’s willingness to engage in certain types of crimes. Thus,

in our empirical specification of the model, we separately examine the relationship between this

substance and violent, property and income-producing crimes.

4
 As the literature review above shows, there is basically no evidence that marijuana markets themselves generate
violence or crime, unlike the market for cocaine. Hence, we are implicitly assuming here that higher marijuana
prices do not have a direct association with criminal behavior due to the need to protect territory or market share.
IV. The Data and Empirical Models

       Two different data sets are used to explore the relationship between marijuana use and

crime. The first source of data is the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) Program

(formerly Drug Use Forecasting System). Since 1987, the U.S. Department of Justice has

interviewed arrestees in urban booking facilities about their drug use patterns as well as tested

them for drug use. The purpose of the study is to provide local law enforcement and other local

officials with reliable estimates of the prevalence of drug abuse and related problems in the

population of arrestees in their jurisdiction. Sites were originally selected through applications

from those jurisdictions interested in participating, but the number of sites increased substantially

during the 1990s from 23 in 1996 to 35 in 1998 (See Appendix for complete list of sites).

       Prior to 1998 the data generally reflect convenience samples, as they were collected from

recent arrestees in the largest booking facility in the county. Since 1998, the sampling

methodology has been modified so that the sampling frame now represents all arrestees within a

county, not just those booked at the central booking facility. Data collection takes place four

times a year (once each calendar quarter) at each site. Arrestees are approached within 48 hours

of their arrest and asked to participate in the study. Although participation in ADAM is strictly

voluntary, response rates hover around 80 to 90 percent (U.S. Department of Justice, 2000).

       Although the data are non-representative of the overall arrestee population, they are the

only data source where information on the offender’s substance use near the time of the arrest is

available. Self-reported use of various legal and illicit substances in the past year, past month

and past 72 hours are obtained and validated through analysis of urine specimen. The

urinanalyses can identify any of ten substances (including the NIDA-5: cocaine, opiates,

marijuana, methamphetamine and PCP), but the results should be interpreted with caution since
some drugs are detectable in the body for up to a month after consumption. Between 1995 and

1999, the survey also included questions pertaining to whether the offender was “under the

influence” of specific drugs at the time of the offence. Given that marijuana is one of the drugs

that remains detectable in the body for longer periods of time, knowledge of use of marijuana at

the time of the offence is extremely important for validating a causal connection. Hence, we use

information from the 1996 through 1999 ADAM data for our current analysis. Data from 1995

were not included because of a change in the method for evaluating a positive urine test during

that year that resulted in an increase in the number of marijuana detections (NIJ, 1999).

         ADAM reports up to three charges for each arrestee and classifies these into more than

fifty offenses, ranging from murder to unlicensed vending. We aggregate the most serious

offence into three broad categories: violent crime, property crime, and income producing crime.5

Violent crime includes murder, forcible rape, robbery and aggravated assault. Property crimes

include burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft and arson. Income-producing crimes are

defined as robbery, burglary, motor vehicle theft, forgery, embezzlement, stolen goods, and

prostitution. For each type of crime in the ADAM data, we estimate the following regression

model:

(6) Pr (Ocijt = 1) =

         Φ ( α0 + α1 PAjt+ α2 PMjt + α3 PODjt ,+ α4 Ejt,+ α5Yit + α6 Zjt+ α7 Wj + α8 Year + εit).

where c = violent crime, property crime and income producing crime, Φ is the cumulative

distribution function of the univariate normal distribution, Wj is a series of dummy variable for

each ADAM site that pick up time invariant unobservable factors that are unique to each


5
 We group people by their most serious arrest charge for two main reasons. First, most arrestees are only charged
with one offense. Second, the crime data from the FBI only report the arrest for the most serious charge (the
hierarchy rule) and since this analysis utilizes both of these data sets it is useful to make them as consistent as
possible.
location, εit is an individual random error term which is assumed to be normally distributed, and

the other variables are as specified previously.6 Our measure of local enforcement (Ejt) is the

number of full time sworn officers per capita, which was obtained from estimates reported in the

Justice Expenditure and Employment Abstracts. These data are extracted from the Census

Bureau’s Annual Government Finance Survey and Annual Survey of Public Employment and

includes the same jurisdictions covered by ADAM sites.7

         Individual-level characteristics (Yit) that are collected in the ADAM survey include age,

gender, race, ethnicity, marital status, educational attainment, and income. In the case of

income, two separate questions are included about legal and illegal income earned in the

previous month.8 Other community factors (Zjt) also controlled for in these models include real

per capita income and the local unemployment rate, obtained from the Census Bureau and

Bureau of Labor Statistics, respectively.

         Information on the monetary price of marijuana comes from various publications of the

Illegal Drug Price/Purity Report, (IDPPR) published by the DEA Office of Intelligence or

Intelligence Division of the U.S. Department of Justice. Although other sources of marijuana

price data are available, the IDPPR published data represents the only source we are aware of in

which it is possible to distinguish high and low quality marijuana consistently over time for the

same locations. The IDPPR report the minimum and maximum retail (ounce) and wholesale

(pound) price of commercial-grade and sinsemilla marijuana in 19 cities located in 16 states.

These 19 cities represent main branch offices for the DEA. The price and quality information


6
  Year dummy variables were also explored but the dummies indicated a linear trend. Hence the linear trend was
employed in all of the models.
7
  We also considered a measure of the relative crime per officers by constructing a measure of the total crime per
number of full-time sworn officers. Results are qualitatively similar to those presented here.
8
  Individuals with missing information for either of these income measures, approximately 20% of our ADAM
sample, were dropped from the current analysis.
are obtained for purchases made by undercover police officers and DEA agents that are sent to a

laboratory for analysis. For the purposes of this analysis, we focus on the quarterly prices for

commercial marijuana sold at the retail level. Predicted quarterly prices are obtained using data

from 1982 through 2001 to predict the natural logarithm of real price using indicators for the

location of the DEA field office, year, interaction terms of the DEA field office and the year of

purchase, and year squared.9 We match the predicted price to the ADAM data set based on

quarter and to the UCR data based on year. Each ADAM site is assigned the predicted price of

the closest within-state branch office that reported to one of the 19 main field offices.

         Cocaine and alcohol prices are included to ensure that the estimated marijuana price

effects do not reflect indirect effects through alcohol and cocaine consumption. Similar to

previous studies, we use information about the price of cocaine from the DEA’s STRIDE data.

STRIDE contains records on acquisitions of cocaine (and other illicit drugs) made by undercover

agents and informants of the DEA. For each cocaine acquisition, information is recorded about

the type of cocaine (e.g. cocaine base (crack), cocaine hydrochloride (powder cocaine), and

others), the quantity acquired, its purity (in percent), the cost (if the cocaine was purchase rather

than seized), along with the DEA field office responsible for the acquisition and the date that it

took place. In addition to cost differences arising from the form of cocaine, the cost of

purchases may vary due to the weight and/or purity of the purchase. One method to account for

differences in the weight purchased is to divide the (CPI deflated) cost of purchase by its weight

to obtain a price per gram. However, this method ignores the quantity discounting evident in

these data as well as differences due to actual purity. To overcome these issues, we follow the

economics literature and form a predicted price of a pure gram of cocaine for each year and


9
 It is necessary to use predicted prices instead of actual prices because of missing data for particular cities and
quarters.
city.10    City-specific predicted quarterly and annual prices for one pure gram of cocaine were

matched to the ADAM site on the basis of the closest city for which we had price data.

          Information on the monetary cost of alcohol is represented by the CPI deflated sum of

federal and state taxes on a twelve-ounce can of beer. These data are published annually in the

Beer Institute’s Brewers’ Almanac. Information on state and local taxes is used for these

analyses instead of city-level alcohol prices because city-specific prices are not consistently

available through ACCRA for the ADAM locations in our sample. However, supplemental

regressions using this alternative measure for alcohol price resulted in similar findings.

          The ADAM data obviously represent a selective population in that we only observe

individuals in these data if they committed an offence, were caught, and were sent to a booking

facility that participates in the ADAM survey. Probabilistic samples were not drawn from most

jurisdictions until 1998. Hence, there are numerous reasons to be concerned about the

generalizability of findings obtained from these data. Therefore, we also examine reduced form

models using data from the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) to

test the robustness of our findings. The UCR system collects information on the number of

crimes reported to the police in specific crime categories each year for every city in the country.

Arrests are also reported for each jurisdiction by criminal offence. While the shortcomings of

these data are well documented (e.g. O’Brien, 1985), they remain the only source of

geographically disaggregated crime and arrest data in the United States.

10
   The model used to predict price is based on regressing the log of the real cost of purchase on the log of the weight
of the purchase, the log of the purity of the purchase, indicators for the city of purchase, interactions between the
city and year of purchase, the square of the year of purchase, and a set of indicators for the quarter of purchase. In
order to address the issue of uncertainty of purity at the time of purchase, we replace actual purity with the predicted
purity based on a model containing the regressors included in the model for the predicted price (except the year
squared term and quarter dummies). The effect of (the log of) purity is identified in the cost model by constraining
its coefficient to be equal to the coefficient on the (log of) weight of the purchase. We then predict the log of the
price of a pure gram of cocaine for each city and year, and exponentiate this quantity to get the real price of a gram
of cocaine. City-specific prices were estimated for those cities where at least 40 observations were observed over
the period 1985-2000 to reduce the noise in the series.
        Because we are primarily concerned about ADAM’s reliance on convenience sampling

during the 1996-1999 time period, we restrict our UCR data to reflect the same 35 counties

included in our ADAM sample. Further, we restrict the UCR time period to 1994 through 2000

so that it overlaps with our ADAM sample; thus we can reduce the number of plausible

explanations for differences in results that might emerge across these two data sets.11

        Publicly available data from the UCR provide information on crime and arrest rates, but

no information is available on individual characteristics or whether crimes were committed under

the influence of alcohol or illicit drugs. At best we can infer an association between crime and

marijuana use from the UCR by using a reduced form model to determine if decreases in

marijuana prices are associated with increases in particular types of crime. Using data from

ADAM, we are able to confirm that use of marijuana among the arrestee population is price

responsive (see Table A1 in the Appendix).12 Preliminary examination and statistical testing of

the UCR data suggests that the appropriate empirical specification of equation (5) using these

data varied by type of offence.13 In the case of violent crimes, we model the data using a general

linear model with log-link function and nonconstant variance, or:

(7) E [(violent crime arrests/10,000 population)jt] =

        exp (β0 + β1 PAjt+ β2 PMjt + β3 PODjt + β4 Ejt,+ β5 Zjt + β6 Wj +β7 Yeart + νjt).

(8) V[(violent crime arrests/10,000 population)jt]=

        E2 [(violent crime arrests/10,000 population)jt].


11
   It was necessary to expand the time horizon in the UCR data because our unit of observation in the UCR is a
county-year. Thus a sample from 1996-1999 would have little statistical power. We chose the years 1994-2000
because trends in crime rates in these locations during that time period were consistent with what occurred during
1996-1999.
12
   The probability of using marijuana, as measured by all three indicators of use in our ADAM sample, is negatively
associated with changes in price.
13
   The specific functional form was determined by empirically testing alternative functional forms suggested by box-
cox transformations. The variance structure was determined through a modified Park Test (Deb, Manning, and
Norton, 2003).
In the case of property and income-producing crimes, we model these outcomes using general

linear models with log-link functions and constant coefficient of variation, or:

(9) E [(property crime arrests/10,000 population)jt] =

        exp (δ0 + δ1 PAjt+ δ2 PMjt + δ3 PODjt + δ4 Ejt,+ δ5 Zjt + δ6 Wj +δ7 Yeart + µjt).

(10) V [(property crime arrests/10,000 population)jt] = 1.


        Because individual-level demographic information is not available in the public use UCR

data we exclude Yit from the equations above. County-level demographics, income and

unemployment rates are included as components of the Zjt matrix, however. In addition, we

account for county-level income and unemployment rates, obtained from the Bureau of

Economic Analysis and Bureau of Labor Statistics, respectively.14


        In our UCR analyses, we include an additional measure of local enforcement (Ejt) so that

we can account for the prominence of drug crime and drug enforcement activity in the area. In

addition to a measure of the local crime per number of officers, we construct the ratio of local

drug arrests to total reported crime from UCR data. Both our measures of enforcement are likely

to be endogeneous in the UCR analyses. However, we are unable to identify variables that allow

us to uniquely identify variation in law enforcement independent of arrests. Thus, to test the

sensitivity of our main marijuana findings to the inclusion of these endogenous variables, we run

two sets of models for each outcome. One set of models excludes these enforcement measures

and one set includes them.


        Descriptive statistics for the ADAM and UCR samples employed for all regression

analyses are included in Table 1. Looking only at violent, property, and income-producing
14
  Unemployment figures were not available for the Anchorage FIPS so unemployment data for the Anchorage MSA
are substituted (http://www.economagic.com/em-cgi/data.exe/blsla/lausm03800003).
crimes, there is a larger share of income-producing crimes in the ADAM sample than in the

UCR. And for both samples, violent crimes are the least common of the three categories. The

predicted prices for cocaine and marijuana, on average, are slightly higher in the UCR sample, in

part because the UCR data include data on all 35 locations going back to 1994. The ADAM data

only have information for 23 of the 35 cities until 1998. The difference in county characteristics

between the two samples therefore, can partially be explained by the inclusion of all cities for

more years in the UCR and the fact that the ADAM sample draws a different number of

observations from each jurisdiction. To adjust for the unequal weight attributed to various

jurisdictions within the ADAM sample, all models are run using a Huber/White correction of the

standard errors using the “robust” option in STATA 7.0.


V. Results

       Table 2 provides a preliminary look at the association between marijuana use and specific

types of crime for the full ADAM sample. When individuals charged with a drug offence are

included in the sample, then marijuana users—identified through urine tests or self-reported

use—are generally found to be less likely to be charged of a violent, property or income-

producing crime than non-users. The notable exception are those individuals who reported use

in the past three days who are statistically more likely to be arrested for property and income

producing crime, but the finding of a positive association contradicts the result of a negative

association for those self-reporting that they were under the influence at the time of the arrest.

       Individuals who report being under the influence of alcohol at the time of the offence are

more likely to be charged with a violent crime and less likely to be charged with a property or

income-producing crime. Not surprisingly, the data show that marijuana users, regardless of
how it is measured, are statistically more likely to be charged with a drug crime. Those under

the influence of alcohol, however, are less likely to be charged of a drug-involved crime.

       Given that we are only looking at those arrested, it is not surprising that marijuana users

are more likely to be charged with a drug-related crime and less likely to be charged with other

crimes simply because many marijuana users are picked up on drug charges. Once we take

individuals arrested on drug charges out of the sample, however, we should not expect to see any

sort of systematic relationship between marijuana use and specific arrest charges unless there is

some sort of association (spurious or real) between marijuana use and these specific offences.

       When we remove those arrested on drug charges from the sample, we see some

interesting changes. In the case of violent crime, we find that those who report use of marijuana

in the past three days or being under the influence at the time of the crime are no longer less

likely to be charged with a violent crime than non-marijuana users. In fact, those with a positive

urine test for marijuana are statistically more likely to be charged with a violent crime than those

testing negative. Given that marijuana can be identified in urine for up to 30 days past the time

of consumption, this suggests that individuals who engage in violent crimes are also likely to

engage in marijuana use but the marijuana use is not necessarily related to their decision to

engage in crime.

       In the case of property and income-producing crime we find a more consistent story

across different measures of marijuana use. Here we see that marijuana users, regardless of how

it is measured, are more likely to be arrested for property and income-producing crime.

Interestingly, this is the opposite of what we find for those who report being under the influence

of alcohol. Those who report being under the influence of alcohol at the time of the offence are

less likely to be in either property or income producing crimes than non-alcohol users.
        None of the previous findings control for observable factors that may be driving these

associations. In Table 3 we present the marginal effects from a probit specification of the

likelihood of being charged with a violent crime controlling for individual demographics,

sources of income, county demographics, unemployment rates, and county law enforcement.15

Given the previous table demonstrated differences in findings based on the measure of marijuana

that was employed, we decide to estimate each of the models using the three different measures

of marijuana use as well as the price of marijuana so we could have a better understanding of

how to interpret results from the models including price. Results from the first two models (M1

and M2) suggest that marijuana users are less likely to be charged with a violent arrest than non-

users. However, this finding does not hold in model 3 (M3), where use is measured at the time

of the offence suggesting that the association identified in the first two models may not be causal

in nature. Indeed, our reduced form specification of the model (M4) shows a positive but

statistically insignificant relationship between marijuana price and the probability of a violent

crime offence, reinforcing the conclusion that marijuana use is not causally related to violent

criminal behavior.

        Neither the beer tax nor the price of cocaine is statistically significant in these models,

contrary to findings from previous studies (DeSimone, 2001; Lott and Mustard, 1997; Cook and

Moore, 1993). Although this might appear to be somewhat surprising, it is easily explained by

the limited longitudinal variation in these variables during the time period being evaluated and

the inclusion of county fixed effects. Cross-sectional variation in the beer tax is captured by

county-specific dummies that are included in the regression; the only independent variation that

can be identified from the beer tax is the within state variation in real taxes over time. During


15
  Note that all individuals arrested on drug charges are removed from the sample used in this and all subsequent
analyses.
the time period being evaluated (1996 through 1999) there is minimal temporal variation in the

real beer tax in the 26 states represented by the ADAM sites.16 A similar problem exists for

cocaine, in that city and time dummy variables explain nearly 95% of the variation in cocaine

prices during the period being examined here. However, some independent temporal variation

still exists because of differences in seasonal fluctuation in the quarterly price of cocaine that

differs across sites. We are less concerned about this issue in the case of marijuana prices

because our demand models (shown in Appendix A1) demonstrate a negative and statistically

significant association between price and consumption, as theory would suggest, even though

time and county fixed effects are included. We interpret this as evidence that sufficient temporal

variation exists in our marijuana price measure.

           Given there is so little variation in the beer tax across locations, we are concerned that

models including the beer tax may suffer an omitted variable bias that may lead to improper

conclusions with respect to the relationship between marijuana use and crime. We therefore

reran the models replacing the beer tax with a measure of self-reported use of alcohol at the time

of the offence. We find that when we use this alternative measure of alcohol use we get a

positive and statistically significant association between alcohol use and violent crime, consistent

with the literature (DeSimone, 2001; Cook and Moore, 1993). More importantly, however, the

inclusion of this alternative measure of alcohol use does not significantly alter our previous

findings with respect to marijuana use. Although the coefficients on the self-reported marijuana

use measures get larger in absolute value and self-reported marijuana use at the time of the crime

becomes statistically significant, the marijuana price measure remains statistically insignificant.

This supports the conclusion that the positive association implied by indicators of self-reported

marijuana use is not be due to a causal mechanism.
16
     Alternative models were estimated using beer prices from ACCRA but this did not improve the results.
       In Table 4 we present findings from similar models of the probability of getting arrested

for a property crime. Here our different measures of marijuana use generate some conflicting

findings. When marijuana use is measured in terms of a positive urine sample (indicating use at

some point in the previous thirty days), we find no statistical association between marijuana use

and the likelihood of getting arrested for a property crime. If we instead use a more proximal

measure of use (M2 and M3), we find that marijuana use is positively associated with the

probability of getting arrested for a property crime although the finding with respect to use at the

time of offence is only statistically significant at the 10% level. This positive association

between marijuana use and property crime is confirmed in the reduced form version of the model

(M4), where marijuana prices are found to have a negative and statistically significant

association with the probability of arrest for a property crime, suggesting the association may be

causal in nature. The positive association between recent marijuana use and property crime is

invariant to the inclusion of self-reported alcohol use at the time of the offence (Models M6

through M8).

       Contrary to what is found by DeSimone (2001), these models suggest that there is a

negative association between powder cocaine use and property crime as higher powder cocaine

prices (associated with lower cocaine use) are positively associated with property crime. The

finding is fairly robust to variation in the measure of marijuana use and alcohol use. There are at

least two plausible explanations for the difference in findings across studies. First, as was

already stated, our model has limited variation in the price of cocaine because of our relatively

short time period being evaluated and the inclusion of county-fixed effects. Thus, findings

obtained from this relatively short panel may not be robust if evaluated over longer periods.

Second, our method for predicting the price of cocaine differs substantially from that employed
by DeSimone (2001).17 For example, we do not include measures of crime and drug arrests

when predicting cocaine prices and we exclude crack observations from our price regression so

that our price series only reflects changes in the price of powder cocaine.18 Thus, we are

cautious not to place too much importance on this finding.

        In Table 5 we present results from models estimating the probability of being arrested for

an income-producing crime. The results presented in these models again suggest that marijuana

use is causally linked to crime as self-reported measures of marijuana use near the time of the

arrest (Models M2 and M3) are positively and significantly associated with property crime and

the price of marijuana is inversely related to income-producing crime at conventional levels of

significance. The fact that the results from models M2 through M4 are substantially different

than those implied by model M1, which relies on urinalysis for identification of use, suggests

that we should be cautious drawing conclusions from associations identified off this measure of

use.

        As was the case in Table 4, we again see in Table 5 a positive association between

cocaine prices and income-producing crime, but the same interpretation applies. An intriguing

puzzle is presented in Table 5 by the different implied relationship between alcohol and income-

producing crimes based on our two different measures of alcohol use. When the beer tax is used

to capture the influence of alcohol consumption, we find that higher beer taxes, indicating less

alcohol use, is associated with a lower likelihood of being arrested for an income-producing

crime, consistent with results obtained elsewhere in the literature (DeSimone 2001, Gyimah-



17
   As indicated in the prior section, we use a much more restricted subset of the STRIDE data and do not include
measures of arrest or crime in our estimation of the price of cocaine.
18
   There is a significant literature demonstrating an association between crack cocaine use and crime (Grogger and
Willis, 2000; Inciardi, 1990; Fagan and Chin, 1990). It may be the case that by narrowing our focus to powder
cocaine in the 1990s, we identify a different relationship between cocaine and crime. Future research will explore
this hypothesis.
Brempong, 2001). This contradicts findings obtained from models M5 through M8, however,

where alcohol intoxication is shown to be negatively associated with getting arrested for income-

producing crimes. The contradiction may simply be caused by an endogeneity bias that is

generated from the inclusion of self-reported alcohol measures, but it is difficult to know for sure

given the limited variability in the beer tax measure.

       Overall the findings from the reduced form models would suggest that marijuana use is

positively associated with property and income-producing crimes and that no causal association

exists between marijuana use and violent crime. However, one must be careful drawing these

conclusions based on analysis that only considers the likelihood of getting arrested for a specific

criminal offence among a nonrandom sample of arrestees. Results from these models may not

hold in the general population because this sample is not representative of the general arrestee

population, the criminally involved population, or the general population.

       To test the generalizability of these findings to the arrestee population, we estimated

models of the number of arrests for violent, property and income producing crimes in the same

geographic locations over a similar time period using county-level data from Uniform Crime

Reports. Results from these models are presented in Table 6. In the case of the number of

property crimes and income-producing crimes we obtain results that are consistent with those

presented in Tables 4 and 5. Higher marijuana prices, indicative of lower marijuana use, are

negatively and statistically associated with the number of property and income producing

criminal arrests per capita, suggesting that marijuana use is positively associated with these

measures of arrest. This finding is not sensitive to the inclusion of the endogenous enforcement

measures (Column M2).
           We find a new result when the dependent variable is the number of violent arrests per

capita. In the ADAM analysis (Table 2) we saw no statistical relationship between marijuana

prices and the probability of an arrest for a violent offence. Here in Table 6 we see that

marijuana prices are negatively and statistically associated with violent crime arrest rates,

suggesting that marijuana use may be positively associated with violent crime as well. The result

is robust to the inclusion of the endogenous enforcement measures.

           It is important to consider the differences in the samples employed for these two analyses

before interpreting these findings. The UCR and ADAM samples employed in Tables 2 and 6

differ in the following ways: the representativeness of the data samples; the inclusion of three

extra years of data in the UCR analysis; the exclusion of individual demographics in the UCR

analysis; and the presence of data for all thirty-five cities for all years in the UCR sample.19 We

ran additional analyses exploring the influence of omitted demographics, the extra years, and the

presence of cities in additional years and none of these factors led to a change in the statistical

significance of the marijuana price variable, suggesting that the cause for the differential findings

across the UCR and ADAM analysis is who is represented in the data.

           Findings with respect to the beer tax and cocaine price also differ across the ADAM and

UCR analysis. For example, beer taxes are shown in Table 6 to be positively associated with

higher levels of all three arrests, which is inconsistent with the previous tables. Our

supplemental analyses reveal that this finding is driven by the inclusion of all thirty-five counties

in all years. When we restrict the UCR sample to just those counties that are in the sample

ADAM sample in each year, we again see that there is no statistical association between the beer

tax and any of the arrest rates. The sensitivity of the finding to the inclusion of additional

counties in some years reinforces our concern regarding how to properly interpret any findings
19
     The ADAM sample grew from 23 cities in 1996 and 1997 to 35 cities in 1998 and 1999.
from this variable. The findings with respect to the price of cocaine in Table 6 are much more

consistent with the existing literature and are robust to changes in the county and years of data

included. Thus, we believe that this difference in results pertaining to the cocaine price measure

on crime rates identified across the different studies is largely being driven by a difference in the

representativeness of the two alternative samples.


VI. Discussion

        Results from reduced form specifications of models of the number (UCR) and type

(ADAM) of arrest suggest that marijuana use may actually be causally associated with specific

types of crime, even for the general population of arrestees. Evidence from both sets of analyses

suggest that higher marijuana use, as indicated by lower marijuana prices, is positively

associated with property arrests and income-producing criminal arrests. There is also evidence

from the UCR analysis that marijuana use might be positively associated with the number of

violent arrests.

        A significant limitation of the results so far is that we do not know the extent to which

those arrested for crimes are behaviorally similar to those who commit crimes. It may be the

case that substance use reduces an individual’s ability to get away with a crime rather than

influencing the likelihood of committing a crime. To consider this possibility, we re-ran our

basic reduced form model using crime rates instead of arrest rates for the same locations in our

ADAM sample. Although we recognize that crimes reported may not accurate reflect actual

crimes committed, these are the only source of crime for all the locations in our ADAM sample.

Results from these additional specifications are included in Table 7. Note that we are unable to

estimate a model for the number of income-producing arrests per 10,000 residents because the

data were not available at a disaggregated level.
        Results from our reduced form models predicting violent crime per 10,000 residents in

the ADAM locations reinforce the original findings presented in Table 2 that marijuana use is

not causally linked to violent criminal behavior. The marijuana price variable, although

negative, is statistically insignificant at conventional levels and this null finding is invariant to

the inclusion of general enforcement measures. The results from our models predicting property

crime are more mixed, as the marijuana price variable is only negative and statistically

significant when endogenous measures of enforcement are included in the model. Future work

will need to carefully consider the proper treatment of these endogenous variables to fully

understand the nature of the relationship between marijuana use and known property crimes.

        The results from reduced form models tell a fairly consistent story across all of the tables.

The positive association between marijuana use and arrests for property and income-producing

crimes is not driven by a spurious correlation; these findings suggest a causal interpretation.

These results are consistent with models using more proximate measures of use, including use of

marijuana at the time of the offence. However, the proper interpretation of the result is still

unclear. It may be the case that marijuana use causes individuals to participate in these crimes or

it may be the case that marijuana use increases the likelihood that offenders get arrested for these

crimes. Further investigation of this important distinction with other data sets will be necessary.

        The results pertaining to the relationship between marijuana use and violent crime are a

bit more complex to interpret. Evidence from the ADAM sample of arrestees suggests that the

positive association identified between marijuana use and violent crime is not causal in nature.

This result is not confirmed in analyses using all known arrests from the ADAM cities, however.

When UCR arrest data are employed a causal interpretation is supported. But the finding

disappears again when crime is measured in terms of known offences as opposed to arrests,
suggesting that the positive association identified in the UCR analysis may be driven by the fact

that marijuana users who participate in crime are more likely to get arrested. Future work will

need to consider the extent to which these current findings hold in a nationally representative

sample of arrests and crime in order for us to clearly understand whether the criminal justice

costs of marijuana prohibition are partially reimbursed through a reduction in crime.
                                         References

Baker, J. (1998). Juveniles in Crime - Part 1: Participation Rates and Risk Factors, Sydney:
       New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research and New South Wales Crime
       Prevention Division.
Bushman, B.J. (1997). Effects of alcohol on human aggression: validity of proposed
       explanations. In Recent Developments in Alcoholism, Vol. 13, ed. M. Galanter, pp. 227-
       43. New York: Plenum Press.
Bushman, B.J. (1990). Human aggression while under the influence of alcohol and other drugs:
       An integrative research review. Psychological Science, 2, 148–152.
Cook, PJ and M.J. Moore. (1993). "Violence reduction through restrictions on alcohol
       availability." Alcohol, Health and Research World, 17(2): 151-156.
Deb, P., Manning W., and E Norton. (2003). "Modeling Health Care Costs and Counts" Pre-
       conference workshop held before the International Health Economics Association 2003
       Meeting (San Francisco, CA).
Dembo, R., Williams, L., Schmeidler, J., Wish, E.D., Getreu, A. and Berry, E. (1991). Juvenile
       crime and drug abuse: a prospective study of high risk youth. Journal of Addictive
       Disorders, 11 (2), 5-31.
DeSimone, J. (2001). The Effect of Cocaine Prices on Crime. Economic Inquiry. 39(4): 627-643.
Ehrlich, I. (1973). Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical
       Investigation. The Journal of Political Economy 81(3): 521-565.
Fagan, J. (1990). Intoxication and aggression. Drugs and crime. In Crime and Justice, A Review
       of Research, Vol. 13, ed. M. Tonry and J. Q. Wilson, pp. 241-320. Chicago: The
       University of Chicago Press.
Fagan, J.A. (1993). The political economy of drug dealing among urban gangs. In Drugs and
       Community, ed. R. Davis, A. Lurigio and D. P. Rosenbaum, pp. 19-54. Springfield, IL:
       Charles Thomas.
Fagan, J.A. and K.L. Chin. (1990). "Violence as Regulation and Social Control in the
       Distribution of Crack," National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph Series
       103: 8-43.
Fergusson, D. M., & Horwood, L. J. (1997). Early onset cannabis use and psychosocial adjustment
       in young adults. Addiction, 92(3), 279-296.
Goldstein, P. (1985). The drugs/violence nexus: a tripartite conceptual framework. Journal of
       Drug Issues, 15 (Fall), 493-506.
Goldstein, P.J., Brownstein, H.H., Ryan, P.J. and Bellucci, P.A. (1989). Crack and homicide in
       New York City, 1988: a conceptually based event analysis. Contemporary Drug
       Problems, 16, 651-87.
Gorman, D.M. and White, H.R. (1995). You can choose your friends, but do they choose your
       crime? Implications of differential association theories for crime prevention policy. In
       Crime and Public Policy: Putting Theory to Work, ed. H. D. Barlow, pp. 131-55.
       Boulder, CO: Westview.
Grogger, J. and M. Willis. (2000). "The Emergence of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in Urban
       Crime Rates." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(4): 519-529.
Gyimah-Brempong, K. (2001). "Alcohol Availability and Crime: Evidence from Census Tract
        Data" Southern Economic Journal 68(1): 2-21.
Hirschi, T. and Gottfredson, M. (1988). Towards a general theory of crime. In Explaining
        Criminal Behaviour: Interdisciplinary Approaches, ed. W. Buikhuisen and S. A.
        Mednick, pp. 8-26. Leiden; New York: E.J. Brill.
Inciardi, J.A. (1990). "The Crack-Violence Connection Within a Population of Hard-Core
        Adolescent Offenders," National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph Series
        103: 92-111.
Jessor, R. and Jessor, S.L. (1977). Problem Behavior and Psychosocial Development: A
        Longitudinal Study of Youth, New York: Academic Press.
Johnston, L.D., O'Malley, P.M. and Bachman, J.G. (2000). National Survey Results on Drug Use
        from the Monitoring the Future Study, 1975-1999 Volume II: College Students and
        Young Adults, Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Kaplan, Howard B. and Kelly R. and Damphousse 1995. Self-attitudes and antisocial
        personality as moderators of the drug use-violence relationship. In Drugs, crime and
        other deviant adaptions: Longitudinal studies, edited by Howard B. Kaplan. New York:
        Plenum Press.
Lott, JR and DB Musturd. (1997). Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concelaed Handguns."
        Journal of Legal Studies, 26: 1-68.
MacCoun, R. and Reuter, P. (2001). Drug War Heresies: Learning from Other Vices, Times and
        Places, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Makkai, T., Fitzgerald, J. and Doak, P. (2000). Drug use among police detainees, Contemporary
        Issues in Crime and Justice, Vol. 49, Sydney: NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and
        Research.
Markowitz, S. (2000). An Economic Analysis of Alcohol, Drugs and Crime in the National
        Criminal Victimization Survey, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
        7982. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Miczek, K.A., DeBold, J.F., Haney, M., Tidey, J., Vivan, J. and Weerts, E.M. (1994). Alcohol,
        drugs of abuse, aggression, and violence. In Understanding and preventing violence, Vol.
        3, ed. A. J. Reiss and J. A. Roth, pp. 377-570. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Institute of Justice. (1999). 1998 Annual report on marijuana use among arrestees.
        http://www.adam-nij.net/files/175658.pdf
National Institute of Justice. (2000). 1999 Annual report on marijuana use among arrestees.
National Research Council (1993). Understanding and Preventing Violence, Washington, DC:
        National Academy Press.
O’Brien, Robert. Crime and Victimization Data (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage). 1985.
Salmelainen, P. (1995). The correlates of offending frequency: a study of juvenile theft offenders
        in detention, Sydney: New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research.
Skogan, W. (1990). Disorder and Decline: Crime and the Spiral Decay in American
        Neighbourhoods, New York: Free Press.
Stevenson, R. and Forsythe, L. (1998). The Stolen Goods Market in New South Wales: An
        Interview Study with Imprisoned Burglars, Sydney: NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and
        Research.
Taylor, B. and Bennett, T. (1999). Comparing Drug Use Rates of Detained Arrestees in the
        United States and England, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
Taylor, B.G., Fitzgerald, N., Hunt, D., Reardon, J.A. and Brownstein, H.H. (2001). ADAM
       Preliminary 2000 Findings on Drug Use and Drug Markets - Adult Male Arrestees:
       National Institute of Justice.
United States Office of National Drug Control Policy (2001). Pulse Check: Trends in Drug
       Abuse. November 2001, Washington, DC: Office of National Drug Control Policy.
White, H.R. (1990). The drug use-delinquency connection in adolescence. In Drugs, Crime and
       the Criminal Justice System, ed. R. A. Weisheit, pp. 215-56. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson
       Publishing.
White, Helene Raskin and Stephen Hansell. 1998. Acute and long-term effects of drug use on
       aggression from adolescence into adulthood. Journal of Drug Issues. 28: 837-858.
White, H.R. and Gorman, D.M. (2000). Dynamics of the drug-crime relationship. In The Nature
       of Crime: Continuity and Change, ed. G. LaFree, pp. 151-218. Washington, DC: U.S.
       Department of Justice.
White, Helene Raskin and Stephen Hansell. 1998. Acute and long-term effects of drug use on
       aggression from adolescence into adulthood. Journal of Drug Issues. 28: 837-858.
                                                                Table 1
                                                       Means of Primary Data Sets
                            ADAM Analysis                                                              UCR Analysis
                                N = 101,960                                                              N = 188
Variable                              Mean Std. Dev     Min     Max    Variable                             Mean Std. Dev      Min    Max
Positive Urine Test                   0.349   0.477       0        1   Violent arrests per capita         33.030 20.773      7.071 113.250
Use in past 3 days                    0.266   0.442       0        1   Log(violent arrests per capita)      3.327   0.576    1.956   4.730
Under the infl: MJ                    0.051   0.220       0        1   Property arrests per capita        94.870 29.607     27.546 188.901
Under the infl: Alc                   0.211   0.408       0        1   Log(property arrests per capita)     4.500   0.333    3.316   5.241
Arrested for violent crime            0.183   0.387       0        1   Income arrests per capita          52.937 27.000     13.153 186.691
Arrested for property crime           0.246   0.431       0        1   Log(income arrests per capita)       3.861   0.460    2.577   5.229
Arrested for income crime             0.320   0.467       0        1
Real predicted price of MJ            55.21 18.940    20.37   101.02   Real predicted price of MJ        58.539   19.024    23.839 98.268
Real beer tax                          2.32   1.972    0.59    10.76   Real beer tax                      2.462    1.863     0.577 11.454
Real predicted price of cocaine       65.76 14.730    34.34   105.85   Real predicted price of cocaine   68.699   14.558    34.944 103.710
Male                                  0.753   0.431       0        1   Match dummy                        0.938    0.243         0       1
Black                                 0.465   0.499       0        1
Hispanic                              0.214   0.410       0        1   % male                             0.484   0.012      0.463    0.514
Other race                            0.031   0.173       0        1   % pop less than 18                 0.257   0.032      0.180    0.366
Education >= 12                       0.420   0.494       0        1   % pop 18-24                        0.099   0.011      0.071    0.128
Age 18-24                             0.264   0.441       0        1   % white                            0.762   0.160      0.320    0.991
Age 25-34                             0.295   0.456       0        1   % black                            0.182   0.170      0.002    0.649
Age > 34                              0.299   0.458       0        1   % other                            0.056   0.046      0.007    0.228
Real income - illegal sources        180.80 1185.47       0    63734   % hispanic                         0.175   0.200      0.005    0.953
Real income - legal sources          573.64 1423.63       0    63734   unemployment rate                  4.911   1.932      1.900   15.400
Year                                1997.60   1.145    1996     1999   Real per capita income (in $1000 18.294    5.533      7.959   49.019
Unemployment rate                     4.700   1.580     1.9      9.2   Log(county pop)                   13.852   0.826     12.000   16.049
FTE police per capita                 0.004   0.006   0.001    0.030   Year                                1997   1.712       1994     1999
Real per capita income (in $1000)     19483    7213    8471    49019   Index Crime                      94384.5 89798.9       9447   591795
% male                                0.484   0.012   0.463    0.513   FTE sworn officers                4178.9 7576.1         250    46158
% pop < 18                            0.252   0.029   0.182    0.366   total drug arrests/index crime     0.117   0.068      0.020    0.430
% pop 18-24                           0.098   0.011   0.074    0.128   Index crime/ FTE sworn officers    0.569   0.542      0.009    2.725
% black                               0.216   0.173   0.002    0.642
% other                               0.060   0.050   0.007    0.228
% hisp                                0.199   0.175   0.006    0.953
                                          Table 2
                                   Descriptive Statistics
                                  1996 - 1999 ADAM data
                                           Full                                 P-value
                            # of Obs      Sample       Non User     User      for diff ~=0
                     PANEL A : Includes those charged of a drug offence
Violent Crime
    MJ: Positive urine test    137409        0.148       0.148        0.147      0.544
    MJ: Use in past 3 days     137091        0.148       0.152        0.138      0.000
    MJ: under influence        136496        0.148       0.149        0.130      0.000
    ALC: under influence       136497        0.148       0.142        0.171      0.000
Property Crime
    MJ: Positive urine test    137409        0.197       0.199        0.193      0.014
    MJ: Use in past 3 days     137091        0.197       0.195        0.201      0.019
    MJ: under influence        136496        0.196       0.197        0.184      0.003
    ALC: under influence       136497        0.196       0.210        0.143      0.000
Income Crime
    MJ: Positive urine test    137409        0.255       0.258        0.250      0.000
    MJ: Use in past 3 days     137091        0.255       0.252        0.264      0.000
    MJ: under influence        136496        0.255       0.256        0.244      0.021
    ALC: under influence       136497        0.255       0.273        0.186      0.000
Drug-Involved Crime
    MJ: Positive urine test    137409        0.187       0.164        0.227      0.000
    MJ: Use in past 3 days     137091        0.187       0.162        0.249      0.000
    MJ: under influence        136496        0.187       0.179        0.313      0.000
    ALC: under influence       136497        0.187       0.198        0.145      0.000
                       PANEL B: Excludes those charged with a drug offence
Violent Crime
    MJ: Positive urine test    111721        0.182       0.178        0.190      0.000
    MJ: Use in past 3 days     111459        0.182       0.181        0.183      0.382
    MJ: under influence        110969        0.182       0.181        0.189      0.156
    ALC: under influence       110970        0.182       0.177        0.200      0.000
Property Crime
    MJ: Positive urine test    111721        0.242       0.238        0.250      0.000
    MJ: Use in past 3 days     111459        0.242       0.233        0.267      0.000
    MJ: under influence        110969        0.242       0.240        0.268      0.000
    ALC: under influence       110970        0.242       0.262        0.167      0.000
Income Crime
    MJ: Positive urine test    111721        0.314       0.309        0.323      0.000
    MJ: Use in past 3 days     111459        0.314       0.300        0.352      0.000
    MJ: under influence        110969        0.314       0.311        0.356      0.000
    ALC: under influence       110970        0.314       0.340        0.218      0.000
                                           Table 3
           Marginal Effects and Robust Standard Errors from Probit Estimation of
                              Prob(Arrested for a Violent Crime)a
                           ADAM 1996 - 1999, Non-drug offenders
                               M1             M2              M3           M4
MJ: positive urine           -0.0054 **
                             (0.003)
MJ in past 3 days                          -0.0111 ***
                                            (0.003)
MJ: under influence                                        -0.0084
                                                           (0.005)
Real price of MJ                                                         0.0002
                                                                        (0.001)
Real beer tax                -0.0112       -0.0122         -0.0113      -0.0136
                             (0.041)        (0.041)        (0.041)      (0.042)
Real price of cocaine        -0.0002       -0.0002         -0.0002      -0.0002
                             (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)
County Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
# of Observations           101,960        101,960        101,960       101,960
Pseudo-R2                     0.051          0.051          0.051        0.051
                               M5             M6              M7           M8
MJ: positive urine           -0.0066 **
                             (0.003)
MJ in past 3 days                          -0.0144 ***
                                            (0.003)
MJ: under influence                                        -0.0191 ***
                                                           (0.005)
Real price of MJ                                                         0.0002
                                                                        (0.001)
ALC: under influence         0.0493 ***     0.0503 *** 0.0506       ***  0.0490 ***
                             (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.003)
Real price of cocaine        -0.0002       -0.0001         -0.0002      -0.0001
                             (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)
County Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
# of Observations           101,960        101,960        101,960       101,960
Pseudo-R2                     0.053          0.054          0.053        0.053

a
  Models include as additional regressors gender, ethnicity, race, education, age categories, legal
and illegal income, quarter dummies, time trend, county unemployment rate, the number of police
 per capita, real county income, % county population that male, black and other race, and age
demographics of the county. Statistical significance is designated as follows: *** indicates
significance at the 1% level (2-tailed test), ** indicates significance at the 5% level , and * indicates
significance at the 10% level.
                                          Table 4
           Marginal Effects and Robust Standard Errors from Probit Estimation of
                            Prob(Arrested for a Property Crime)a
                           ADAM 1996 - 1999, Non-drug offenders
                                M1           M2             M3            M4
MJ: positive urine           -0.0036
                             (0.003)
MJ in past 3 days                          0.0211 ***
                                           (0.003)
MJ: under influence                                      0.0109   *
                                                         (0.006)
Real price of MJ                                                       -0.0034 **
                                                                       (0.001)
Real beer tax                -0.0369      -0.0357        -0.0378       -0.0065
                             (0.047)       (0.047)       (0.047)       (0.049)
Real price of cocaine         0.0051 ***   0.0051 *** 0.0051     *** 0.0053 ***
                             (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
County Fixed Effects           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
# of Observations           101,960       101,960        101,960       101,960
Pseudo-R2                     0.032         0.032         0.032         0.032
                                M5           M6             M7            M8
MJ: positive urine           -0.0017
                             (0.003)
MJ in past 3 days                          0.0267 ***
                                           (0.003)
MJ: under influence                                      0.0300  ***
                                                         (0.006)
Real price of MJ                                                       -0.0036 ***
                                                                       (0.001)
ALC: under influence         -0.0772 *** -0.0792 *** -0.0792 *** -0.0773 ***
                             (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
Real price of cocaine         0.0053 ***   0.0053 *** 0.0053     *** 0.0053 ***
                             (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
County Fixed Effects           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
# of Observations           101,960       101,960        101,960       101,960
Pseudo-R2                     0.036         0.037         0.036         0.036

a
  Models include as additional regressors gender, ethnicity, race, education, age categories, legal
and illegal income, quarter dummies, time trend, county unemployment rate, the number of police
 per capita, real county income, % county population that male, black and other race, and age
demographics of the county. Statistical significance is designated as follows: *** indicates
significance at the 1% level (2-tailed test), ** indicates significance at the 5% level , and * indicates
significance at the 10% level.
                                           Table 5
            Marginal Effects and Robust Standard Errors from Probit Estimation of
                       Prob(Arrested for an Income-Producing Crime)a
                            ADAM 1996 - 1999, Non-drug offenders
                               M1             M2              M3            M4
MJ: positive urine           0.0023
                             (0.003)
MJ in past 3 days                           0.0361  ***
                                            (0.004)
MJ: under influence                                         0.0236   ***
                                                            (0.007)
Real price of MJ                                                         -0.0047                ***
                                                                          (0.001)
Real beer tax               -0.1007    *   -0.0983   *     -0.1018   **  -0.0574
                             (0.052)        (0.052)         (0.052)       (0.054)
Real price of cocaine        0.0045   ***   0.0045  ***     0.0045   ***  0.0047                ***
                             (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)
County Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
# of Observations           101,960        101,960         101,960       101,960
Pseudo-R2                     0.049          0.050           0.049         0.049
                               M5             M6              M7            M8
MJ: positive urine           0.0046
                             (0.003)
MJ in past 3 days                           0.0432  ***
                                            (0.004)
MJ: under influence                                         0.0479   ***
                                                            (0.007)
Real price of MJ                                                         -0.0053                 ***
                                                                          (0.001)
ALC: under influence        -0.0961   ***  -0.0993  ***    -0.0992   *** -0.0960                 ***
                             (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)       (0.004)
Real price of cocaine        0.0052   ***   0.0051  ***     0.0052   ***  0.0051                 ***
                             (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)
County Fixed Effects           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
# of Observations           101,960        101,960         101,960       101,960
Pseudo-R2                     0.054          0.055           0.054         0.054

a
  Models include as additional regressors gender, ethnicity, race, education, age categories, legal
and illegal income, quarter dummies, time trend, county unemployment rate, the number of police
 per capita, real county income, % county population that male, black and other race, and age
demographics of the county. Statistical significance is designated as follows: *** indicates
significance at the 1% level (2-tailed test), ** indicates significance at the 5% level , and * indicates
significance at the 10% level.
                                           Table 6
              GLM Estimates of Log Arrest Rates from UCR: 1994 -1999
                                             M1                                 M2
                                    OLS             Robust             OLS             Robust
                                Coefficient         Std. Err       Coefficient         Std. Err
                                          Log (# of violent crime arrests/ 10K pop)
Real price of MJ                      -0.017 ***        0.006           -0.022 ***         0.004
Real price of Cocaine                  0.002            0.003           -0.001             0.003
Real beer tax                          0.215 ***        0.079            0.256 ***         0.087
log(county pop)                       -1.853 ***        0.452           -0.447             0.627
% of county pop < 18                 11.059 ***         3.809            4.536             4.182
% of county pop black                  1.390            5.636           -0.318             4.289
% of county pop other race           34.256 ***        10.077          42.310 ***          8.264
% of county pop Hispanic              -8.914 *          5.122         -13.333 ***          3.971
Real per capita income            -3.59E-05 ***     1.21E-05        -8.51E-05 ***      1.51E-05
Unemployment rate                      0.013            0.014            0.007             0.012
Year                                  -0.037 *          0.019           -0.059 ***         0.015
Crime per officer                                                        0.440 ***         0.128
Drug arrests/total crime                                                 3.342 ***         0.888
Constant                             97.940 ***        36.451         126.071 ***        29.710
                                         Log (# of property crime arrests / 10 K pop)
Real price of MJ                      -0.010 **         0.005           -0.013 ***         0.005
Real price of Cocaine                 -0.002            0.002           -0.004 **          0.002
Real beer tax                          0.177 ***        0.066            0.151 **          0.066
log(county pop)                       -0.482            0.336            0.023             0.398
% of county pop < 18                 15.342 ***         3.704          15.407 ***          3.751
% of county pop black                  1.032            4.223            0.472             4.023
% of county pop other race             8.091            8.343          16.737 **           8.068
% of county pop Hispanic              -5.199            4.505           -8.291 *           4.371
Real per capita income            -1.18E-05         1.35E-05        -3.36E-05 ***      1.19E-05
Unemployment rate                      0.013            0.009            0.007             0.009
Year                                  -0.049 ***        0.015           -0.063 ***         0.017
Crime per officer                                                        0.341 ***         0.083
Drug arrests/total crime                                                 1.562 ***         0.420
Constant                            106.099 ***        33.664         125.901 ***        32.365
                                             Log(# of income arrests/ 10K pop)
Real price of MJ                      -0.011 **         0.005           -0.017 ***         0.004
Real price of Cocaine                 -0.004            0.003           -0.005 **          0.003
Real beer tax                          0.154 *          0.084            0.238 ***         0.072
log(county pop)                       -1.008 ***        0.378            0.303             0.490
% of county pop < 18                 20.707 ***         3.867          17.411 ***          3.946
% of county pop black                  7.775            4.904            6.447 *           3.743
% of county pop other race           13.805             9.064          19.349 **           8.662
% of county pop Hispanic              -3.963            4.033         -10.916 ***          3.708
Real per capita income            -1.43E-05         1.45E-05        -5.63E-05 ***      1.78E-05
Unemployment rate                      0.017            0.018            0.011             0.015
Year                                  -0.057 ***        0.017           -0.063 ***         0.018
Crime per officer                                                        0.328 ***         0.127
Drug arrests/total crime                                                 2.722 ***         0.656
Constant                            122.440 ***        35.204         118.105 ***        37.157
All models include as additional regressors city fixed effects.
*** Indicates significance at 1% level (two-tailed test), ** indicates significance at 5% level
(two-tailed test) and * indicates significance at the 10% level (two-tailed test).
                                                      Table 7
                         GLM Estimates of Log Crime Rates from UCR: 1994 -1999
                                             M1                                  M2
                                     OLS              Robust            OLS             Robust
                                 Coefficient          Std. Err      Coefficient         Std. Err
                                               Log (# of violent crimes/ 10K pop)
Real price of MJ                      -0.009              0.006           -0.005           0.003
Real price of Cocaine                  0.004              0.003            0.000           0.003
Real beer tax                          0.286 ***          0.069            0.172 **        0.070
log(county pop)                       -1.123 **           0.497           -1.831 ***       0.443
% of county pop < 18                   7.929 **           3.796            4.942           3.190
% of county pop black                  4.621              3.537          12.023 ***        2.995
% of county pop other race           20.524 *           12.237             9.770           8.906
% of county pop Hispanic              -3.279              6.029            2.631           3.432
Real per capita income            -2.72E-02 ***       1.03E-02       -2.00E-02 *        1.14E-02
Unemployment rate                      0.013              0.016            0.008           0.016
Year                                  -0.047 ***          0.013           -0.054 ***       0.015
Crime per officer                                                          0.518 ***       0.101
Drug arrests/total crime                                                  -0.578 *         0.326
Constant                            108.014 ***         30.087         129.284 ***        34.111
                                             Log (# of property crimes / 10 K pop)
Real price of MJ                      -0.003              0.003           -0.005 *         0.003
Real price of Cocaine                  0.003              0.002            0.003           0.002
Real beer tax                          0.186 ***          0.045            0.026           0.053
log(county pop)                        0.718 *            0.418            0.057           0.299
% of county pop < 18                   0.092              3.026            9.524 ***       2.537
% of county pop black                  0.151              3.146           -2.015           2.840
% of county pop other race            -6.555              5.029           -5.729           3.816
% of county pop Hispanic              -6.965 **           3.139           -9.127 ***       2.355
Real per capita income            -1.44E-02 **        7.16E-03        4.33E-03          7.54E-03
Unemployment rate                      0.013              0.013            0.006           0.009
Year                                   0.002              0.015            0.026 **        0.013
Crime per officer                                                          0.467 ***       0.064
Drug arrests/total crime                                                  -1.704 ***       0.324
Constant                              -8.122            30.964          -48.733           26.608
All models include as additional regressors city fixed effects.
*** Indicates significance at 1% level (two-tailed test), ** indicates significance at 5% level
(two-tailed test) and * indicates significance at the 10% level (two-tailed test).
                                                  APPENDIX

                     Table A1. Marginal Effects and Robust Standard Errors from
                             Probit Estimation of Prob(Using Marijuana)a

                                         MJ50             MJ72HR            UNDERMJ
                                        -0.0011      *    -0.0011      *     -0.0006     **
                        Price MJ
                                        (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.000)
                                        0.1491      ***    0.0863     ***     0.0266    ***
                         MALE
                                        (0.003)           (0.003)            (0.001)
                                        0.0294      ***    0.0439     ***     0.0059    ***
                         BLACK
                                        (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.002)
                                        -0.0722     ***   -0.0592     ***    -0.0114    ***
                       HISPANIC
                                        (0.005)           (0.004)            (0.002)
                                        -0.1022     ***   -0.0676     ***    -0.0108    ***
                      OTHR RACE
                                        (0.009)           (0.008)            (0.004)
                                        0.0375      ***    0.0280     ***    -0.0009
                      AGED 18-24
                                        (0.005)           (0.005)            (0.002)
                                        -0.1381     ***   -0.0699     ***    -0.0279    ***
                      AGED 25-34
                                        (0.005)           (0.005)            (0.002)
                                        -0.2601     ***   -0.1728     ***    -0.0566    ***
                       AGED >34
                                        (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.002)
                                        -0.0584     ***   -0.0569     ***    -0.0138    ***
                         EDU12
                                        (0.003)           (0.003)            (0.001)
                                        0.0133      **     0.0196     ***     0.0033
                        MEDUC
                                        (0.006)           (0.006)            (0.002)
                         LEGAL          0.0000      ***    0.0000     ***     0.0000    ***
                        INCOME          (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)
                        ILLEGAL         0.0000      ***    0.0000     ***     0.0000    ***
                        INCOME          (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)
                                        0.0051      **     0.0054      **     0.0032    ***
                          YEAR
                                        (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.001)
                        PRICE           0.0038             0.0339      **     0.0007
                         BEER           (0.016)           (0.015)            (0.007)
                       Distance         0.0418      ***   0.0119       *     -0.0054     *
                       Indicator        (0.007)           (0.007)            (0.003)
                        PRICE           0.0004             0.0006             0.0000
                       COCAINE          (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.000)
                                        -0.0021           -0.0016             0.0005
                       QUARTER
                                        (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)

Statistical significance is designated as follows: *** indicates significance at the 1% level (2-tailed test), **
indicates significance at the 5% level , and * indicates significance at the 10% level.
                                            Table A2.
                                   ADAM Locations and Fipscodes

Albuquerque                        35001             Minneapolis                     27053
Anchorage                           2020             New Orleans                     22071
Atlanta                            13121             New York                        36061
Birmingham                          1073             Oklahoma City                   40109
Chicago                            17031             Omaha                           31055
Cleveland                          39035             Philadelphia                    42101
Dallas                             48113             Phoenix                          4013
Denver                              8031             Portland                        41051
Des Moines                         19153             Sacramento                       6067
Detroit                            26163             Salt Lake City                  49035
Ft. Lauderdale                     12011             San Antonio                     48029
Houston                            48201             San Diego                        6073
Indianapolis                       18097             San Jose                         6085
Kansas City                        29095             Seattle                         53033
Laredo                             48479             Spokane                         53063
Las Vegas                          32003             St. Louis                       29189
Los Angeles                         6037             Tucson                           4019
Miami                              12086             Washington                      11001
NOTE: Sites included in the county analysis are those listed in Table 1 except Kansas City, which did not
report any data for 1995-1999. Quarterly data is averaged (annually) for the county-level analysis.


        From the ADAM codebooks: “Prior to 1998, samples of arrestees for the ADAM/DUF
program were drawn from booking facilities within each of the sites and thus were limited to the
types of arrestees booked at these facilities. In 11 sites (Atlanta, Chicago, Cleveland, Denver,
Detroit, Houston, Kansas City, Omaha, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Washington, DC), the
catchment area represented the central city. The data from the city of Denver included Denver
County in its entirety, and the St. Louis data also encompassed a county. (Kansas City ceased
being a DUF site after 1992.) In ten additional sites (Dallas, Ft. Lauderdale, Indianapolis, Miami,
New Orleans, Manhattan [New York City], Phoenix, Portland, San Antonio, and San Jose), the
catchment area was the county, parish, or borough.” Post-1997, ADAM expanded as well as
“enhanced each site’s collection to include the entire county” (NIJ, 2000b).
