                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE CHINESE ECONOMIES IN GLOBAL CONTEXT:
                  THE INTEGRATION PROCESS AND ITS DETERMINANTS

                                            Yin-Wong Cheung
                                            Menzie D. Chinn
                                                Eiji Fujii

                                          Working Paper 10047
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10047


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




We thank Yunjong Wang for comments. The financial support of faculty research funds of the University of
California, Santa Cruz is gratefully acknowledged. The views contained herein are solely those of the authors,
and do not necessarily represent those of the institutions they are associated with.The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Chinese Economies in Global Context: The Integration Process and Its Determinants
Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii
NBER Working Paper No. 10047
October 2003
JEL No. F13, F31, F41

                                           ABSTRACT

The linkages between the People's Republic of China (PRC) and the other Chinese economies of
Hong Kong and Taiwan are assessed, and compared against those with Japan and the US. We first
characterize the time series behavior of variables corresponding to three criteria of integration,
namely real interest parity, uncovered interest parity, and relative purchasing power parity. There
is evidence that these parity conditions tend to hold over longer periods between the PRC and all
other economies, although they do not hold instantaneously. In general, the magnitude of the
deviations from the parity conditions is shrinking over time. Overall, however, Hong Kong exhibits
indications of a more advanced level of integration with the PRC. We also find that evidence is
surprisingly positive for integration with the US. We then turn to examining the determinants of the
degree of integration. Regression results suggest that the degrees of financial and real integration
depend upon the extent of capital controls, foreign direct investment linkages, as well as the
magnitude of exchange rate volatility.

Yin-Wong Cheung                                      Eiji Fujii
Department of Economics                              Institute of Policy and Planning
SS1                                                  University of Tsukuba
University of California                             1-1-1 Tennodai Tsukuba
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                 Ibaraki, Japan
cheung@ucsc.edu                                      efujii@sk.tsukaba.ac.jp

Menzie D. Chinn
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
mchinn@lafolette.wisc.edu
1.     Introduction
       The economies of China – the People’s Republic, Hong Kong and Taiwan – constitute
one of the most dynamic regions of the world economy, with the People’s Republic of China
(PRC) registering economic growth over 8% in 2002. Perhaps of equal significance, the
combined output of these three economies is almost twice that of Japan’s, and over 60% that of
the US. In addition, their foreign exchange reserves are among the largest in the world.1 Yet it is
not clear that one can treat the region as an integrated whole; indeed, there has been little
systematic examination of whether the links between the PRC and the other two Chinese
economies are any stronger than those that connect the PRC to other major economies around the
globe, such as Japan or the US.
       Over the past two and a half decades, the PRC has been engaged in a process of financial
and real integration with the rest of the world. Concurrently, for a variety of geopolitical and
economic reasons, the PRC, Hong Kong, and Taiwan – a grouping sometimes termed “Greater
China” – have maintained or developed close economic ties. While Hong Kong has a quite long
history of economic and financial interactions with the PRC, it might be more surprising to a
casual observer that, despite political and ideological differences and occasional tensions,
economic links between the PRC and Taiwan have proliferated since the 1990s. According to
official statistics, the PRC is the largest recipient of Taiwan’s overseas investment and Taiwan is
the PRC’s third-largest source of foreign direct investment.2
       These links between the economies comprising “Greater China” need to be placed in
context, however. The US and Japan are the PRC’s main trading partners and foreign investors.
For instance, in 2002 the total trade (imports plus exports) between the PRC and each of the two
economies is about US$100 billion. Foreign direct investment flows to China have also been
burgeoning. HK to the PRC flows were nearly US$17 billion in 2001, while those from Taiwan



1
        As of April 2003, the reserves of Hong Kong and Taiwan were, respectively, US$114.2
and US$170.6 billion. Those of the People’s Republic of China were US$312.9 billion in
February (Economist, May 31-June 6, 2003, p. 98).
2
        It is widely believed that the official statistics under-represent the overall Taiwan
economic interest in China. For instance, some analysts count Taiwan's total investment in China
as just behind that of Hong Kong’s but ahead of that of the US. In 2002, electronics companies
from Taiwan account for 64% of the PRC’s total information-technology output (The Economist
Intelligence Unit, 2003).


                                                  1
were between US$3 to US$4.5 billion. Evidently, linkages of many types have been flourishing
between these economies over the last decade or so.
       In this paper, we examine some macroeconomic aspects of the PRC’s economic
integration with Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, and the US. Despite its increasing importance in the
world economy, there are a relatively limited number of studies of the PRC’s interactions with
other economies. This is not to say that there has not been any quantitative analysis on the
subject. Particularly in the wake of the PRC’s accession to the World Trade Organization, quite a
few quantitative studies were undertaken. However, most of these focused on sectoral/trade
issues.3 A thoroughgoing investigation of financial and price linkages is notably lacking.4
       In addition to assessing the integration between the PRC and the other four economies,
the current study examines whether the patterns of integration between the PRC and, on the one
hand, the other two Greater China economies and, on the other hand, Japan and the US, are
similar. We believe that such an investigation is warranted as there has been much talk of the
economic entity called Greater China, comprising the PRC, Hong Kong and Taiwan and is also
termed the “China Circle.”5
       We use three fundamental parity conditions – real interest parity, uncovered interest
parity, and purchasing power parity – to gauge the degree of integration in capital, financial, and
goods markets. The real interest parity condition measures the mobility of physical capital,
specifically whether capital flows equalize real interest rates across economies. It can be shown
that the degree to which real interest rate parity holds depends on the extent to which uncovered
interest parity and relative purchasing power parity apply. Since uncovered interest parity
involves financial arbitrage between money and foreign exchange markets and relative
purchasing power parity entails arbitrage in goods and services, the real interest parity condition
embodies elements of both real and financial integration.



3
        Recent analyses focused on WTO effects include Wang (2001) and Ma (2001). Other
quantitative analyses of trade linkages include Wei and Frankel (1994), Wei et al. (2000),
Noland et al. (1998), and Fernald et al. (1999).
4
        Ha and Fan (2002) and Shellekens (2002) study the interactions of prices in the PRC and
Hong Kong and the deflationary effect on Hong Kong. Cheung, Chinn and Fujii (2003)
investigate intra-China linkages.
5
        Harding (1995) used the term “Greater China” while Naughton (1997) popularized the
title “China Circle”.


                                                 2
         In addition to characterizing these linkages, we also document how the strength of each
of these links depends on a number of regulatory and economic factors. We investigate, for
instance, how much of the gap between real rates of returns depends upon the extent of capital
controls, and how much might be due to the uncertainty associated with macroeconomic policies
– as summarized by exchange rate and inflation volatility.
         The plan of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we lay out a framework for
systematically analyzing the components of financial and real integration – corresponding to
deviations from uncovered interest parity and relative purchasing power parity. In section 3, we
turn to examining each of these three factors, in terms of their stationarity characteristics,
persistence, and trends. The compositions of deviations from the parity conditions are also
studied in the same section. Section 4 examines how these deviations can be related to economic
factors. Some concluding remarks are offered in Section 5.


2.       Aspects of Capital Market Integration
         There are a number of definitions of capital market integration. Each definition has its
own strengths and weaknesses. We will adopt several specific definitions due to Frankel (1991).
First, we equate real interest parity with real capital mobility. The real interest parity condition is
underpinned by two other conditions: covered interest parity and purchasing power parity. The
latter two conditions represent financial capital market integration and goods market integration,
respectively.


2.1      An Accounting Identity
      Consider the ex ante real interest differential between two economies:
          rte,k − rt*,ke ≡ (it ,k − π te,k ) − (it*,k − π t*,ek )                                 (1)

where rte,k is the expected k-period real interest rate in the first economy with the “e” and “k”

superscripts indicate the variable is expected and the maturity of the debt instrument. The “*”
denotes the variables for the second economy. The real interest rate is given by the difference
between it ,k , the k-period nominal interest rate, and π te,k , the expected inflation rate in k-periods.

Hence, equation (1) defines the ex ante real rate as the nominal interest rate on an asset of k-




                                                                    3
period maturity, deflated by the inflation rate expected at time t to prevail over the period t to t+k
(annualized).6 The expected inflation is defined by
        π te,k ≡ pte,k − pt .                                                                 (2)

where pte,k and pt are, respectively, the price (in logs) expected to prevail at t+k and the price at

t. The expected inflation in the second economy is analogously defined by
        π t*,ek ≡ pt*,ek − pt* .                                                              (3)

       The expression for the real interest differential on the right hand side of (1) can be re-
arranged, and expected depreciation subtracted and added, to yield:
        rte,k − rt*,ke ≡ (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ ste,k ) − (π te,k − π te,*k − ∆ ste,k )           (4)

where expected depreciation is given by:
        ∆ ste,k ≡ ste,k − st                                                                  (5)

and st is the exchange rate between monies in the two economies expressed in logarithm form.
Note that the first term on the right hand side of (4) is the uncovered interest differential, and the
second term is the deviation from ex ante relative purchasing power parity. The uncovered
interest differential should equal zero when financial capital is perfectly mobile and
substitutable; the deviation from purchasing power parity should be zero when goods markets are
perfectly integrated.


2.2    Empirical Implementation
       Strictly speaking, real interest parity is an ex ante concept defined by expectations rather
than realized real interest rates. The theoretical relationship between the three parity conditions is
defined by identity (4). However, due to the paucity of data on expectations, the identity cannot
be used to assess the empirical relevance of these parity conditions. Instead, we employ an
operational version based on ex post differentials,
        rt ,k − rt*,k ≡ (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k ) − (π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k )             (6)

to examine the data. One way to justify the use of (6) is that, under the rational expectations
hypothesis, the ex post realizations are unbiased predictors of the ex ante counterparts.7 Since

6
        In this case, we are assuming that the interest rates are on highly liquid, money market
instruments of identical default risk characteristics. Hence, we do not address default risk premia
in our discussion.


                                                                        4
there is substantial evidence that expectations are not unbiased, 8 we will refer to the term on the
left hand side of (6) as the deviation from rational real interest parity, and the two terms on the
right hand side as the deviation from rational uncovered interest parity and from rational relative
purchasing power parity.


2.3     Financial versus Real Integration
        Abstracting from the distinction between ex ante and ex post, equations (4) and (6) imply
that a sufficient condition for real interest parity to hold is that both uncovered interest parity and
relative purchasing power parity hold. While uncovered interest parity pertains to financial
integration driven by arbitrage between money and foreign exchange markets – that is, how
desirable currencies are viewed and how free money is to move – relative purchasing power
parity pertains to how easily goods and services are arbitraged. Hence, real interest parity is a
function of both financial and real market integration (Frankel, 1991).
        To make this assertion concrete, consider a situation where financial markets in two
economies were well integrated, while differential inflation rates were not offset by changes in
exchange rates. Then real interest differentials could persist not because financial capital flows
were hindered and uncovered interest parity is violated, but because of the breakdown of relative
purchasing power parity due to limited strength of the forces that drive together goods prices
(expressed in a common currency).
        The condition wherein real interest rate parity holds is sometimes termed real capital
mobility. That is, real interest rates are equalized when “real” capital is free to move. To see why
some observers make this equivalence, consider basic microeconomic theory. An optimizing
firm sets the marginal product of capital equal to the user cost of capital. Absent taxes (and
ignoring depreciation), the user cost of capital is nominal interest rate, adjusted by the rate of




7
       In other words, we are equating the subjective market expectations with the conditional
mathematical expectations, viz., xet+k = E(xt+k | It), in a steady state such that xt+k - E(xt+k | It) =
ξt+k where ξt+k is a true innovation.
8
       See Frankel and Froot (1987) and Chinn and Frankel (1994).


                                                    5
inflation of its output. Hence real interest parity is taken as a signal of the equalization of the
marginal product of capital across countries.9


3.      Empirical Results
        The data considered in this exercise are monthly observations on one-month interbank
interest rates, exchange rates, and consumer price indexes for the PRC, Hong Kong, Taiwan,
Japan, and the US, from February 1996 to June 2002. See the Data Appendix for a more detailed
description. The period of analysis is dictated by data availability and, more importantly, by the
realities of the liberalization process in the PRC. A unified national interbank market was only
established in January of 1996; prior to that the interbank market was substantially controlled
(Xie, 2002). Hence, extending the interest rate series backwards would not yield more
information relevant to assessing international financial integration. 10
        For each pair of economies, the ex post real interest differential ( rt ,k − rt*,k ), ex post

uncovered interest differential (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k ) , and ex post relative purchasing power

differential (π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k ) are constructed to examine the relevance of the parity conditions

and infer the degree of integration between the PRC and other economies. For notational
simplicity, we drop the term “ex post” hereafter.
        Table 1 presents the summary descriptive statistics. Several observations are in order.
First, for the real interest differential, the Hong Kong/PRC series has the smallest mean (in
absolute value), but not smallest range (maximum – minimum), nor smallest variance. If these
numbers are used to assess integration, then Hong Kong and the PRC appear to have a high level
of integration.11
        However, recall that the deviations from real interest parity are a composite of other
deviations. When focusing solely on the financial side, the deviation from uncovered interest
9
        There is a subtlety involved in using parity conditions to evaluate the level of integration.
When a parity condition is rejected, then enlargements and diminutions of deviations may be due
either to greater economic integration, greater convergence of economic policies, or both.
10
        There is a separate question of whether the one-month rate is representative of other
short-term interest rates, including the commercial paper and repo rates. Li and Peng (2002)
argue that in recent years the segmentation between these short-term instruments has largely
disappeared.
11
        In the presence of a 1997 dummy variable, the Taiwan/PRC pair, instead of the Hong
Kong/PRC pair, has the smallest absolute average real interest differential.


                                                      6
parity tells a different story. The Hong Kong/PRC and US/PRC pairs appear the most tightly
linked, with the smallest absolute mean values and smallest ranges. The Japan/PRC pair yields
the largest absolute value of the mean differential deviation. This result is likely driven by the
exchange rate arrangements adopted by the PRC. During the sample period, currencies of the
PRC and Hong Kong are effectively pegged to the US dollar and, thus, the exchange rate has a
limited effect on the uncovered interest deviations. On the other hand, the Japan/PRC pair is
characterized by large and volatile exchange rate variation and thus large deviations from
rational uncovered interest parity.
        The deviations from purchasing power parity are generally fairly small in their mean
values with the exception of the Japan/PRC link. The range is smallest for the Hong Kong/PRC
and US/PRC pairs, cases where the exchange rates are pegged. Again, the results confirm that
the choice of exchange rate regime has major import for the magnitude of the dis-parity.
        The three differential series are graphed for each of the PRC pairs in Figures 1 to 4.
Taking the scale of these graphs into consideration, the three differential series of the four PRC
pairs display two distinct patterns. Figures 1 and 3 indicate that the real interest differentials of
the Hong Kong/PRC and US/PRC pairs are greatly influenced by the deviations from the relative
purchasing power parity. On the other hand, the uncovered interest differentials and deviations
from relative purchasing power parity for the Japan/PRC and Taiwan/PRC pairs tend to offset
each other and result in a relatively small real interest differential. These observations
corroborate the numbers reported in Table 1 – the averages of the Japan/PRC and Taiwan/PRC
real interest differentials are considerably smaller than those of the other two differential series.
        In the following subsections, we provide some formal evaluations of the parity conditions
via several perspectives. First, we test for the presence of a unit root in these differential series.
Second, we gauge the predictive ability of the past values of a differential series. Third, we
assess whether the deviations from parity conditions are shrinking over time or not. Fourth, we
examine the composition of the volatilities of the three differential series.


3.1     Real Interest Parity
        In some earlier studies, regression methods are used to determine the validity of real
interest parity (Cumby and Obsfeld, 1984). For example, interest rate differentials are regressed
on inflation differentials and the coefficient estimates are used to assess whether the real interest



                                                   7
rate parity condition holds.12 In this study, we use the concept of mean stationarity to evaluate
the parity condition. If the deviations from real interest parity are stationary, then even though
the condition does not hold in the short run, it holds in the long run because deviations from
parity are transitory. The argument follows from the property of a stationary time series; a
stationary series will revert back to its equilibrium value after being disturbed by external
shocks. On the other hand, if the deviations from parity are not stationary, shocks can lead to
permanent displacements from equilibrium and there is no built-in mechanism to restore the
parity condition even in the long run.13 The use of the stationarity criterion is appropriate because
a parity relation is usually established under some ideal conditions that are unlikely to hold in the
short run. The stationarity criterion can also be rationalized by recalling that we only observe ex
post inflation and depreciation rates; hence it makes no sense to assume that the ex post parity
conditions hold instantaneously. As long as the parity conditions hold ex ante and the
expectations errors are mean stationary, tests for stationarity will be informative.
        A modified Dickey-Fuller test known as the ADF-GLS test (Elliott, Rothenberg, Stock,
1996) is used to test for stationarity. While the standard Dickey-Fuller procedure is notorious for
its low power, the ADF-GLS test is shown to be approximately uniformly most powerful
invariant. Consider a series { qt }; qt = real interest differential, uncovered interest differential,

and relative purchasing power differential at time t. The ADF-GLSτ test that allows for a linear
time trend is based on the following regression:

        (1 − L)qtτ = α 0 qtτ−1 + ∑k =1α k (1 − L)qtτ−k + ε t
                                    p
                                                                                (7)

where qtτ is the locally detrended process under the local alternative of α and is given by

        qtτ = qt − γ~′zt                                                        (8)




12
        There is an extensive literature on testing real interest parity. See Mishkin (1984), Mark
(1985), and Cumby and Mishkin (1986). In some studies, exact formula for calculating interest
rate variables (instead of log approximations) are typically used in the context of testing for real
interest parity. However, it is noted that data derived from exact formulae and log
approximations gave qualitatively similar test results. Following the general practice, the test
results in Tables 2 to 5 are based on the log approximation.
13
        The constant associated with the real interest parity deviation can be interpreted as a
time-invariant difference in the default risk or liquidity attributes of the money market
instruments that have been assumed away in the algebraic expressions.


                                                         8
with zt = (1, t)’. γ~ is the least squares regression coefficient of q~t on ~
                                                                            z t , where (q~1 , q~ 2......q~T ) =

(q1 , (1 - α L) q 2 ,..., (1 - α L) qT ) , ( ~
                                             z1 ,~
                                                 z 2......~
                                                          z T ) = ( z1 , (1 - α L) z 2 ,..., (1 - α L) z T ) , and L is the
lag operator. The local alternative α is defined by α = 1 + c / T for which c is set to -13.5.
The ADF-GLSµ test, which allows for only an intercept, involves the same procedure as the
ADF-GLSτ test, except that qtτ is replaced by the locally demeaned series qtµ , which is obtained

by setting zt = 1 and c to -7. In implementing the test, the lag parameter p is chosen to make the
error term ε t a white noise process. The unit root hypothesis is rejected when the ADF-GLS test
statistic, which is given by the usual t-statistic for αo = 0 against the alternative of αo < 0, is
significant. See Elliott, Rothenberg, Stock (1996) for a detailed description of the testing
procedure.
         The results of applying the ADF-GLSτ and ADF-GLSµ tests to the four real interest
differential series are presented in Panel A of Table 2. For all the three series, the residual Q-
statistics indicate that the selected lag specifications are quite adequate. Both the ADF-GLSτ and
ADF-GLSµ test statistics are negative and significant; suggesting that the real interest differential
series are stationary. That is the deviations from real interest parity are stationary and tend to
converge over time.
         Panel B of Table 2 reports the results of the following regression:

         qt = α 0 + ∑k =1α k qt −k + ε t .
                          p
                                                                                                 (9)

This regression is used in some previous studies assessing the parity condition. Under
instantaneous real interest parity, the expected real interest differential is random, has a zero
mean, and cannot be predicted by available information. Thus, the significance of α k 's in (9) is
considered as evidence against the validity of the (instantaneous) parity condition.
         As reported in Panel B, all the four PRC real interest differential series display significant
persistence. Deviations from the real interest parity are predictable and the markets are not
efficient in this sense. Thus, the results indicate that the PRC is imperfectly integrated with the
other economies – a finding that is not surprising because the PRC has strict controls on both
trade and financial flows. Nonetheless, despite the limited extent of integration and the failure of
short-run real interest parity, the stationarity results in Panel A suggest that the real interest rates




                                                              9
of PRC and all other economies are linked in the long run and they do not drift apart without a
bound over time.
          The explained components of these differential series, as indicated by the adjusted-R2,
range from 4.5% of the US/PRC real interest differentials to 19.2% of the Taiwan/PRC
differentials. The adjusted-R2s from the Hong Kong/PRC and Taiwan/PRC regressions are larger
than those from the other two pairs. Apparently, the real interest differentials between the
Greater China economies are more predictable than those between the PRC and the two non-
Chinese economies.
          Next, we use a simple panel setting to reveal the possible trending behavior of dis-parity.
Specifically, we would like to investigate whether the magnitude of deviation is declining during
the sample period. To this end, we construct an annual measure of absolute deviation by
averaging the monthly absolute real interest differentials. Specifically, we calculate:

          q~ j ,t = 12 −1 ∑k =1 abs (q j ,t ,k )
                           12
                                                                                (10)

where abs (q j ,t ,k ) is the absolute value of the real interest rate differential between economy j and

the PRC in the k-th month during year t, j = Hong Kong, Japan, Taiwan, and the US, and t =
1996, …, 2001.14 We then estimate a common trend in the obtained average absolute deviations
by running a panel regression:
       q~ = α + β t + ε
            j ,t     j              j ,t                                        (11)

and report the results in Table 2, Panel C. The economy-specific intercept term α j allows

individual absolute deviation series to have different means. The estimated common trend term
reported in the row labeled “Common” is statistically significant and negative, suggesting that
the magnitude of real interest rate differentials is, in general, shrinking over time.
          It is useful to identify which economy is the major source of the general decline in the
absolute deviation from real interest parity. For this reason, we estimate trend coefficients
between the PRC and 1) the other Greater China economies, 2) Japan and the US, and 3)
individually economies. The results are reported in the row labeled “Group’ and “Individual.”
All these trend coefficient estimates are negative – indicating that the PRC real interest rate gap
tends to dwindle over time vis-à-vis other economies. The most notable decline is between the
PRC and Japan, as manifested by both the size and the statistical significance of the trend
14
     The year 2002 is excluded because we have only 6 observations for that year.


                                                   10
coefficient estimate. In sum, there is evidence that the PRC is increasingly linked with the other
major economies. This finding is robust to the inclusion of a dummy for the 1997 currency
crisis.15


3.2     Uncovered Interest Parity
        The real interest parity condition incorporates aspects of both financial and real
integration. Although the results in the previous subsection are supportive of long-run real
interest parity, it is instructive to isolate the sources of rejection of short-run integration. To this
end, we examine the cases of financial and real integration individually. The results related to
financial integration are given in Table 3, in a format analogous to that used in Table 2.
        Panel A presents the results of applying the unit root tests on the uncovered interest
differential series. For all pairs, excepting the US/PRC, the unit root hypothesis is strongly
rejected by both ADF-GLSτ and ADF-GLSµ test statistics. When a dummy variable for the 1997
crisis is included, the US/PRC series exhibits stationarity.16 Thus, after accounting for the 1997
crisis, all the uncovered interest differential series are stationary and shocks to uncovered interest
parity are transitory.
        The results of fitting the uncovered interest differential to equation (9) are given in Panel
B. The deviation from uncovered interest parity does not appear random for the Hong Kong/PRC
and US/PRC pairs – the lagged uncovered interest differential variables are positively significant
and indicative of strong persistence. The adjusted-R2s are quite high at 62% and 83%,
respectively. If monies are free to move across markets, arbitrage can generate profits based on
the pattern of persistent deviation and help restore the parity. However, this kind of arbitrage
activity is quite difficult, especially in the short run, given the prevailing capital controls in the
PRC.
        The Japan/PRC and Taiwan/PRC pairs display a different pattern. The lagged
differentials are small and insignificant – indicating the deviations are quite random.

15
        The sensitivity to the 1997 dummy is investigated for all results reported in the tables.
The reported results are quite robust to the inclusion of the dummy variable. To conserve space,
the results allowing for the dummy are discussed only when they are different from those in the
tables.
16
        The results for US/PRC pair with the 1997 dummy are 1) ADF-GLSµ =-2.869* [1],
Q(6)= 7.792, and Q(12)= 18.096, and 2) ADF-GLSτ =-3.335* [1], Q(6)= 6.596 and Q(12)=
17.158.


                                                   11
Interestingly, these two differentials series have a variance that is 50 times to 125 times larger
than those of the Hong Kong/PRC and US/PRC series.17 The unduly high volatility may make it
difficult to uncover significant coefficients in the Japan/PRC and Taiwan/PRC regressions.
       The annual absolute deviation from uncovered interest parity, which is constructed in the
same manner as the absolute deviation from real interest parity (see equation (10)), is used to
assess the trending behavior of uncovered interest dis-parity. While all the estimated common,
group, and individual time trends have a negative sign – indicating the differentials are
narrowing during the sample – only the estimates for the Hong Kong/PRC and US/PRC pairs are
statistically significant. Again, the insignificant results are associated with the highly variable
Japan/PRC and Taiwan/PRC series.


3.3    Relative Purchasing Power Parity
       The relative purchasing power differential series are used to assess goods market
integration. The notion of relative purchasing power parity in (4) is different from the purchasing
power parity commonly examined in the literature. The relative purchasing power parity that
constitutes the equivalence of parities is akin to the Roll’s (1979) efficient market purchasing
power parity. Roll (1979) shows that, under the efficient market assumption, ex ante deviations
from purchasing power parity are unpredictable. Frankel (1991), for example, suggests that
violation of ex ante relative purchasing power parity is associated with incomplete integration of
goods markets.
       The empirical results are presented in Table 4. The ADF-GLSτ and ADF-GLSµ tests
strongly reject the presence of a unit root in these differential series. While the stationarity result
is expected from the parity identity relationship and the results in the previous two subsections, it
is reassuring to see the actual relative purchasing power differential series are stationary. Thus,
there is evidence of long-run goods market integration between the PRC and other economies.
       The results in Panel B are quite different from the corresponding panels in the two
preceding tables. The coefficient estimates of the lagged deviation from relative purchasing
power parity are small and insignificant and the adjusted-R2s are quite close to zero. If the

17
        During the sample period, Hong Kong and PRC have their currencies effectively pegged
to the US dollar. Thus, the Hong Kong/PRC and US/PRC exchange rates are relatively stable
and contribute little to the related uncovered interest differentials. On the other hand, the
exchange rates of Taiwan and Japan vis-à-vis PRC are more volatile.


                                                  12
information set is restricted to lagged relative purchasing power parity deviations,
(π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k ) is a random series. The result is supportive of the Roll's (1979) efficient

market purchasing power parity, which postulates {π te,k − π te,*k − ∆ ste,k } is a zero mean random

series.
          There is no evidence of a decrease in the magnitude of relative purchasing power
deviations revealed in Panel C of Table 4. The results are based on fitting the annual averages of
absolute differentials to equation (11). All three types of time trend; common, group, and
individual, are not significant. Again, the results are in contrast with the corresponding ones in
Tables 2 and 3, which find substantial evidence of diminishing deviation from the two interest
parities. Note, however, that the PRC opened its goods and services markets, albeit in a gradual
fashion, long before launching financial reforms in the late 1990s. It is possible that the
magnitude of relative purchasing power deviations declined before the current sample period
and, hence, does not manifest itself in a declining trend in recent years.
          To investigate the possibility that most of the process of goods market integration
occurred before 1996, we extended the sample back to January 1984. This data span includes the
longest available exchange rate and price series. For the extended sample, the common trend
estimate is -0.291 (standard error = 1.122), the time trend estimate of the Hong Kong/PRC and
Taiwan/PRC group is -0.722 (standard error = 0.220), and the one of the Japan/PRC and
US/PRC group is 0.138 (standard error = 2.257). For the individual time trends, only the Hong
Kong/PRC one is statistically significant; the estimate is -1.037 with standard error equals to
0.264. Thus, only the time trend estimates involving Hong Kong are significant and negative,
indicating it is only the relative purchasing power parity gap between the PRC and Hong Kong
that is declining during the period under investigation. The result is consistent with the fact that,
among the four economies under consideration, Hong Kong has the most long-standing
“preferential” political and economic links with the PRC, making that economy better positioned
to integrate with the PRC. Overall, the results pertaining to the longer sample and those in Table
4 suggest that there is considerable evidence of goods market integration between the PRC and
Hong Kong, and that much of it took place in the period before 1996.
          The results of testing the parity conditions are summarized in Table 5. All in all, there is
evidence that the three parity conditions hold in the long run. The unit root null is rejected for all
the series and, thus, the deviations from these parity conditions are stationary. Given the short


                                                      13
sample considered and the usual concern about the power of unit root tests, the evidence in favor
of the three long-run parity conditions is quite strong (even if these conditions do not necessarily
hold in the short run). There is also some evidence that some economy-pairs experience a decline
in the magnitude of deviations.
         Apparently, the PRC and Hong Kong have the highest level of integration. This finding is
not too surprising given the development of close ties that preceded the PRC’s more recent set of
economic reforms. On the other hand, Taiwan, compared with Japan and the US, does not appear
to be more integrated with the PRC. Thus, the integration between the Greater China economies
is not uniformly deeper than that between the PRC and the other major economies.


3.4      The Composition of Deviations from Parity Conditions
         The variance of a differential series provides a measure of the extent of deviation from a
parity condition. For example, consider real interest parity. If the parity condition holds
instantaneously, then the real interest differential series will be identically equal to zero. If the
parity is subject to large shocks, then the variance of the differential series is large. Thus, a large
differential variance is indicative of substantial deviation from the parity condition. There are
two caveats. The first is that the ex post deviations impound an expectational error, so larger
deviations can be an indication of increased uncertainty. Second, even a constant deviation from
the parity yields a zero variance. Due to impediments to capital flows including formal barriers
and transaction costs, the parity condition may not hold exactly in reality. The impediments can
create a zone in which it is not feasible for arbitrage to restore the parity. Under such
circumstances, the observed differential series does not have a zero mean and its variance can be
interpreted as a measure of deviation from parity allowing for the effect of impediments to capital
flows.
         The variance of differential series offers a direct way to assess the components of dis-
parity. The variance of real interest differentials can be equivalently written as
         Var (rt ,k − rt*,k ) ≡ Var (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k ) + Var (π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k )

                                − 2Cov (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k , π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k ) .     (12)

The intensity of deviations from real interest parity depends on the extents of financial and goods
market dis-integration and the comovement between deviations from uncovered interest parity



                                                                   14
and relative purchasing power parity. The decomposition of Var (rt ,k − rt*,k ) using actual data can

pinpoint whether it is the barriers in financial markets or in goods markets that cause the failure
to equalize real interest rates.
        By the same token, the variances of uncovered interest and relative purchasing power
differentials can be expressed as
        Var (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k ) ≡ Var (it ,k − it*,k ) + Var ( ∆ st ,k ) − 2Cov (it ,k − it*,k , ∆ st ,k )         (13)

and
        Var (π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k ) ≡ Var (π t ,k − π t*,k ) + Var ( ∆ st ,k ) − 2Cov (π t ,k − π t*,k , ∆ st ,k )   (14)

Equations (12), (13) and (14) allow us to assess the roles of nominal interest rates, exchange rate
changes, relative inflation rates, and their comovements on deviations from the parities.
        The decomposition results based on (12), (13), and (14) are presented in Table 6. For real
interest differentials the Japan/PRC pair has the smallest variance while the Taiwan/PRC pair has
the largest one. The relative contributions of uncovered interest dis-parity and relative
purchasing power dis-parity are different across these economy-pairs. The Hong Kong/PRC and
US/PRC pairs are similar – the variances of uncovered interest and relative purchasing power
differentials are smaller than that of real interest differentials. In the case of Hong Kong/PRC,
66.7% of the variation is attributable to relative purchasing power variability and 16.7% to
uncovered interest variability. For the US/PRC real interest differential variance, slightly more
than 90% is attributable to relative purchasing power parity variability and 34% to uncovered
interest variability.
        In contrast, the variances of the Japan/PRC and Taiwan/PRC real interest differentials are
much smaller than those of their components. Specifically, the variances of uncovered interest
and relative purchasing power differentials are at least 40 times larger than the variance of real
interest difference for Japan/PRC and at least 6 times for Taiwan/PRC. A negative comovement
between its two components keeps the variances of real interest differentials of Japan and
Taiwan in the same order of magnitude as those obtaining for the Hong Kong and the US links.
That is, individually, the real interest and relative purchasing power disequilibria between the
PRC, Japan, and Taiwan are large, but they tend to offset each other (though not perfectly) and
result relatively small deviations in the real interest market.18

18
        The results echo the differential series graphed in Figures 2 and 4.


                                                                  15
       The decomposition results for uncovered interest and relative purchasing power
differentials can be summarized quite simply. The variances of the Japan/PRC and Taiwan/PRC
pairs are higher than those of the Hong Kong/PRC and US/PRC pairs. For the two former cases,
exchange rate variation is the main contribution to variability while, for the latter two cases,
relative price and relative interest variations are the main determinants.
       The pattern of results reflects the exchange rate arrangements of these economies. As
already noted, both Hong Kong and the PRC effectively pegged their currencies to the US dollar
during the sample; hence the Chinese exchange rate regimes relative to the US and to Hong
Kong are de facto pegs. In contrast, Taiwan and Japan are best characterized as following a
policy of managed floating. When exchange rates are floating, exchange rate variability accounts
for almost the entire variability of the deviations from parity. The situation is exactly reversed
when the exchange rate is pegged. Thus, the exchange rate arrangement has significant
implications for using these parity conditions as a measure of integration.


4.     The Economic Determinants of Parity Deviations
       To this point, we have discussed the time series behavior of deviations from these three
parity conditions. One drawback of the pure time series approach is that we are unable to
determine whether the decline in the size of the differentials (when it occurs) is due to increasing
integration, or due to convergence in macroeconomic policies. For instance, if uncovered interest
parity does not hold perfectly, then in principle, monetary policies can exert an influence on the
ex ante and ex post deviation from uncovered interest parity.19


4.1    A Regression Equation
       In order to ascertain whether deviations from parity conditions are a function of the
reduction in trade barriers and financial restrictions, we undertake a panel regression analysis.
We posit that financial account restrictions will impede capital flows, thereby allowing greater
scope for deviations from uncovered interest parity. To approximate the degree of financial
account restrictions, we employ the capital control index compiled by Chan-Lee (2002) for the
Asian Development Bank. The index is denoted by KAOPEN j ,t – a large index value means a

low level of capital controls.
19
       See for instance Willett, Keil and Ahn (2002).


                                                 16
        Similarly, we anticipate greater trade barriers would be correlated with greater deviations
from purchasing power parity. Unfortunately, we do not possess good information on the extent
of trade barriers. Many of the existing estimates pertain to points in time. Consequently, we use
trade intensity as a proxy for the amount of arbitrage activity and assume it is negatively related
to trade barriers. More specifically, we adopt:
         TRADE j ,t = ( X PRC , j ,t + M PRC , j ,t ) /( X j ,t + M j ,t + X PRC ,t + M PRC ,t )         (15)

where X PRC , j ,t ( M PRC , j ,t ) is the PRC’s exports to (imports from) economy j, X j ,t ( M j ,t ) is j’s

total exports (imports), and X PRC ,t ( M PRC ,t ) is the PRC’s total exports (imports), all at time t.20

        The factor endowment theory of international trade suggests that convergence of product
prices across economies; either free movement of goods or that of production factors can
enhance, for example, goods market integration. Thus, foreign direct investment (FDI) that
induces factor movements can affect the parity condition.21 For this reason, we include FDI in
the exercise and, specifically, anticipate that a strong FDI link leads to a small relative
purchasing power deviation. The variable FDI j ,t – the economy j’s FDI flow to the PRC in period

t normalized by the PRC’s gross domestic product is used to measure the FDI effect.
        Two other variables reflect the conduct of macroeconomic policies. The first is the
volatility of ex post exchange rate changes; the second the volatility of relative inflation. The
definitions of the differential series offer a clue to the effect of exchange rate movements.
Exchange rates are notoriously difficult to forecast. A priori, one would expect that greater
deviations from ex post uncovered interest parity occur with greater exchange rate volatility. One
possibility is that high ex post exchange rate volatility occurs with large expectation errors,
which affect ex post uncovered interest parity deviations. Also, exchange rate volatility can
influence relative purchasing power parity deviations – exchange rate volatility coupled with
sticky prices are deemed to be a reason why the purchasing power parity does not hold.
        Inflation is not easy to predict and at the same time affects nominal interest rates. We
hypothesize the relative inflation variability can influence uncovered interest differentials via the

20
        The measure has been used in empirical studies of the gravity models of international
trade. See for instance Frankel and Rose (1998).
21
        In other words, FDI is considered as a substitute for goods trade and, hence, induces
relative price convergence between economies. See, for example, Goldberg and Klein (1998,
1999) for empirical evidence.


                                                                17
nominal interest differential and relative purchasing power parity deviations via the relative
inflation term. We use 13-month centered moving variances as proxies of the volatilities of
exchange rate changes and relative inflation. The proxies are denoted by MVS j ,t and MVPj ,t ,

respectively.
        For each of three differential series, we pool the data across the four economy-pairs and
estimate
        ADEV j ,t = c + δ 1 KAOPEN j ,t + δ 2 ln TRADE j ,t + δ 3 ln FDI j .t
                                                                                        (16)
                   + δ 4 MVS j ,t + δ 5 MVPj ,t + u j ,t

where ADEV j ,t is the absolute deviation from a given parity, c is a constant, u j ,t is the

disturbance term, and the other variables are proxy variables described above.


4.2 Empirical Results
        The estimation results are summarized in Table 7. The selected economic variables
explain absolute uncovered interest and relative purchasing power parity differentials quite well
but not absolute real interest differentials. These variables account for only 2.4% of absolute real
interest differential variation but over 30% of variations in the other two series. Indeed, none of
the economic variables is significant in the absolute real interest differential regression.
        The capital control index KAOPEN j ,t has the expected negative effect on all three

absolute differential series. However, only the two coefficients from the absolute uncovered
interest and relative purchasing power parity differential equations are statistically significant.
Although slightly counterintuitive, it is not too surprising to observe a significant capital control
effect on deviations from relative purchasing power parity since capital controls usually
accompany trade impediments. The regression results confirm that a low level of capital controls
facilitates integration.22
        The effect of the trade variable TRADE j ,t is difficult to interpret. Specifically, this

variable has an unexpected positive effect on the three differential series. While the trade
variable is insignificant in two series, it is significant for absolute relative purchasing power

22
       Note that statistical significance is evaluated using robust standard errors. The least
absolute deviation (LAD) approach was also used to assess the capital control effect. Under
LAD, KAOPEN has a significant negative effect on absolute real interest differentials though
there was no improvement in the adjusted R-squared.


                                                           18
parity differentials. We do not have an explanation for the results. Other measures of trade
intensity were also explored but did not change the results. Nonetheless, it is noted that in
studying the effect of trade on purchasing power parity deviations, Campa and Wolf (1997) also
find a similar trade variable to have a positive effect on parity differentials. In our context, the
trade variable may not be a good proxy for (the absence) of trade barriers.
       The effects of the FDI and exchange rate volatility variables, FDI j ,t and MVS j ,t , are

significant and with the expected signs for absolute uncovered interest and absolute relative
purchasing power parity differentials but are statistically insignificant for absolute real interest
differentials. The significant FDI effect is negative; indicating small dis-parity is associated with
a high level of FDI. FDI flows facilitate movements of financial and physical capitals and, thus,
narrow gaps in uncovered interest and relative purchasing power parities. On the other hand, the
significant exchange rate volatility effect is positive – a result in accordance with the assertion
that high ex post exchange rate volatility can lead to large uncovered interest and relative
purchasing power differentials.
       Unlike exchange rate volatility, the other policy variable - relative inflation volatility
MVPj ,t , has very limited effect on the differential series under investigation. Indeed, for all the

three differential series, the estimates of the MVPj ,t coefficient are both small and statistically

insignificant. Since the exchange rate is more volatile than inflation in several cases, the
relatively low variability of inflation may contribute to the lack of significant results.
       Overall, the ability of the selected economic variables to explain the behavior of
deviations from parities is mixed.23 While they explain about one third of the variations in
absolute uncovered interest and absolute relative purchasing power parity differentials, they offer
little help in explaining movements in absolute real interest differentials. The trade variable tends
to have the wrong sign and the relative inflation variance variable is not significant. On the other
hand, the capital controls, FDI, and exchange rate volatility variables have the expected sign
when they are significant. Thus, given the exploratory nature of the exercise, the results are quite
encouraging.


23
       We also considered samples consist of observations from only Hong Kong/PRC and
Taiwan/PRC and from only Japan/PRC and US/PRC. The regression results are qualitatively the
same as those reported.


                                                  19
5.     Concluding Remarks
       The integration of the PRC into the world economy has preoccupied business leaders and
policy makers alike. There is a plethora of evidence that flows of capital and goods to and from
the PRC are increasing rapidly. This study has undertaken a price-based (prices of goods, prices
of assets) assessment of the degree of integration. We consider three parity conditions, based on
economic theory. They include real interest parity as an indicator of "real" capital mobility,
uncovered interest parities for assessing financial capital mobility, and deviations from relative
purchasing power parity for measuring goods market integration. We find, to varying degrees,
that the long-run version of the three parity conditions hold between the PRC and the other
Greater China economies as well as its major trading partner – Japan and the US. On the other
hand, the data do not in general satisfy the short-run parity conditions and we can conclude that
the markets are not completely efficient.
       In comparing the levels of integration between the PRC and the two other Greater China
economies (Hong Kong and Taiwan) and the two other non-Greater China economies (Japan and
the US), there is no substantial evidence that the integration among the Greater China economies
is stronger than that between the PRC and the non-Greater China economies. In general, Hong
Kong appears to have an advanced level of integration with the PRC. On the other hand, the
PRC’s link with Taiwan, another Greater China economy, is no stronger than those with Japan
and the US. The contrasting results for Hong Kong and Taiwan suggest that, during the sample
period, integration with the PRC is not necessary an intrinsic characteristics of a Greater China
economy. In addition, we observe that the exchange rate regime choice has substantial
implications for the results regarding financial and goods market integration. A de facto fixed
exchange rate arrangement is associated with strong evidence of integration while weak
integration tends to occur with a flexible rate arrangement. A similar finding does not apply to
the composite integration criterion corresponding to real interest parity. We conjecture that this is
because the large expectational errors associated with floating exchange rates do not directly
enter into this parity condition.
       Even though the statistical results offer some evidence of integration, we recognize that
there are non-negligible restrictions on both physical and financial flows between the PRC and
other economies. Recent developments are, however, quite promising. For instance, the PRC’s
current efforts to promote trade with other East Asian economies and scheduled removal of trade



                                                 20
barriers associated with joining the WTO suggest that the process of integrating the PRC into the
world economy will continue.
       One interesting aspect of this study is that we not only find increasing convergence in the
three parities, we also empirically identify several regulatory and economic policy factors that
determine the process of convergence. Specifically, proxies for capital controls, trade intensity,
FDI, and exchange rate volatility are found to be significant factors though the trade intensity
variable has the wrong sign. The results are quite positive given the exiguity of quality data on
these regulatory and administrative variables. Nonetheless, we believe that additional analyses
using different criteria of integration and alternative measures of regulatory and economic policy
factors can offer valuable and complementary insights on integration between the PRC and other
economies. 24
       We also confirm results found elsewhere in the international finance literature – namely
that deviations from parity conditions depend upon the regime. When the exchange rate is
effectively pegged, then the variability of the shocks to relative purchasing power parity is on the
same order as those to real interest parity. In contrast, when exchange rates are (managed)
floating, the shocks to relative purchasing power parity are on the same order as those to
uncovered interest parity. This suggests that the size of the relative purchasing power parity
perturbations is a function of the exchange rate regime the PRC has maintained since 1994. As
the PRC moves toward currency convertibility, it is likely that over the intermediate run, some
form of managed float will likely be implemented. The variability of the deviations from relative
PPP, and hence real interest parity, will likely depend on how the PRC manages its
macroeconomy, and in particular, how it deals with the contingent liabilities of the banking
sector and the pension system.




24
        The concept of integration is difficult to define and measure precisely. Other approaches
to assess integration include a) measuring trade linkages, b) comparing the expected yields on
similar assets in different economies, and c) evaluating the correlation of (output) shocks across
economies and the relative contributions of common and economy-specific shocks to output
variations.


                                                21
Data Appendix
       The interest rate and price data are collected from four sources – Bloomberg Financial
Services, CEIC database, International Financial Statistics, and the Hong Kong Monetary
Authority. The monthly series retrieved from Bloomberg is the PRC one-month interbank offer
rate. The monthly series retrieved from CEIC are the Hong Kong one-month interbank offer rate,
the Taiwan one-month interbank offer rate, the Taiwan–US exchange rate, the Hong Kong
consumer price index, and the Taiwan consumer price index. The Taiwan interest rate is the
middle rate given by a simple average of the high and low rates. The monthly series from
International Financial Statistics are dollar-based exchange rates of Hong Kong dollar and China
yuan. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority provided the PRC consumer price series.
       The sample period is from February 1996 to June 2002. The X-12 routine (with
multiplicative factors on the levels) was used to seasonally adjust all the price series. The
Japanese CPI series also had an adjustment for the imposition of new taxes in April 1997.
       In section 4, the capital control data were obtained from James Chan-Lee, and are
described in Chan-Lee (2002). These indices were tabulated using the criteria and methodology
of Quinn (1997); the recorded degree of restrictiveness is based on a reading of the regulations in
place. Higher values indicate less restrictiveness. Values for 2001 were assumed to equal the
2000 values for all cases except Taiwan, which uses the preliminary value assigned. In
constructing the trade variable, the data on imports and exports are extracted from the Direction
of Trade Statistics for all economies but Taiwan. The Taiwan data are provided by the Board of
Foreign Trade of Taiwan at their website. The FDI data are obtained from the CEIC database.
The 13-month centered moving variances of exchange rate changes and inflations rates are
calculated using the consumer price and exchange rate data described above.




                                                 22
References
Campa, Jose M. and Holger C. Wolf, 1997, “Is Real Exchange Rate Mean Reversion Caused By
       Arbitrage?” NBER Working Paper #6162.
Chan-Lee, James, 2002, “Beyond Sequencing: What does a risk-based analysis of core
       institutions, domestic financial and capital account liberalization reveal about systemic
       risk in Asian Emerging Market Economies?” ADBI Research Paper No.46 (Asian
       Development Bank Institute, November).
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie Chinn and Eiji Fujii, 2003, “China, Hong Kong and Taiwan: Real
       and Financial Integration,” CESifo Working Paper #851; forthcoming, China Economic
       Review.
Chinn, Menzie and Jeffrey Frankel, 1994, “Financial Links around the Pacific Rim: 1982-1992,”
       in R. Glick and M. Hutchison (editors), Exchange Rate Policy and Interdependence:
       Perspective from the Pacific Basin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press): 17-26.
The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2003, Country Report March 2003 – China, (London, UK: The
       Economist Intelligence Unit Limited)
Cumby, Robert E. and Frederick S. Mishkin, 1986, “The International Linkage of Real Interest
       Rates: The European-U.S. Connection,” Journal of International Money and Finance 5:
       5-23.
Cumby, Robert E. and Maurice Obstfeld, 1984, “International Interest Rate and Price Level
       Linkages under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of Recent Evidence,” in J. F. O.
       Bilson and R. C. Marston (editors) Exchange rate Theory and Practice (University of
       Chicago Press, Chicago, IL): 121-151.
Elliott, Graham, Thomas J. Rothenberg, and James H. Stock, 1996, “Efficient Tests for an
       Autoregressive Unit Root,” Econometrica, 64: 813-836.
Fernald, John, Hali Edison, and Prakash Loungani, 1999, “Was China the First Domino?
       Assessing Links between China and Other Asian Economies,” Journal of International
       Money and Finance 18: 515-535.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1991, “Quantifying International Capital Mobility,” in D. Bernheim and J.
       Shoven (editors), National Saving and Economic Performance (Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press): 227-260.




                                               23
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Kenneth A. Froot, 1997, “Using Survey Data to Test Standard
       Propositions Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations, American Economic Review 77,
       133-153.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew Rose, 1998, “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area
       Criteria,” Economic Journal 108, 1009-1025.
Goldberg, Linda S. and Michael W. Klein, 1998, “Foreign Direct Investment, Trade and Real
       Exchange Rate Linkages in Developing Countries,” in G. Reuven (editor) Managing
       Capital Flows and Exchange Rates: Perspectives from the Pacific Basin (Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press): 73-100.
Goldberg, Linda S. and Michael W. Klein, 1999, “International Trade and Factor Mobility: An
       Empirical Investigation,” NBER Working Paper #7196.
Ha, Jiming, and Kelvin Fan, 2002, “Price Convergence Between Hong Kong and the Mainland,”
       Research Memorandum, Hong Kong Monetary Authority.
Harding, Harry, 1995, “The Concept of ‘Greater China’: Themes, Variations and Reservations’
       in Shambaugh, Davis (ed), Greater China: The Next Superpower? Oxford: Clarendon,
       pp. 8-34.
Li, Yang and Xingyun Peng, 2002, “The Money Market in China: Theory and Practice,” China
       and the World Economy 10: 3-10.
Ma, Jun, 2001, “Quantifying the Effect of China’s WTO Entry,” Global Markets Research
       (Hong Kong: DeutscheBank, December).
Mark, Nelson, 1985, “Some Evidence on the International Inequality of Real Interest Rates,”
       Journal of International Money and Finance 4: 189-208.
Mishkin, Frederick S., 1984, “Are Real Interest Rates Equal Across Countries? An Empirical
       Investigation of International Parity Conditions,” Journal of Finance 39: 1345-1357.
Naughton, Barry (ed.), 1997, China Circle: Economics & Technology in the PRC, Taiwan, &
       Hong Kong, (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution).
Noland, Marcus, LiGang Liu, Sherman Robinson, and Zhi Wang, 1998, Global Economic Effects
       of the Asian Currency Devaluations, Policy Analyses in International Economics 56
       (Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics).
Quinn, Dennis, 1997, “The correlates of change in international financial regulation," American
       Political Science Review 91(3): 531-551.



                                               24
Roll, Richard, 1979, “Violations of Purchasing Power Parity and their Implications for Efficient
       International Commodity Markets,” in M. Sarnat and G.P. Szego (editors), International
       Finance and Trade (Ballinger Publishing: Cambridge, MA.): 133-176.
Shellekens, Philip, 2002, “Deflation in Hong Kong, SAR,” People’s Republic of China – Hong
       Kong Special Administrative Region: Selected Issues, IMF Country Report 02/99 (IMF:
       Washington, DC, May).
Wang, Zhi, 2001, “The Impact of China’s WTO Accession on Patterns of World Trade,” Paper
       presented at ASSA Annual Meeting in Atlanta Georgia, January 4-6, 2002.
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Jeffrey Frankel, 1994, “A ‘Greater China’ Trade Bloc?” China Economic
       Review 5: 179-190.
Wei, Shang-Jin, Ligang Liu, Zhi Wang and Wing T. Woo, 2000, “The China Money Puzzle:
       Will Devaluation of the Yuan Help or Hurt the Hong Kong Dollar? China Economic
       Review 11: 171-188.
Willett, Thomas D, Manfred W. Keil and Young-Seok Ahn, 2002, “Capital Mobility for
       Developing Countries May Not Be So High,” Journal of Development Economics 68(2):
       421-34.
Xie, Duo, 2002, “Analysis of the Development of China’s Money Market,” China and the World
       Economy 10: 29-37




                                               25
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
                             Hong Kong/PRC       Taiwan/PRC            US/PRC             Japan/PRC
A. Real interest differentials
    Mean                          -0.178               -1.847         -3.245**             -5.289**
    Maximum                      21.260               19.427           11.056               8.363
    Minimum                      -20.899              -43.994          -20.383             -16.633
    Variance                     86.818               114.100          41.161               40.912
B. Uncovered interest differentials
    Mean                         -1.276**             -7.274*         -1.718**            -17.382**
    Maximum                       9.787               51.813            4.434               79.034
    Minimum                       -9.150              -160.383          -8.377             -128.787
    Variance                     14.349               714.270          13.964              1744.785
C. Deviations from relative purchasing power parity

    Mean                          1.097                5.426#          -1.527*             12.092*
    Maximum                      22.701               166.622          14.797              130.708
    Minimum                      -16.187              -62.297          -18.703             -87.654
    Variance                     57.931               782.878          37.988              1788.675


Notes: The real interest differentials, uncovered interest differentials, and deviations from relative
purchasing power parity are all annualized and measured in percentage terms. The economy-pairs
are labeled in the first row. “**,” “*,” and “#” indicate that the sample mean is significantly
different from zero at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.
Table 2. Real Interest Differentials
                              Hong Kong/PRC             Taiwan/PRC                US/PRC                 Japan/PRC
A. Unit root test satistics
  ADF-GLSμ                      -3.626* [3]             -2.358* [6]              -3.195* [4]             -2.436* [4]
        Q(6)                      10.067                  0.642                    0.385                   0.957
        Q(12)                     17.192                  3.967                    16.055                  10.715
  ADF-GLSτ                      -7.187* [1]             -4.996* [5]              -6.684* [1]             -7.145* [1]
        Q(6)                      8.442                   10.574                   5.402                   6.532
        Q(12)                     13.866                  15.265                   16.088                  13.956
B. Persistence
  AR(1)                          0.270*                   -0.231*                 0.241*                   0.168
                                 (0.120)                  (0.107)                 (0.121)                 (0.117)
  AR(2)                          0.250*                   -0.175                  -0.118                   0.080
                                 (0.121)                  (0.111)                 (0.125)                 (0.120)
  AR(3)                          -0.063                   -0.053                   0.068                   0.035
                                 (0.120)                 (0.113)                  (0.126)                 (0.120)
  AR(4)                             -                     -0.001                   0.171                  0.285*
                                                         (0.113)                  (0.125)                 (0.120)
  AR(5)                              -                     0.136                     -                       -
                                                         (0.111)
  AR(6)                              -                   0.420**                      -                       -
                                                         (0.108)
  Adjusted R2                     0.124                    0.192                   0.045                   0.103
C. Trends in annual absolute averages
  Individual                     -0.484#                  -0.471                  -0.277                  -0.961*
                                 (0.208)                  (0.283)                 (0.166)                 (0.334)
  Group                                       -0.478*                                          -0.619*
                                              (0.162)                                          (0.219)
  Common                                                              -0.548**
                                                                       (0.128)

Notes: Results on the properties of real interest differentials are presented. The economy-pairs are
labeled in the first row. Panel A gives the ADF-GLSτ and ADF-GLSµ unit root test results. Levels
of significance are determined using finite sample critical values (Cheung and Lai, 1995). Figures in
square brackets are lag parameters selected by the Bayesian information criterion. Q(6) and Q(12)
are the Box-Ljung Q-statistics based on the first six and twelve autocorrelations of the estimated
residuals. Panel B gives the persistence of real interest differentials estimated from equation (9).
Panel C gives the common and economy-pair (individual) specific trend estimates of the annual
average of absolute real interest differentials (equation (11)). Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. Significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels are indicated
by “**,” “*,” and “#,” respectively.
Table 3. Uncovered Interest Differentials
                               Hong Kong/PRC             Taiwan/PRC              US/PRC                 Japan/PRC
A. Unit root test statistics
  ADF-GLSμ                       -2.126* [5]             -7.019* [1]             -1.698 [3]             -8.344* [1]
        Q(6)                       5.554                   10.304                  3.748                  6.429
        Q(12)                      10.670                  18.275                 14.363                  14.396
                                       #
  ADF-GLSτ                       -2.808 [2]              -4.892* [2]             -1.263 [3]             -8.794* [1]
        Q(6)                       9.457                   8.471                   3.534                  6.648
        Q(12)                      17.473                  18.375                 14.266                  12.773
B. Persistence
  AR(1)                           0.429**                   0.189                0.384**                 -0.022
                                  (0.118)                  (0.115)               (0.115)                 (0.118)
  AR(2)                            0.137                      -                   0.268*                     -
                                  (0.129)                                         (0.119)
  AR(3)                            0.070                      -                   0.270*                     -
                                  (0.130)                                         (0.112)
  AR(4)                           -0.073                      -                      -                       -
                                  (0.129)
  AR(5)                           0.282*                      -                      -                       -
                                  (0.115)
  Adjusted R2                      0.620                   0.022                   0.829                  -0.013
C. Trends in annual absolute averages
  Individual                      -0.950*                  -1. 760                -1.005*                -0.429
                                  (0.299)                  (2.448)                (0.282)                (1.902)
  Group                                        -1.355                                         -0.717
                                               (1.292)                                        (0.790)
  Common                                                                -1.036
                                                                       (0.725)

Notes: Results on the properties of uncovered interest differentials are presented. The economy-
pairs are labeled in the first row. Panel A gives the ADF-GLSτ and ADF-GLSµ unit root test results.
Levels of significance are determined using finite sample critical values (Cheung and Lai, 1995).
Figures in square brackets are lag parameters selected by the Bayesian information criterion. Q(6)
and Q(12) are the Box-Ljung Q-statistics based on the first six and twelve autocorrelations of the
estimated residuals. Panel B gives the persistence of real interest differentials estimated from
equation (9). Panel C gives the common and economy-pair (individual) specific trend estimates of
the annual average of absolute real interest differentials (equation (11)). Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. Significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels are
indicated by “**,” “*,” and “#,” respectively.
  Table 4. Deviations from Relative Purchasing Power Parity
                               Hong Kong/PRC             Taiwan/PRC               US/PRC                 Japan/PRC
A. Unit root test statistics
  ADF-GLSμ                       -7.802* [1]             -7.568* [1]             -2.173* [4]             -3.291* [3]
        Q(6)                       10.144                  4.479                   1.126                   3.897
        Q(12)                      14.180                  17.802                  18.415                  12.809
                                                                                       #
  ADF-GLSτ                       -8.025* [1]             -4.069* [4]             -2.810 [6]              -8.602* [1]
        Q(6)                       7.455                   0.868                   0.421                   5.737
        Q(12)                      9.574                   15.862                  17.863                  13.984
B. Persistence
  AR(1)                            0.094                    0.115                  0.123                  -0.046
                                  (0.116)                  (0.116)                (0.118)                 (0.120)
  AR(2)                               -                       -                   -0.209#                 -0.102
                                                                                  (0.114)                 (0.121)
  AR(3)                               -                       -                    0.031                   0.118
                                                                                  (0.116)                 (0.121)
  AR(4)                               -                       -                    0.175                     -
                                                                                  (0.116)
  Adjusted R2                      -0.004                  -0.002                  0.043                   -0.013
C. Trends in annual absolute averages
  Individual                       0.025                   -1.199                  0.264                   0.775
                                  (0.160)                  (1.838)                (0.222)                 (1.580)
  Group                                        -0.586                                           0.519
                                               (0.914)                                         (0.672)
  Common                                                                -0.033
                                                                       (0.561)

Notes: Results on the properties of relative purchasing power parity differentials are presented. The
economy-pairs are labeled in the first row. Panel A gives the ADF-GLSτ and ADF-GLSµ unit root
test results. Levels of significance are determined using finite sample critical values (Cheung and
Lai, 1995). Figures in square brackets are lag parameters selected by the Bayesian information
criterion. Q(6) and Q(12) are the Box-Ljung Q-statistics based on the first six and twelve
autocorrelations of the estimated residuals. Panel B gives the persistence of real interest differentials
estimated from equation (9). Panel C gives the common and economy-pair (individual) specific
trend estimates of the annual average of absolute real interest differentials (equation (11)). Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses underneath coefficient estimates. Significance at the 1, 5
and 10% levels are indicated by “**,” “*,” and “#,” respectively.
Table 5. Summary of the Parity Conditions

                                   HongKong/PRC           Taiwan/PRC         US/PRC         Japan/PRC

A. Real Interest Parity
    Stationarity                       yes                   yes              yes              yes
    Short-Run Persistence              yes                   yes              yes              yes
    Declining Trend - individual        no                    no               no              yes
                     - group                     no                                   yes
                     - common                                          yes

B. Uncovered Interest Parity
    Stationarity                       yes                   yes              yes1             yes
    Short-Run Persistence              yes                    no              yes              no
    Declining Trend - individual       yes                    no              yes              no
                     - group                     no                                   no
                     - common                                          no

C. Relative Purchasing Power Parity
    Stationarity                       yes                   yes              yes              yes
    Short-Run Persistence               no                    no              yes              no
                                             1
    Declining Trend - individual       yes                    no               no              no
                                                      1
                     - group                     yes                                  no
                     - common                                          no


Note: The table summarizes the test results reported in Tables 2, 3, and 4. The rows labeled
“Stationarity,” “Short-Run Persistence,” and “Declining Trend” correspond to the “Unit root test
statistics,” “Persistence,” and “Trends in absolute annual averages” presented in the preceding
tables.
    1.       The result allowing for the 1997 dummy variable as discussed in the text.
    2.       The result based on the extended sample discussed in the text.
     Table 6. Decomposition of Parity Differential Variances

                                   Hong Kong /PRC                 Taiwan/PRC           US/PRC                  Japan/PRC
A. Var(RID)                               86.818                   114.100              41.161                    40.912
        % Var(UID)                        16.528                   626.002              33.925                   4264.629
        % Var(RPD)                        66.726                   686.132              92.290                   4371.903
        % -2Cov                           16.744                   -1212.134           -26.215                  -8536.533


B. Var(UID)                               14.349                   714.270              13.964                   1744.785
        % Var(i-i*)                       95.286                     1.303              93.945                     0.746
        % Var(Δs)                          3.791                    97.400              0.955                     96.635
        % -2Cov                            0.922                     1.295              5.099                      2.617


C.    Var(RPD)                            57.931                   782.878              37.988                   1788.675
        % Var(Δp-Δp*)                     98.950                    14.086              99.674                     1.881
        % Var(∆s)                          0.939                    88.864              0.351                     94.497
        % -2Cov                            0.110                    -2.950              -0.025                     3.621

Notes: The economy-pairs are labeled in the first row. Panel A gives the variance of real interest
differentials and its components according to
Var (rt ,k − rt*,k ) ≡ Var (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k ) + Var (π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k )
− 2Cov (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k , π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k ) .
“Var(RID)” gives Var (rt ,k − rt*,k ) , “% Var(UID)” gives the percentage contribution of
Var (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k ) , “% Var(RPD)” gives the percentage contribution of Var (π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k ) ,
and “% -2Cov” gives the percentage contribution of the covariance term.
           Panel B gives the variance of real interest differentials and its components according to
Var (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k ) ≡ Var (it ,k − it*,k ) + Var ( ∆ st ,k ) − 2Cov (it ,k − it*,k , ∆ st ,k ) . “Var(UID)” gives
Var (it ,k − it*,k − ∆ st ,k ) , “% Var(i-i*)” gives the percentage contribution of Var (it ,k − it*,k ) , “% Var(Δ
s)” gives the percentage contribution of Var ( ∆ st ,k ) , and “% -2Cov” gives the percentage
contribution of the covariance term.
       Panel C gives the variance of relative purchasing power parity differentials and its
components according to Var (π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k ) ≡ Var (π t ,k − π t*,k ) + Var ( ∆ st ,k )
− 2Cov (π t ,k − π t*,k , ∆ st ,k ) . “Var(RPD)” gives Var (π t ,k − π t*,k − ∆ st ,k ) , “% Var(Δp-Δp*)” gives the
percentage contribution of Var (π t ,k − π t*,k ) , “% Var(∆s)” gives the percentage contribution of
Var ( ∆ st ,k ) , and “% -2Cov” gives the percentage contribution of the covariance term.
  Table 7. Panel Regression Results on the Absolute Deviations from the Parity Conditions

                                                       Dependent Variable

                             Absolute Real Interest     Absolute Uncovered         Absolute Relative
                                 Differentials          Interest Differentials     Purchasing Power
                                                                                     Differentials
    KAOPEN j ,t                      -1.062                    -6.378#                 -6.579*
                                    (1.267)                    (3.283)                  (3.242)
    TRADE j ,t                       0.496                      5.718                   7.988*
                                    (0.815)                    (3.928)                  (3.854)
    FDI j ,t                         0.709                     -3.046#                  -3.363*
                                    (0.480)                    (1.553)                  (1.492)

    MVS j ,t                         0.000                    0.013**                   0.011**
                                    (0.000)                   (0.002)                   (0.002)
    MVPj ,t                          0.020                     -0.008                    0.050
                                    (0.022)                    (0.027)                  (0.031)
    Constant                        15.533                     30.555                   36.198
                                    (7.948)                   (20.218)                 (20.225)
    Adjusted R2                      0.024                      0.368                    0.331



Notes: Absolute deviations from real interest parity, uncovered interest parity, and relative
purchasing power parity are regressed on the variables listed in the first column using panel data
with j = Hong Kong, Taiwan, the U.S., and Japan. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are
provided in the parentheses. “**,” “*,” and “#” indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10%
levels, respectively.
Figure 1. Deviations from the parity conditions between Hong Kong and PRC

   25

   20

   15

   10

    5

    0

   -5

  -10

  -15

  -20

  -25
        Jan-96
                 M ay-96
                           S ep-96
                                     Jan-97
                                              M ay-97
                                                        S ep-97
                                                                  Jan-98
                                                                           M ay-98
                                                                                     S ep-98
                                                                                               Jan-99
                                                                                                        M ay-99
                                                                                                                   S ep-99
                                                                                                                             Jan-00
                                                                                                                                      M ay-00
                                                                                                                                                S ep-00
                                                                                                                                                          Jan-01
                                                                                                                                                                   M ay-01
                                                                                                                                                                             S ep-01
                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                M ay-02
                           R ealinterest differentials                                                            U ncovered interest differentials
                           R elative P P P deviations
Figure 2. Deviations from the parity conditions between Taiwan and PRC

   200

   150

   100

    50

      0

   -50

  -100

  -150

  -200
          Jan-96
                   M ay-96
                             S ep-96
                                       Jan-97
                                                M ay-97
                                                          S ep-97
                                                                    Jan-98
                                                                             M ay-98
                                                                                       S ep-98
                                                                                                 Jan-99
                                                                                                          M ay-99
                                                                                                                     S ep-99
                                                                                                                               Jan-00
                                                                                                                                        M ay-00
                                                                                                                                                  S ep-00
                                                                                                                                                            Jan-01
                                                                                                                                                                     M ay-01
                                                                                                                                                                               S ep-01
                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                  M ay-02
                              R ealinterest differentials                                                           U ncovered interest differentials
                              R elative P P P deviations
Figure 3. Deviations from the parity conditions between U.S. and PRC

   20

   15

   10

     5

     0

   -5

  -10

  -15

  -20

  -25
         Jan-96
                  M ay-96
                            S ep-96
                                      Jan-97
                                               M ay-97
                                                         S ep-97
                                                                   Jan-98
                                                                            M ay-98
                                                                                      S ep-98
                                                                                                Jan-99
                                                                                                         M ay-99
                                                                                                                   S ep-99
                                                                                                                             Jan-00
                                                                                                                                      M ay-00
                                                                                                                                                S ep-00
                                                                                                                                                          Jan-01
                                                                                                                                                                   M ay-01
                                                                                                                                                                             S ep-01
                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                M ay-02
                               R ealinterest differentials                                                         U ncovered interest differentials
                               R elative P P P deviations
Figure 4. Deviations from the parity conditions between Japan and PRC

   200

   150

   100

    50

      0

   -50

  -100

  -150

  -200
          Jan-96
                   M ay-96
                             S ep-96
                                       Jan-97
                                                M ay-97
                                                          S ep-97
                                                                    Jan-98
                                                                             M ay-98
                                                                                       S ep-98
                                                                                                 Jan-99
                                                                                                          M ay-99
                                                                                                                    S ep-99
                                                                                                                              Jan-00
                                                                                                                                       M ay-00
                                                                                                                                                 S ep-00
                                                                                                                                                           Jan-01
                                                                                                                                                                    M ay-01
                                                                                                                                                                              S ep-01
                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                 M ay-02
                               R ealinterest differentials                                                          U ncovered interest differentials
                               R elative P P P deviations
