                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              HOW TO DISCOUNT CASHFLOWS
                          WITH TIME-VARYING EXPECTED RETURNS

                                                Andrew Ang
                                                  Jun Liu

                                           Working Paper 10042
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10042


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2003




The authors would like to thank Michael Brandt, Michael Brennan, Bob Dittmar, John Graham, Bruce
Grundy, Ravi Jagannathan, and seminar participants at the Australian Graduate School of Management,
Columbia University, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve and Melbourne Business School for
comments. We thank Geert Bekaert and Zhenyu Wang for helpful suggestions and especially thank Yuhang
Xing for constructing some of the data. We thank Rick Green (the editor) and we are grateful to an
anonymous referee for helpful comments that greatly improved the paper. The authors acknowledge funding
from an INQUIRE UK grant. This article represents the views of the authors and not of INQUIRE. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Andrew Ang and Jun Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How to Discount Cashflows with Time-Varying Expected Returns
Andrew Ang and Jun Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 10042
October 2003
JEL No. E43, G12

                                           ABSTRACT

While many studies document that the market risk premium is predictable and that betas are not
constant, the dividend discount model ignores time-varying risk premiums and betas. We develop
a model to consistently value cashflows with changing risk-free rates, predictable risk premiums and
conditional betas in the context of a conditional CAPM. Practical valuation is accomplished with
an analytic term structure of discount rates, with different discount rates applied to expected
cashflows at different horizons. Using constant discount rates can produce large mis-valuations,
which, in portfolio data, are mostly driven at short horizons by market risk premiums and at long
horizons by time-variation in risk-free rates and factor loadings.


Andrew Ang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
805 Uris
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
aa610@columbia.edu

Jun Liu
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
jliu@anderson.ucla.edu
   To determine an appropriate discount rate for valuing cashflows, a manager is confronted by
three major problems: the market risk premium must be estimated, an appropriate risk-free rate
must be chosen and the beta of the project or company must be determined. All three of these
inputs into a standard CAPM are not constant. Furthermore, cashflows may co-vary with the
risk premium, betas or other predictive state variables. A standard Dividend Discount Model
(DDM) cannot handle dynamic betas, risk premiums or risk-free rates because in this valuation
method, future expected cashflows are valued at constant discount rates.
   In this paper, we present an analytical methodology for valuing stochastic cashflows that
are correlated with risk premiums, risk-free rates and time-varying betas. All these effects are
important. First, the market risk premium is not constant. Fama and French (2002) argue that
the risk premium moved to around 2% at the turn of the century from 7-8% twenty years earlier.
Jagannathan, McGratten and Scherbina (2001) also argue that the market ex-ante risk premium
is time-varying and fell during the late 1990’s. Furthermore, a large literature claims that a
number of predictor variables, including dividend yields (Campbell and Shiller (1988a and b)),
risk-free rates (Fama and Schwert (1977)), term spreads (Campbell (1987)), default spreads
(Keim and Stambaugh (1986)), and consumption-asset-labor deviations (Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001)), have forecasting power for market excess returns.
   Second, the CAPM assumes that the riskless rate is the appropriate 1-period, or instanta-
neous, riskless rate, which in practice is typically proxied by a 1-month or a 3-month T-bill
return. However, it is highly unlikely that over the long horizons of many corporate capital
budgeting problems that the riskless rate remains constant. Since the total expected return
comprises both a risk-free rate and a risk premium, adjusted by a factor loading, time-varying
risk-free rates imply that total expected returns also change through time. Note that even an
investor who believes that the expected market excess return is constant, and a project’s beta is
constant, still faces stochastic total expected returns as short rates move over time.
   Finally, as companies grow, merge or invest in new projects, their risk profiles change. It
is quite feasible that a company’s beta changes even in short intervals, and is very likely to
change over 10 or 20 year horizons. There is substantial variation in factor loadings even for
portfolios of stocks, for example industry portfolios (Fama and French (1997)) and portfolios
sorted by size and book-to-market (Ferson and Harvey (1999)). The popularity of multifactor
models for computing unconditional expected returns (for example, Fama and French (1993))
may reflect time-varying betas and conditional market risk premiums in a conditional CAPM
(see Jagannathan and Wang (1996)).
   This paper presents, to our knowledge, the first analytic, tractable method of discounting
cashflows that embeds the effects of changing market risk premiums, risk-free rates and time-
varying betas. Previous practice adjusts the DDM by using different regimes of cashflow growth
or expected returns (see Lee, Myers and Swaminathan (1999) for a recent example). These
adjustments are not made in an overall framework and so are subject to Fama (1996)’s critique
of ad-hoc adjustments to cashflows with changing expected returns. In contrast, our valuation
is done in an internally consistent framework.
   Our valuation framework significantly extends the current set of analytic present value mod-
els developed in the affine class (see, among others, Ang and Liu (2001), Bakshi and Chen
(2001) and Bekaert and Grenadier (2001)). If a security’s beta is constant and the market risk
premium is time-varying, then the price of the security would fall into this affine framework.
Similarly, the case of a time-varying beta and a constant market risk premium can also be
handled by an affine model. However, unlike our set-up, the extant class of models cannot si-
multaneously model time-variation in both beta and the market risk premium. This is because
the expected return involves a product of two stochastic, predictable variables (beta multiplied
by the market premium).
   We derive our valuation formula under a very rich set of conditional expected returns. Our
functional form for time-varying expected returns nests the specifications of the conditional
CAPM developed by Harvey (1989), Ferson and Harvey (1991, 1993 and 1999), Cochrane
(1996), Jagannathan and Wang (1996), among others. These studies use instrumental variables
to model the time-variation of betas or market risk premiums. In our framework, short rates
also vary through time. The set-up also incorporates correlation between stochastic cashflows,
betas and risk premiums.
   To adapt our valuation framework to current practice in capital budgeting, we compute
a term structure of discount rates applied to random cashflows. Practical cashflow valuation
separates the problem into two steps: first, estimate the expected future cashflows of a project or
security, and then take their present value, usually by applying a constant discount rate. Instead
of applying a constant discount rate, we compute a series of discount rates, or spot expected
returns, which can be applied to a series of expected cashflows. The model incorporates the
effects of changing market risk premiums, risk-free rates and time-varying betas by specifying
a different discount rate for each different maturity.
   Brennan (1997) also considers the problem of discounting cashflows with time-varying ex-
pected returns and proposes a term structure of discount rates. Our model significantly gen-


                                                 2
eralizes Brennan’s formulation. In his set-up, the beta of the security is constant and only the
risk premium changes. Furthermore, his discount rates can only be computed by simulation and
were not applied to valuing predictable cashflows. In contrast, our discount rates are tractable,
analytic functions of a few state variables known at each point in time. We use this analytic
form to attribute the mis-pricing effects of time-varying discount rates.
   We illustrate a practical application of our theoretical framework by working with cashflows
and expected returns of portfolios sorted by book-to-market ratios and industry portfolios. First,
we compute the term structure of discount rates at the end of our sample, December 2000, for
each portfolio. At this point in time, the term structure of discount rates is upward sloping and
much lower than a constant discount rate computed from the CAPM. Second, we compute the
potential mis-pricing of ignoring the time-variation of expected returns. To focus on the effects
of time-varying discount rates, we compute the value of a perpetuity of an expected cashflow of
$1 received each year using the term structure of discount rates from each portfolio. Ignoring
time-varying expected returns can induce large potential mis-valuations; mis-pricings of over
50% using a traditional DDM are observed.
   To determine the source of the mispiricings, we use our model to decompose the variance of
the spot expected returns into variation due to each of the separate components betas, risk-free
rates and the risk premium. We find that most of the variation is driven by changes in beta and
risk-free rates at long horizons, while it is most important to take into account of the variation
of the risk premium at short horizons.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I presents a model for valuing stochas-
tic cashflows with time-varying expected returns. In Section II we show how to compute the
term structure of discount rates corresponding to our valuation model and derive variance de-
compositions for the discount rates. We apply the model to data, which we describe in Section
III. The empirical results are discussed in Section IV. Section V concludes.



  I. Valuing Cashflows with Time-Varying Expected Returns
In this section, our contribution is to develop a closed-form methodology for computing spot
discount rates in a system which allows for time-varying cashflow growth rates, betas, short
rates and market risk premiums. We begin with the standard definition of a security’s expected
return.
   An asset pricing model specifies the expected return of a security, where the log expected


                                                3
return µt is defined as:1                                ·               ¸
                                                             Pt+1 + Dt+1
                                      exp(µt ) = Et                        ,                                (1)
                                                                  Pt
where Pt is the price and Dt is the cashflow of the security. If, in addition, the cashflow process
Dt is also specified, then the price Pt of the security can be written as:
                                     " ∞ Ãs−1                !       #
                                      X Y
                            Pt = Et              exp(−µt+k ) Dt+s .                                         (2)
                                            s=1    k=0

Equation (2) can be derived by iterating equation (1) and assuming transversality.
      A traditional Gordon-model formula assumes that the expected return is constant, µt = µ̄,
and the expected rate of cashflow growth is also constant:

                               Et [Dt exp(gt+1 )] = Et [Dt+1 ] = Dt exp(ḡ).

In this case, the cashflow effects and the discounting effects can be separated:
                                                    ∞
                                                    X Et [Dt+s ]
                                             Pt =                       .                                   (3)
                                                    s=1
                                                             exp(sµ̄)

This reduces equation (2) to:
                                           X∞
                                      Pt
                                         =     exp(−s · (µ̄ − ḡ))
                                      Dt   j=1
                                                         1
                                            =                      ,
                                                  exp(µ̄ − ḡ) − 1
which is the DDM formula, expressed with continuously compounded returns and growth rates.
      However, as many empirical and theoretical studies suggest, expected returns and cashflow
growth rates are time-varying and correlated. When this is the case, the simple discounting
formula (3) does not hold. In particular, the effect of the cashflow growth rates cannot be
separated from the effect of the time-varying discount rates. We must then evaluate equation
(2) directly. In order to take this expectation, we specify a rich class of conditional expected
returns.
      Consider a conditional log expected return µt specified by a conditional CAPM:

                                             µt = α + rt + βt λt ,                                          (4)

where α is a constant, rt is a risk-free rate, βt is the time-varying beta and λt is the time-
varying market risk premium. In the class of conditional CAPM’s considered by Harvey (1989),
  1
      In equation (1), expected returns are continuously compounded to make the mathematical exposition simpler.

                                                          4
Shanken (1990), Ferson and Harvey (1991 and 1993) and Cochrane (1996), among others, the
time-varying beta or risk premium are parameterized by a set of instruments zt in a linear
fashion. For example, the conditional risk premium can be predicted by zt :
                                           m
                                 λt ≡ Et [yt+1 − rt ] = b0 + b01 zt ,                           (5)
       m
where yt+1 − rt is the log excess return on the market portfolio. Similarly, the conditional beta
can be predicted by zt and past betas:

                                   Et [βt+1 ] = c0 + c01 zt + c2 βt .                           (6)

   The instrumental variables zt may be any variables which predict cashflows, betas or aggre-
gate returns. For example, Harvey (1989) specifies expected returns of securities to be a linear
function of market returns, dividend yields and interest rates. Jagannathan and Wang (1996)
allow for conditional expected market returns to be a function of labor and interest rates. Fer-
son and Harvey (1991 and 1993) allow both time-varying betas and market risk premiums to
be linearly predicted by factors like inflation, interest rates and GDP growth, while Ferson and
Korajzyck (1995) allow time-varying betas in an APT model. In Cochrane (1996), betas can
be considered to be a linear function of several instrumental variables, which also serve as the
conditioning information set.
   To take the expectation (2), we need to know the evolution of the instruments zt , the betas
βt and the cashflows of the security gt , where gt+1 = ln(Dt+1 /Dt ). Suppose we can summarize
these variables by a K ×1 state-vector Xt , where Xt = (gt βt zt0 )0 . The first and second elements
of Xt are cashflow growth and the beta of the asset, respectively, but this ordering is solely for
convenience. Suppose that Xt follows a VAR(1):
                                                               1
                                    Xt = c + ΦXt−1 + Σ 2 ²t ,                                   (7)

where ²t ∼ IID N (0, I). The one-order lag specification of this process is not restrictive, as
additional lags may be added by re-writing the VAR into a companion form. Note that the
instrumental variables zt can predict betas, as well as market risk premiums, through the com-
panion form Φ in (7).
   The following proposition shows how to compute the price of the security (2) in closed
form:

Proposition I.1 Let Xt = (gt βt zt0 )0 , with dimensions K × 1, follow the process in equation
(7). Suppose the log expected return (1) takes the form:

                                    µt = α + ξ 0 Xt + Xt0 ΩXt ,                                 (8)

                                                   5
where α is a constant, ξ is a K × 1 vector and Ω is a symmetric K × K matrix. Then, assuming
existence, the price of the security is given by:
                                     " ∞ Ãs−1               !     #
                                       X Y
                         Pt = Et                 exp(−µt+k ) Dt+s
                                       s=1   k=0
                                 ∞
                                 X
                        Pt
                           =           exp(a(n) + b(n)0 Xt + Xt0 H(n)0 Xt ),                   (9)
                        Dt       n=1

where the coefficients a(n) is a scalar, b(n) is a K × 1 vector and H(n) is a K × K symmetric
matrix. The coefficients a(n), b(n) and H(n) are given by the recursions:
                                                                1
     a(n + 1) = a(n) − α + (e1 + b(n))0 c + c0 H(n)c −            ln det(I − 2ΣH(n))
                                                                2
                     1
                   + (e1 + b(n) + 2H(n)c)0 (Σ−1 − 2H(n))−1 (e1 + b(n) + 2H(n)c)
                     2
      b(n + 1) = −ξ + Φ0 (e1 + b(n)) + 2Φ0 H(n)c
                        +2Φ0 H(n)(Σ−1 − 2H(n))−1 (e1 + b(n) + 2H(n)c)
    H(n + 1) = −Ω + Φ0 H(n)Φ + 2Φ0 H(n)(Σ−1 − 2H(n))−1 H(n)Φ                                  (10)

where e1 represents a vector of zero’s with a 1 in the 1st place and
                                                    1
                                 a(1) = −α + e01 c + e01 Σe1
                                                    2
                                               0
                                 b(1) = −ξ + Φ e1
                                H(1) = −Ω                                                     (11)

   The general formulation of the expected return in equation (8) can be applied to the follow-
ing special cases:

   1. First, the trivial case is that µt = µ̄ is constant, so ξ = Ω = 0, α > 0, giving the standard
      DDM in equation (3).

   2. Second, equation (8) nests a conditional CAPM relation with time-varying betas and short
      rates by specifying zt = rt , the short rate, so Xt = (gt βt rt )0 . The one-period expected
      return follows:
                               µt = α + rt + βt λ̄ = α + (e3 + λ̄e2 )0 Xt ,                   (12)

      where λ̄ is the constant market risk premium and ei represents a vector of zeros with a 1
      in the ith place. Hence, we can set ξ = (e3 + λe2 ) and Ω = 0.



                                                   6
   3. Third, if the market risk premium is predictable but the security or project’s beta is con-
         stant (βt = β̄), then we can specify Xt = (gt rt zt )0 , where zt are predictive instruments
         forecasting the market risk premium:
                                                       m
                                             λt ≡ Et [yt+1 − rt ] = b0 + b01 zt .

         The expected return then becomes:

                                     µt = α + rt + β̄λt = α + (e2 + β̄b1 )0 Xt ,

         so we can set ξ = (e2 + β̄b1 ) and Ω = 0.

   4. Finally, we can accommodate both time-varying betas and risk premiums. If the market
         risk premium λt = b0 + b01 zt and Xt is given by our full specification Xt = (gt βt zt0 )0 ,
         then the conditional expected return can be written as:

                                 µt = α + rt + λt βt = α + rt + b0 βt + βt (b01 zt ).                        (13)

         If rt is included in the instrument set zt , then equation (13) takes the form of equation (8)
         for appropriate choices of ξ and Ω. The quadratic term Ω is now non-zero to reflect the
         interaction term of βt (b01 zt ).

       The quadratic Gaussian structure of the discount rate µt in equation (8) results from mod-
elling the interaction of stochastic betas and stochastic risk premiums. Quadratic Gaussian
models have been used in the finance literature in other applications. For example, Constan-
tinides (1992) and Ahn, Dittmar and Gallant (2002) develop quadratic Gaussian term structure
models. Kim and Omberg (1996), Campbell and Viceira (1999) and Liu (1999), among others,
apply quadratic Gaussian structures in portfolio allocation.
       The pricing formula in equation (9) is analytic because the coefficients a(n), b(n) and H(n)
are known functions and stay constant through time. Prices move because cashflow growth
or state variables affecting expected returns change in Xt . The class of affine present value
models in Ang and Liu (2001), Bakshi and Chen (2001) and Bekaert and Grenadier (2001) only
have the scalar and linear recursions a(n) and b(n). Our model has an additional recursion
for a quadratic term H(n). The extant class of present value models is unable to handle the
interaction between betas and risk premiums. Note that the quadratic H(n) term also affects
the recursions of a(n) and b(n).2
   2
       An alternative approach is taken by Menzly, Santos and Veronesi (2003), who price stocks in a habit economy
by specifying the fraction each asset contributes to total consumption. In contrast, we specify exogenous cashflows
in a way that is easily adaptable to current valuation practice.

                                                          7
       In our analysis, we consider only a CAPM formulation with time-varying betas and time-
varying market risk premiums, but Proposition I.1 is general enough to model time-varying
betas for multiple factors, and time-varying risk premiums for multiple factors. This generalized
setting would include linear multi-factor models, like the Fama and French (1993) three-factor
model. In this case, Xt would now include time-varying betas with respect to each of the factors,
and the instrumental variables zt could predict each of the factor premiums.
       In Proposition I.1, we assume that beta is an exogenous process and solve endogenously for
the price of the security. Using the exogenously specified expected returns and cashflows, we
can construct return series for individual assets and if the number of shares outstanding of each
asset is specified, we can construct the return series of the market portfolio. We can compute the
covariance of an individual stock return and the aggregate market portfolio, and hence compute
the implied beta of the stock from returns. Therefore, beta is both an input to the model and
an output of the model. The beta specified as an input into the VAR in equation (7) and the
resulting beta from the implied returns from Proposition I.1 are not necessarily the same. To
see this, our model assumes that the market return takes the following form:

                                         m
                                        yt+1 − rt = λt (Xt ) + σtm (Xt )vt+1
                                                                         m
                                                                             ,                                       (14)

where λt is the same market risk premium in equation (4). The continuously compounded
returns of security i implied by the prices from Proposition I.1 satisfy:

                            i         1
                           yt+1 − rt + (σti (Xt ))2 = βti (yt+1
                                                            m
                                                                − rt ) + σti (Xt )uit+1 ,                            (15)
                                      2
where 12 (σti (Xt ))2 is the Jensen’s term from working in continuously compounded returns,
 i
yt+1 − rt is the excess return for asset i, and σti (Xt ) is the idiosyncratic volatility of asset i
that depends on state variables.3
       We obtain returns in equation (15) using the relation yt+1 = (1 + Pt+1 /Dt+1 )/(Pt /Dt ) ×
exp(gt+1 ). Heteroskedasticity in returns arises from the non-linear form of equation (9), even
though the driving process for Xt in equation (7) is homoskedastic. The beta βti specified in
                                                  i      m
the VAR in equation (7) is not the same as covt (yt+1 , yt+1 )/(σtm )2 in equation (15). If we also
aggregate the returns of individual stocks by multiplying equation (15) by the market weights ωi
   3
       Equations (14) and (15) represent an arbitrage-free specification, since there is a strictly positive pricing kernel
mt+1 that supports these returns:
                                                     µ                      ¶
                                                        1 λ2t       λt m
                                      mt+1 = Rt−1 exp −           −    v      ,
                                                        2 (σtm )2   σtm t+1

where Rt is the gross risk-free rate Rt = exp(rt ).

                                                             8
of each asset i, we do not obtain equation (14). This is because of the heteroskedastic Jensen’s
term 12 (σti (Xt ))2 introduced by the stock valuation equation (9). However, we would expect the
discrepancy to be small, because σti (Xt )2 in (15) is small.
   The model’s implied beta from returns can be made the same as the model’s beta in the VAR
in three ways. First, we can simply ignore the small Jensen’s term in equation (15). Second,
we can perform a Campbell and Shiller (1988b) log-linearization on the returns implied from
Proposition I.1, equation (9), and then re-write equation (15) using log-linearized returns. Both
of these approximations imply that an asset’s returns satisfy a conditional version of an APT
model, where
                             X                           X
                                  ωi βti = 1   and           ωi σ i uit+1 = 0.
                              i                          i

The second relation is the standard assumption of a factor or APT model. That is, as the number
of assets becomes large, diversification causes idiosyncratic risk to tend to zero.
   Finally, we can change the model specification. Proposition I.1 specifies the log discount
rate to be a quadratic Gaussian process. This ensures that the discount rate is always positive.
Instead, we could work in simple returns, following the conditional CAPM specified by Ferson
and Harvey (1993 and 1999). If we specify the simple discount rate to be a quadratic Gaussian
process, then equation (9) would become the sum of quadratic Gaussian multiplied by exponen-
tial quadratic Gaussian terms, extending Ang and Liu (2001). Then, the implied simple returns
would satisfy equation (15) without the Jensen’s term and the model’s beta used as an input into
the VAR would be consistent with the implied model beta from returns. However, this has the
disadvantage of allowing negative discount rates and does not allow a term structure of discount
rates for valuation to be easily computed (below).
   A final comment is that, like any present value or term structure model, Proposition I.1 has
an implied stochastic singularity. By exogenously specifying a beta, risk premium and risk-free
rate, we specify an expected return. Combined with the cashflow process, this implies a market
valuation that may not equal the observed market price of the stock.



              II. The Term Structure of Expected Returns
Current practical capital budgeting is a two-step procedure. First, managers compute expected
future cashflows Et [Dt+s ] from projections, analysts’ forecasts, or from extrapolation of his-
torical data. A constant discount rate is computed, usually using the CAPM (see Graham and
Harvey (2001)). The second step is to discount expected cashflows using this discount rate. The

                                                     9
DDM allows this separation of cashflows and discount rates only because expected returns are
assumed to be constant.
    Although Proposition I.1 allows us to value stochastic cashflows with time-varying returns,
it is hard to directly apply the proposition to practical situations where the expected cashflow
stream is separately estimated. To adapt current practice to allow for time-varying expected re-
turns, we maintain the separation of the problem of estimating future cashflows and discounting
the cashflows. However, we change the second part of the DDM valuation method. In particu-
lar, instead of a constant discount rate, we apply a series of discount rates to the expected future
cashflows, where each expected future cashflow is discounted at the discount rate appropriate
to the maturity of the cashflow.
    This series of discount rates is computed to specifically take into account the time-variation
of expected returns. That is, we specify a series of discount rates µt (n) for horizon n where:
                         " ∞ Ãs−1                !       #     ∞
                          X Y                                 X      Et [Dt+s ]
                Pt = E t             exp(−µt+k ) Dt+s =                              .       (16)
                           s=1   k=0                          s=1
                                                                  exp(s   · µ t (s))


Each different expected cashflow at time t+n, Et (Dt+n ), is discounted back at its own expected
return µt (n), as illustrated in Figure 1.
    To show how the term structure of discount rates µt (s) can incorporate the effects of time-
varying conditional expected returns, we introduce the following definition:

Definition II.1 A “spot expected return” or “spot discount rate” µt (n) is a discount rate which
applies between time t and t + n and is determined at time t. The spot expected return is the
value µt (n) which solves:
                          "Ãn−1            !    #
                            Y                                 Et [Dt+n ]
                       Et       exp(−µt+k ) Dt+n =                          .                  (17)
                               k=0
                                                            exp(n · µt (n))

The series {µt (n)} varying maturity n is the term structure of expected returns or discount
rates.

In equation (17), the LHS of the equation is a single term in the pricing equation (2). Using this
definition enables equation (2) to be re-written as (16).
    The definition in equation (17) is a generalization of the term structure of discount rates in
Brennan (1997). Brennan restricts the time-variation in expected returns to come only from
risk-free rates and market risk premiums, but ignores other sources of predictability (like time-
varying betas and cashflows). The spot expected returns µt (n) depend on the information set

                                                10
at time t, and as time progresses, the term structure of discount rates changes. Note that the
one-period spot expected return µt (1) is just the one-period expected return applying between
time t and t + 1, µt (1) ≡ µt .
   To compute the spot expected returns µt (s), we use the following proposition:

Proposition II.1 Let Xt = (gt βt zt0 )0 follow the process in equation (7) and the one-period
expected return µt follow equation (8). Then, assuming existence, the spot expected return
µt (n) is given by:
                             µt (n) = A(n) + B(n)0 Xt + Xt0 G(n)Xt ,                         (18)

where A(n) is a scalar, B(n) is a K × 1 vector and G(n) is a K × K symmetric matrix. In the
coefficients A(n) = (ā(n) − a(n))/n, B(n) = (b̄(n) − b(n))/n and G(n) = −H(n)/n, a(n),
b(n) and H(n) are given by equation (10) in Proposition I.1. The coefficients ā(n) and b̄(n) are
given by the recursions:
                                                      1
                ā(n + 1) = ā(n) + e01 c + b̄(n)0 c + (e1 + b̄(n))0 Σ(e1 + b̄(n))
                                                      2
                b̄(n + 1) = Φ0 (e1 + b̄(n))                                                  (19)

where e1 represents a vector of zero’s with a 1 in the 1st place and
                                                   1
                                    ā(1) = e01 c + e01 Σe1
                                                   2
                                               0
                                    b̄(1) = Φ e1 .                                           (20)

   Note that µt (n) is a quadratic function of Xt , the information set at time t. This is because
the price of the security or asset is a function of exponential quadratic terms of Xt in equation
(9). As Xt changes through time, so do the spot expected returns. This reflects the conditional
nature of the expected returns, which depend on the state of the economy summarized by Xt .
Like the term structure of interest rates, the term structure of discount rates can take a variety
of shapes, including upward sloping, downward sloping, humped and inverted shapes.
   Besides being easily applied in practical situations, there are several reasons why our model’s
formulation of spot expected returns is useful in the context of valuing cashflows. First, we com-
pute the term structure of expected returns by specifying models of the conditional expected
return from a rich class of conditional CAPM’s, used by many previous empirical studies. We
can estimate the discount curve for individual firms by looking at discount curves for industries
or for other groups of firms with similar characteristics (for example, stocks with high or low
book-to-market ratios).

                                               11
   Second, direct examination of the discount rate curve gives us a quick guide to potential mis-
pricings between taking or not taking into account time-varying expected returns. The greater
the magnitude of the difference between the discount rates µt (n) and a constant discount rate
µ̄, the greater the mis-valuation. This difference is exacerbated at early maturities, where the
time value of money is large. Since the expected cashflows are the same in the numerator of
each expression in equations (3) and (16), we can compare a valuation which takes into account
the effects of changing expected returns to a valuation which ignores them by looking at the
difference between the discount curve {µt (n)} and the constant expected return µ̄ used in the
standard DDM.
   Third, it may be no surprise that accounting for time-varying expected returns can lead
to different prices from using a constant discount rate from an unconditional CAPM. What is
economically more important is quantifying the effects of time-varying expected returns by
looking at its underlying sources of variation. Our analytic term structure of discount rates
in Proposition II.1 allows us to attribute the effect of time-varying expected returns into its
different components. For example, are time-varying risk-free rates the most important source
of variation of conditional expected returns, or is it more important to account for time-variation
in the risk premium?
   Finally, the discount curve is analogous to the term structure of zero coupon rates. In fixed
income, cashflows are known and the zero coupon rates represent the present value of $1 to
be received at different maturities in the future. In equities, cashflows are stochastic (and are
correlated with the time-varying expected return) and µt (n) represents the expected, rather than
certain, return of receiving future cashflows in the future at time t + n. In fixed income mar-
kets, zero coupon yields are observable while in equity markets the spot discount rates are not
observable. However, one can potentially obtain the term structure of expected returns from
observing the prices of stock futures contracts of different maturities. For example, if a se-
ries of derivative securities were available, each derivative security representing the claim on
a stock’s dividend, payable only in each separate future period, the prices of these derivative
securities would represent the spot discount curve. Given the lack of suitable traded derivatives,
particularly on portfolios, we directly estimate the discount curves.
   If a conditional CAPM is correctly specified, the constant α in equations (4) or (8) should
be zero. Since the subject of this paper is to illustrate how to discount cashflows with time-
varying expected returns, rather than correctly specifying an appropriate conditional CAPM, in
our empirical calibration we include an α in the stock’s conditional expected return. Proposition


                                                12
II.1 does not require the conditional CAPM to be exactly true. Hence, we include a constant to
capture any potential mis-specifications from a true conditional CAPM.
      In addition to conducting a valuation incorporating all the time-varying risk-free, risk pre-
mium and beta components, we also compute discount curves relative to two more special cases.
First, if an investor correctly takes into account the time-varying market risk premium but ig-
nores the time-varying beta, this also results in a mis-valuation. We can measure this valuation
by estimating a system Xt = (gt rt zt )0 which omits the time-varying beta, and using a constant
beta in the expected return µt = α + rt + β̄λt . The constant beta can be estimated using an
unconditional CAPM. Second, an investor can correctly measure the time-varying beta, but ig-
nore the predictability in the market risk premium. In this second system, the investor uses an
expected return µt = α + rt + βt λ̄, where λ̄ is the unconditional mean of the market log excess
return.


A. The Time-Variation in Discount Rates
To investigate the source of the time-variation in discount rates, we can compute the variance
of the discount rate var(µt (n)) using the following corollary:

Corollary II.1 The variance of the discount rate var(µt (n)) is given by:

                            var(µt (n)) = B(n)0 ΣX B(n) + 2tr((ΣX G(n))2 ),                     (21)

where ΣX is the unconditional covariance matrix of Xt , given by: ΣX = devec((I − Φ ⊗
Φ)−1 vec(Σ)).

It is possible to perform an approximate variance decomposition on (21), given by the following
corollary:4

Corollary II.2 The variance of µt (n) can be approximated by:

                        var(µt (n)) = (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄)0 ΣX (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄),                    (22)

ignoring the quadratic term in equation (21), where X̄ = (I − Φ)−1 c is the unconditional mean
of Xt .
  4
      The variance from the higher order terms are extremely small, for our empirical values.




                                                        13
   We can use equation (22) to attribute the variation of µt (n) to variation of each of the
individual state variables in Xt . However, some of the sources of variation we want to examine
are transformations of Xt , rather than Xt itself. For example, a variance decomposition with
respect to cashflows (gt ) or betas (βt ) can be computed using equation (22) because gt and βt are
contained in Xt . However, a direct application of equation (22) does not allow us to attribute
the variation of µt (n) to sources of uncertainty driving the time-variation in the market risk
premium λt , since λt is not included in Xt , but is a linear transformation of Xt . To accommodate
variance decompositions of linear transformations of Xt , we can rewrite equation (22) using the
mapping Zt = L−1 (Xt − l) for L a K × K matrix and l a K × 1 vector:

                  var(µt (n)) = (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄)0 LΣZ L0 (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄),                    (23)

where ΣZ = L−1 ΣX (L0 )−1 .
   Orthogonal variance decompositions can be computed using a Cholesky, or similar, orthog-
onalizing transformation for ΣX or ΣZ . However, in our work our variance decompositions
do not sum to 1. For a single variable, we count all the contributions in the variance of that
variable, together with all the covariances with each of the other variables. Hence, our variance
decompositions double-count the covariances, but are not subject to an arbitrary orthogonaliz-
ing transformation.



                   III. Empirical Specification and Data
The model presented in Section II is very general, only needing cashflows and betas to be
included in a vector of state variables Xt . To illustrate the implementation of the methodology,
we specify the vector Xt that we use in our empirical application in Section A. Section B
describes the data and the calibration.


A. Empirical Specification
We specify Xt as Xt = (gt βt ∆pot rt cayt πt )0 , where gt is cashflow growth, βt is the time-
varying beta, ∆pot is the change in the payout ratio, rt is the nominal short rate, cayt is Lettau
and Ludvigson (2001)’s deviation from trend of consumption-asset-labor fluctuations and πt is
ex-post inflation. We motivate the inclusion of these variables as follows.
   First, to predict the risk premium, we use nominal short rates rt and cayt . To be specific, we



                                                14
parameterize the market risk premium as:

                                    λt = b0 + br rt + bcay cayt .                              (24)

While many studies use dividend yields to predict market excess returns (see Campbell and
Shiller (1988a)), we choose not to use dividend yields because this predictive relation has grown
very weak during the 1990’s (see Ang and Bekaert (2002) and Goyal and Welch (2003)). In
contrast, Ang and Bekaert (2002) and Campbell and Yogo (2002) find that the nominal short
rate has strong predictive power, at high frequencies, for excess aggregate returns. Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001) demonstrate that cayt is a significant forecaster of excess returns, at a quar-
terly frequency, both in-sample and out-of-sample. Both of these predictive instruments have
stronger forecasting ability than the dividend yield for aggregate excess returns.
   Second, to help forecast dividend cashflows gt , we use the change in the payout ratio, which
can be considered to be a measure of earnings growth in Xt . Vuolteenaho (2002) shows that
variation in firm-level earnings growth accounts for a large fraction of the variation of firm-level
stock returns. However, earnings growth is difficult to compute for stock portfolios with high
turnover. Instead, we use the change in the payout ratio, the ratio of dividends to earnings. This
is equivalent to including earnings growth, since the change in the payout ratio, together with
gt , contains equivalent information. To show this, if we denote earnings at time t as Earnt ,
then gross earnings growth Earnt /Earnt−1 can be expressed as:
                                        µ          ¶
                              Earnt         1/pot
                                      =              exp(gt )
                             Earnt−1       1/pot−1

where pot = Dt /Earnt represents the payout ratio.
   Finally, since movements in nominal short rates must be due either to movements in real
rates or inflation, we also include the ex-post inflation rate πt in Xt . This has the advantage of
allowing us to separately examine the effects of the nominal short rate or the real interest rate.
   To map the notation of Propositions I.1 and II.1 into this set-up, we can specify the formu-
lation of the one-period expected return in equation (8) as follows:

                          µt = α + rt + λt βt
                              = α + e04 Xt + (b0 + br rt + bcay cayt )βt
                              = α + ξ 0 Xt + Xt0 ΩXt ,                                         (25)




                                                 15
where ξ = (e4 + b0 e2 ) and Ω is given by:
                                                                                
                                           0    0      0     0        0      0
                                                                        
                                     0     0          0 br /2 bcay /2 0
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                 Ω = 0     0          0 0        0    0 .
                                                                        
                                     0 b /2           0 0        0    0
                                          r                             
                                       0 bcay /2       0 0        0    0

      By applying Corollary II.2. we can attribute the variation of µt (n) to linear transformations
of Xt . For example, to compute the variance decomposition of µt (n) to the risk premium λt ,
we can transform Xt = (gt βt ∆pot rt cayt πt )0 to Zt = (gt βt ∆pot rt λt πt )0 using the mapping:

                                                 Xt = l + LZt ,

where l is a constant vector and L is a 6 × 6 matrix given by:
                                                                 
                                   1 0 0       0       0     0
                                                                 
                                 0 1 0        0       0     0    
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                 0 0 1        0       0     0 
                            L=  
                                                                  .
                                                                  
                                  0   0   0   1       0     0    
                                                                 
                                 0 0 0 − br            1
                                                           −   br 
                                              bcay   bcay   bcay 
                                   0 0 0       0       0     1

B. Data Description and Estimation
To illustrate the effect of time-varying expected returns on valuation, we work with ten book-
to-market sorted portfolios and the Fama and French (1997) definitions of industry portfolios.5
We focus on these portfolios because of the well-known value effect and because industry port-
folios have varying exposure to various economic factors (see Ferson and Harvey (1991)). For
the book-to-market portfolios, we focus on the deciles 1, 6 and 10, which we label “growth,”
“neutral” and “value,” respectively. We use data from July 1965 - Dec 2000 for the book-to-
market decile portfolios and from Jan 1964 - Dec 2000 for the industry portfolios. All portfolios
are value-weighted.
      To estimate dividend cashflow growth rates of the portfolios, we compute monthly dividends
as the difference between the portfolio value-weighted returns with dividends and capital gains,
  5
      We exclude the industry portfolios Health, Miscellaneous and Utilities because of missing data.



                                                        16
and the value-weighted returns excluding dividends:

                            Pt+1/12 + D̄t+1/12 Pt+1/12   D̄t+1/12
                                              −        =          ,
                                    Pt           Pt         Pt

where the frequency 1/12 refers to monthly data. The bar superscript in the variable D̄t+1/12
denotes a monthly, as opposed to annual, dividend. To compute annual dividend growth, we
sum up the dividends over the past 12 months, as is standard practice to remove seasonality (see
Hodrick (1992)):
                                                 11
                                                 X
                                         Dt =          D̄t−i/12 .
                                                 i=0

Growth rates of cashflows are constructed taking logs: gt = log(Dt /Dt−1 ). These cashflow
growth rates represent annual increases of cashflows but are measured at a monthly frequency.
    To estimate time-varying betas on each portfolio, we employ the following standard proce-
dure, dating back to at least Fama and MacBeth (1973). We run rolling 60-month regressions
of the excess total return of the portfolio on a constant and the excess market risk return:

                      ȳτ /12 − r̄(τ −1)/12 = αt + βt (ȳτm/12 − r̄(τ −1)/12 ) + uτ            (26)

where all returns are continuously compounded, ȳτ /12 is the portfolio’s log total return over
month τ , r̄(τ −1)/12 is the continuously-compounded 1-month risk-free rate (the 1-month T-bill
rate) from (τ − 1)/12 to τ /12 and ȳτm/12 is the market’s log total return over month τ . The
regression is run at a monthly frequency from τ = t − 60/12 to τ = t. The time series of the
estimated linear coefficients in the regression (26) is the observable time-series of the portfolio
betas βt . We compute an α in equation (4) so that the average portfolio excess return in the data
is matched by this series of betas.
    While this estimation procedure is standard and has been used by several authors to doc-
ument time-varying betas, including recently Fama and French (1997), it is not the optimal
method to estimate betas. If the VAR is correctly specified, then we should be able to infer the
true, unobservable betas from the data of realized returns, and the other observable variables in
Xt , in a more efficient fashion. For example, Adrian and Franzoni (2002) use a Kalman filter to
estimate time-varying betas, while Ang and Chen (2002) and Jostova and Philipov (2002) em-
ploy a Gibbs sampler. However, these estimations are complex and it is not the aim of this paper
to use sophisticated econometric methods to estimate betas. Rather, we focus on discounting
cashflows under time-varying betas, using a simple, standard procedure for estimating betas as
an illustration.


                                                   17
   To predict the market risk premium, we estimate the coefficients in the regression implied
from equation (24):
                             m
                            yt+1 − rt = b0 + br rt + bcay cayt + ²t+1 ,                     (27)
       m
where yt+1 − rt is an annual market excess return, using a one-year ZCB risk-free rate. To form
annual monthly returns, we first compute monthly log total returns on the market portfolio from
month t/12 to (t + 1)/12 and then aggregate over 12 months to form annual log returns:
                                                  12
                                                  X
                                        m                 m
                                       yt+1   =         ȳt+i/12 .
                                                  i=1

We use the monthly data in Lettau and Ludvigson (2002) to construct a series of cayt which
uses data only up to time t to estimate a cointegrating vector to estimate the consumption-
wealth-labor deviation from trend at time t. This avoids any look-ahead bias in the construction
of cayt (see Brennan and Xia (2002) and Hahn and Lee (2002)). All returns are continuously
compounded and the regression is run at a monthly frequency, but with an annual horizon.
   We estimate our VAR in equation (7) and the predictability regression of aggregate excess
returns in equation (27) at an annual horizon. That is, t to t + 1 represents one year. Hence,
we use one-year ZCB risk-free rates rt , year-on-year log CPI inflation πt and an annual change
in the payout ratio, ∆pot in the VAR. We define the payout ratio of year t to be the ratio of the
sum of annual dividends to summed annual earnings per share, excluding extraordinary items,
of the companies in the portfolio. To compute this, we use the COMPUSTAT annual file, and
extract dividends and earnings of companies in the portfolio in December of year t. We exclude
any companies with negative earnings.
   To gain efficiency in estimating the VAR and the predictability regression, we use monthly
data. Since we have annual horizons but monthly data, the residuals from each regression in
the VAR and in the predictability regression have an MA(11) form induced by the use of over-
lapping observations. While all parameter estimates are consistent even with the overlap, the
standard errors of the parameters are affected by the MA(11) terms. To account for this, we
report standard errors computed using 12 Newey-West (1987) lags.
   Panel A of Table 1 presents some selected summary statistics of the representative book-
to-market portfolios and the average industry. The numbers in the average industry row are
averages of the statistics over all industries. Dividend growth is quite volatile: 28% (19%) for
growth (value) stocks, and 21% for the average industry. Payout ratios, as expected, are highest
for neutral and value stocks, at approximately 42% and lowest for growth stocks, at 26%. The
average change in the payout ratios is close to zero for all portfolios. The annualized portfolio

                                                  18
alpha we report is estimated using a monthly regression of the portfolio excess returns onto a
constant α and the excess market return over the whole sample. The alphas for the book-to-
market portfolios reflect the well known value spread, increasing from -2% for growth stocks
to 4% for value stocks.
   The betas of the portfolios display significant time-variation. The betas of growth (value)
stocks have an annual volatility of 10% (17%), and the average industry beta volatility is 19%.
These betas are also quite persistent, over 75% at an annual horizon. We plot the time-varying
betas at a monthly frequency in Figure 2. The betas for growth stocks and value stocks have
generally diverged across the sample, with the betas for growth stocks increasing and the betas
for value stocks decreasing. For example, at the beginning of the 1970’s value stocks have a
beta of around 1.2, which decreases to just above 0.7 by the year 2000. The betas of industry
portfolios (not shown), while exhibiting time-variation, appear more stationary.
   The upward trend in the growth beta and downward trend in the value beta post-1965, has
been emphasized by, among others, Adrian and Franzoni (2002), Ang and Chen (2002), Camp-
bell and Vuolteenaho (2002) and Franzoni (2002). Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2000) discuss
some reasons for the trends in growth and value stocks, related to changing discount rate and
cashflow sensitivities. Our VAR requires stationarity of all variables, including beta, to make
econometric inferences, particularly for computing variance decompositions in Corollary II.1.
The stationary assumption for beta may appear to be violated from Figure 2. However, Adrian
and Franzoni (2002) and Ang and Chen (2002) show that because betas are very persistent se-
ries, it is hard to differentiate a highly persistent beta series from a beta process with a unit root
in small samples. This is analogous to interest rates, where unit root tests fail to reject the null
of a unit root in small samples because of low power, but term structure models require the short
rate to be a stationary process.
   We list the estimates of the regression (27) in Panel B of Table 1. The coefficient on the
interest rate is negative, so higher interest rates cause decreases in market risk premiums. This
is the same sign found by many studies since Fama and Schwert (1977). However, while Ang
and Bekaert (2002) and Campbell and Yogo (2002) document strong predictive power of the
short rate at monthly horizons, the significance is greatly reduced at an annual horizon. Lettau
and Ludvigson (2001) find that, in-sample, cayt significantly predicts market risk premiums
with a positive sign. However, without look-ahead bias at an annual horizon, the predictive
power of cayt is reduced. Nevertheless, it is the same sign found by Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001).


                                                 19
   Since the risk premium is a function of instrumental variables, it is possible to infer the
variation of the risk premium from the regression coefficients br and bcay in (27) using:
                                             p
                                        σλ = ζ 0 ΣX ζ,                                       (28)

where ζ = (0 0 0 br bcay 0)0 and ΣX is the unconditional covariance matrix of Xt . From the
estimated parameters in Panel B of Table 1, the unconditional volatility of the risk premium is
2.66% and the risk premium has an autocorrelation of 0.54.


    IV. The Calibrated Term Structure of Expected Returns
In this section, we concentrate on presenting the term structure of discount rates for the growth,
neutral and value portfolios. The term structure of discount rates from these portfolios are
representative of the general picture of the spot expected returns from other portfolios. However,
we look at mis-pricings from valuations incorporating time-varying expected returns from both
book-to-market and industry portfolios.


A. VAR Estimation Results
We report some selected VAR estimation results in Table 2 for growth, neutral and value stocks.
The average industry refers to a pooled estimation of the VAR across all industry portfolios.
Table 2 shows that there are some significant feed-back effects from the instruments rt , cayt
and ∆pot to growth rates and time-varying betas. For example, for growth (value) stocks,
lagged interest rates (cayt ) predict future cashflows, and for neutral stocks, interest rates and
∆pot predict growth rates and betas. For the average industry, rt , cayt and πt significantly
predict dividend growth and betas.
   In Table 2, while cashflows gt are predictable, particularly by short rates and cayt for in-
dustry portfolios, cashflows have weak forecasting ability for the variables driving conditional
expected returns, βt , rt , cayt . The VAR results for the “Average Industry” pools across all 45
industry portfolios and does not find any evidence of predictability for cashflows. Hence, we
might expect the feed-back effect of cashflows on time-varying expected returns to be weak.


B. Discount Curves
Figure 3 plots the term structure of discount rates µt (n) for growth, neutral and value stocks.
The discount curve for the full model is shown in circles. At the end of December 2000, the

                                               20
term structure of discount rates is upward sloping. At December 2000, the risk-free rate and
cayt both predict low conditional expected returns for the market. This markedly lowers the
short-end of the discount curve. Since the risk premium is mean-reverting, the discount rates
increase with maturity and asymptote to a constant.6
      In Figure 3, the spot discount curve for growth stocks lies below the discount curve for
value stocks. However, in Figure 2, the betas of growth stocks are higher than value stocks. The
discrepancy is due to two reasons. First, the constant α term in equation (4) is negative (positive)
for growth (value) stocks. This reflects the well-known value effect (see, for example, Fama
and French, 1993) and brings down the spot discount curve for growth stocks relative to value
stocks. Second, the discount curves also incorporate the effect of cashflows on time-varying
expected returns in the VAR in equation (7).
      Figure 3 also super-imposes the discount curves for the three special cases. First, the term
structure of discount rates for an unconditional CAPM is a horizontal line since it is constant
across horizon. Second, the shape of the term structure of discount rates ignoring the time-
variation in beta is similar to the shape of the full model, particularly for growth and neutral
stocks. There is a faster gradient for value stocks, but the similarities may result in a relatively
small degree of mis-valuation if we ignore the time-variation in beta. However, there is a large
change in the shape of the term structure when we ignore time-variation in the risk premium.
In this case, the discount curves are much higher because when we ignore time-variation of the
risk premium, we cannot capture the low conditional expected returns of the market portfolio at
December 2000. For growth and value stocks, the term structure of discount rates ignoring the
time-varying risk premium take on inverse humped shapes, illustrating some of the variety of
the different shapes the discount curves may assume.


C. Mis-Pricing of Cashflow Perpetuities
We use the term structure of discount rates in Figure 3 to value a perpetuity of an expected
cashflow of $1 received at the end of each year at the end of December 2000 in Table 3 for port-
folios sorted by book-to-market ratios and selected industry portfolios. Table 3 also illustrates
the large mis-valuations that may result by (counter-factually) assuming expected returns are
constant, ignoring the fact that betas vary over time, or ignoring the time-variation in the market
risk premium.
      To compute the perpetuity values we set Et [Dt+s ] = 1 for each horizon s in equation (16).
  6
      As n → ∞, µ(n) → µ̄, where µ̄ is a constant. This is proved in the Appendix.


                                                       21
We value this perpetuity within each book-to-market decile or industry, under our model with
time-varying conditional expected returns. These perpetuities do not represent the prices of any
real firm or project because they are not actual forecasted cashflows. By keeping expected cash-
flows constant across the portfolios, we directly illustrate the role that time-varying expected
returns play without having to control for cashflow effects across industries in the numerator.
However, in the denominator, the discount rates still incorporate the effects of cashflows on
time-varying expected returns in the VAR.
   After computing perpetuity values from our model, we compute perpetuity values from three
mis-pricings relative to the true model: (i) using a constant discount rate from an unconditional
CAPM, which is a traditional DDM valuation, (ii) ignoring the time-variation in β but recog-
nizing the market risk premium is predictable and (iii) ignoring the predictability of the market
risk premium but taking into account time-varying β. We report the mis-pricings as percentage
errors:
                                                wrong − correct
                             mis-pricing error =                 ,                       (29)
                                                     correct
where “correct” is the perpetuity value from the full valuation and “wrong” is the perpetuity
value from each special case.
   We turn first to the results in Table 3 for the book-to-market portfolios. The perpetuity values
are from the the baseline case of time-varying short rates, betas and risk premiums. There is a
general pattern of high perpetuity values for growth stocks to low perpetuity values for value
stocks, but the pattern is not strictly monotonic. This follows from the low (high) discount rates
for growth (value) stocks in Figure 3. The perpetuity values are almost monotonic, except for
the 2nd book-to-market decile. This is mostly due to the more negative alpha for the 2nd decile
(-0.03) than the 1st decile (-0.02). In addition, the growth firms (decile 1) have low payout
ratios. This may understate the potential predictability of discount rates by cashflows.
   The second column in Table 3 reports large mis-pricing errors from applying a DDM, with a
mean error of -15%. The maximum mis-pricing, in absolute terms, is -32% for the 2nd book-to-
market decile portfolio. The DDM produces much higher cashflow perpetuity values because
at the end of December 2000, the conditional expected returns from our model are low, while
the unconditional expected return implied by the CAPM is much higher.
   The case presented in the column labelled “Ignoring Beta” in Table 3 allows for time-varying
expected returns, but only through the risk premium and short rate. Ignoring time-varying betas
results in overall smaller mis-pricings, but at this point in time the effect of time-varying betas
can still be large (for example, 12% for the 3rd book-to-market decile portfolio). The largest


                                                22
effect in mis-specifying the expected return at December 2000 comes from ignoring the time-
varying market return, in the last column, rather than mis-specifying the time-varying beta.
Like the DDM, ignoring variation in the risk premium produces consistently higher values of
the cashflow perpetuity relative to the baseline case. This is because as the level of the market
is very high at December 2000, the conditional risk premium is very low. When we use the
average risk premium, we ignore this effect.
   The same picture is repeated for the industry portfolios, except the extreme mis-pricings
are even larger. At December 2000, the discount rates for individual industries take on a sim-
ilar shape to the discount rates for book-to-market portfolios in Figure 3, because of the low
conditional risk premium versus the relatively high unconditional expected return. Table 3 lists
the two portfolios with the two largest absolute pricing errors from the unconditional CAPM,
which are the ship industry (-58%) and fabricated products (-33%), respectively. The ship in-
dustry has a low beta at December 2000 (0.63), which causes it to have a very high perpetuity
value. The unconditional beta is much higher (1.06), which means that using the DDM with the
unconditional CAPM results in a very incorrect valuation. On average, using an unconditional
CAPM for valuation produces a mis-pricing of -17% across all industry portfolios. Like the
book-to-market portfolios, ignoring the risk premium at December 2000 produces larger mis-
valuations on average (-13%) than ignoring the time-variation of beta (-5%). In summary, the
effect of time-varying expected returns on valuation is important.


D. Variance Decompositions
That ignoring time-varying expected returns, or some component of time-varying expected re-
turns produces different valuations than the DDM is no surprise. What is more economically
interesting is to investigate what is driving the time-variation in the discount rates. We exam-
ine this by applying Corollary II.2 to compute variance decompositions of the spot expected
returns.
                                                                      p
   We first illustrate the volatility of the spot expected returns,       var(µt (n)), at each maturity
in the left column of Figure 4. As the maturity increases, the volatility of the discount rates
tends to zero. This is because as n → ∞, µt (n) approaches a constant because of stationarity,
so var(µt (n)) → 0. At a 30-year horizon, the µt (30) discount rate still has a volatility above
2.5% for growth and neutral stocks, and above 7.0% for value stocks. While the volatility curve
must eventually approach zero, it need not do so monotonically. In particular, for value stocks,
there is a strong hump-shape, starting from around 4.7% at a 1 year horizon, increasing to near

                                                23
                                                                         p
8.0% at 13 years before starting to decline. The strong hump in              var(µt (n)) for value stocks
compared to growth and neutral stocks is due to the much larger persistence of the value betas
(0.84 compared to 0.68 (0.57) for growth (neutral) stocks in the VAR estimates of Table 2).
Note that the current beta is known in today’s conditional expected return. A shock to the beta
only takes effect next period and the more persistent the beta, the larger the contribution to the
variance of the discount rate.
   In the right-hand column of Figure 4, we decompose the variance of the discount rates.
Our first result is that the time-variation in cashflows makes only a very small contribution to
the variance of the spot expected returns. We add both the variance decomposition to gt and
the variance decomposition to ∆pot together to determine the total variance decomposition to
cashflows. The small effect of cashflows on discount rates is expected, because cashflows or
payouts weakly predict the variables driving time-varying expected returns: time-varying betas,
short rates, and cayt . The persistence of cashflows is also very low (see Table 1), and so shocks
to cashflows have little long-term effect on the variances of the discount factors.
   Second, at very short maturities Figure 4 shows that the attribution of the variance of µt (n)
to nominal risk-free rates is large, the attribution to the market risk premium is also large, and the
attribution to beta is smaller than the variance decomposition to risk-free rates or to the market
risk premium. For example, for neutral stocks, approximately 65% of var(µt ) is accounted for
by risk-free rates, 72% by the market risk premium, and 20% by time-varying beta. Hence,
at short horizons, it is crucial to account for time-varying short rates and risk premiums. The
effect of beta is secondary.
   Some intuition for this result can be gained by more closely examining the one-period ex-
pected return:

            µt = rt + βt λt
                 = (rt + r̄ − r̄) + (βt + β̄ − β̄)(λt + λ̄ − λ̄)
                 = const + (rt − r̄t ) + β̄(λt − λ̄) + λ̄(βt − β̄) + (βt − β̄)(λt − λ̄),            (30)

where r̄, β̄ and λ̄ represent the unconditional means of nominal interest rates, beta and risk
premiums, respectively. Ignoring the covariance and other higher-order terms in (30), we have:

                           var(µt ) ≈ var(rt ) + β̄ 2 var(λt ) + λ̄2 var(βt ).                      (31)

The variance of rt enters one for one and so has a large effect, but var(λt ) and var(βt ) are scaled
by the effects of β̄ and λ̄. Since β̄ is approximately 1, the variance of the risk premium also has

                                                   24
a large effect. However, the average log risk premium in the data is of the order of 5%, which
means that var(βt ) has a smaller effect on the variance of µt than risk-free rates or market risk
premia. For value stocks, the variance of betas is relatively large, allowing betas to account
for up to 41% of the variance of µt (1), but this is still smaller than the one-period variance
decompositions to risk-free rates (71%) and risk premia (72%).
       Third, the variance decomposition of the risk premium decreases as n increases. While the
time-variation in the market is very important for the value of short-term cashflows, we can
pay less attention to the predictability of the market premium for long-term cashflows. Mathe-
matically, the risk premium is a linear function of the instrumental variables rt and cayt . The
autocorrelation of rt is around 0.74 at an annual horizon, and cayt is much less autocorrelated
(0.63 at an annual horizon). The risk premium is a linear function of both rt and cayt , and is
less autocorrelated than the short rate (0.54). This means that at long horizons, shocks to the
risk premium are less persistent than shocks to the short rate and other variables in the system,
leading to a reduction in the variance decomposition to the risk premium as n increases.7
       Finally, the variance decomposition of the risk-free rate can increase or decrease with hori-
zon, and can dominate, or be dominated by the variance of time-varying beta. For growth
stocks, the attribution of var(µt (n)) to the interest rate only slightly decreases as n increase,
while for value stocks the risk-free rate variance decomposition becomes much smaller at long
horizons. Hence, growth stocks are more sensitive to movements in the nominal term structure
than value stocks. This is in line with intuition as growth stocks have few short-term cashflows
but potentially large long-term cashflows.
       The mechanism by which the nominal risk-free rate or βt can dominate the variance de-
composition of var(µt (n)) at long horizons is due to the relative persistence of the interest rate
versus beta and the size of the predictive coefficients in the risk premium. Since the interest rate
is very persistent, shocks to rt tend to dominate at long horizons unless the autocorrelation of
beta is large enough, relative to the autocorrelation of real rates, to off-set its effects. The au-
tocorrelation of beta (0.86) is much larger than the autocorrelation of the beta of growth stocks
(0.76), which allows the variance attribution to β to dominate at long horizons for the value
portfolio.
       In Figure 5, we perform a more detailed variance decomposition of var(µt (n)) to risk-free
rates. Figure 5 repeats the variance decompositions to rt from Figure 4 and also plots the
   7
       If dividend yields are used instead of cayt , the variance decomposition to the risk premium falls across all
horizons. While the dividend yield is more persistent than both the nominal or ex-post real risk-free rate, the
predictive coefficient of the dividend yield in the risk premium regression is almost zero in our sample.


                                                         25
variance decompositions to actual (or ex-post) real rates rt − πt and expected (or ex-ante) real
rates Et (rt+1 − πt+1 ). First, the variance decompositions to nominal, actual and expected real
rates all follow the same patterns in absolute magnitude. In particular, at short horizons the
variance decompositions to real rates, like nominal rates, is large. The same intuition for these
results for the nominal rate using the approximation in equation (31) also applies to the ex-ante
or ex-post real rates.
       Second, the variance decomposition to ex-ante and ex-post real rates is negative, compared
to the positive variance decompositions to rt . The reason is that while rt is unconditionally
positively correlated with the other state variables, the actual and expected real rates are neg-
atively correlated with the other state variables. For example, for value stocks, the correlation
of rt with βt is 56%, whereas the correlation of rt − πt with βt is -25% and the correlation of
Et (rt+1 − πt+1 ) with βt is -35%.8 By definition, the variance decompositions to risk-free rates,
ex-ante and ex-post real rates that do not count the covariances must be positive. Hence, the
negative variance decompositions result solely from the unconditional negative correlations of
real rates with other state variables. Finally, the variance decompositions of actual real rates
are larger than than the variance decompositions of ex-ante real rates. This is expected, as the
actual real rate comprises the ex-ante real rate plus unpredictable inflation noise.



                                              V. Conclusion
Despite the strong evidence for time-variation in the market risk premium, factor loadings and
risk-free rates, the main tool of valuation, the Dividend Discount Model does not take into
account any of these stylized facts. We develop a valuation methodology which incorporates
time-varying risk premiums, betas and risk-free rates by computing a series of discount rates
which differ across maturity. The price of a security has an analytical solution, which depends
only on observable instruments.
       For application to practical capital budgeting problems, we develop an analytical, tractable
term structure of discount rates. This series of discount rates differs across maturity and can be
applied to value a series of expected cashflows. The discount curve is constructed in such a way
to consistently model the dynamics of time-varying risk-free rates, betas and risk premiums.
   8
       The fact that the actual and expected real rates are negatively correlated with inflation (at -58% and -43%,
respectively), while there is a positive correlation of nominal risk-free rates and inflation (70%), is the well-known
Mundell (1963) and Tobin (1965) effect.



                                                         26
   We estimate the term structure of discount rates for book-to-market and industry portfolios,
and find the effect of time-variation in risk-free rates, betas and risk premiums is large. By com-
puting a variance decomposition of the discount rates, we show that at short horizons, investors
should be most concerned with the impact of time-varying interest rates and risk premiums for
discounting cashflows. At long horizons, the time-variation in risk-free rates or beta is more
important.
   While we provide an easily applicable methodology for handling the effects of time-varying
risk premiums, risk-free rates and beta, and demonstrate that all these are important for valua-
tion, future research must deal with some practical issues. For example, parameter uncertainty
in the predictability of the market risk premium and estimating betas will affect the capital bud-
geting problem. Time-varying risk-free rates, betas and risk premiums can only make potential
mis-pricings in these situations even larger.




                                                27
Appendix

                                   A. Proof of Proposition I.1
Before proving Proposition I.1 we first prove a useful lemma:

Lemma A.1 Let ² be a K × 1 vector, where ² ∼ N (0, Σ), A a K × K matrix and Ω a symmetric K × K matrix.
If (Σ−1 − 2Ω) is strictly positive definite, then:
                                                µ                                   ¶
                                 0                 1             1 0 −1          −1
                 E[exp(A² + ² Ω²)] = exp − ln det(I − 2ΣΩ) + A (Σ − 2Ω) A .
                                                   2             2

Proof:
                                         Z                       µ        ¶
                          0                     −K         −1/2    1 0 −1
           E[exp(A² + ² Ω²)] =             (2π) | det Σ|      exp − ² Σ ² exp(A0 ² + ²0 Ω²)dK ²
                                                                   2
                                         Z                       µ                   ¶
                                               −K        −1/2      1 0 −1
                                    =      (2π) | det Σ|      exp − ² (Σ − 2Ω) + A ² dK ²
                                                                                   0
                                                                                                             (A-1)
                                                                   2

If (Σ−1 − 2Ω) is strictly positive definite then there exists a K × K lower triangular matrix M , det M 6= 0, such
that (Σ−1 − 2Ω) = (M M 0 )−1 . Substituting this into the above expression we obtain:
                                      Z                            µ                          ¶
                             0                −K         −1/2         1 0
             E[exp(A² + ² Ω²)] = (2π) | det Σ|                  exp − ² (M ) M ² + A ² dK ²
                                                                            0 −1   −1       0
                                                                                                            (A-2)
                                                                      2

Now substitute u = M −1 ²:
                                         Z                                   µ               ¶
                                                                                  1
             E[exp(A² + ²0 Ω²)]      =      (2π)−K | det Σ|−1/2 | det M | exp − u0 u + A0 M u dK u
                                                                                  2
                                                                   µ              ¶
                                                                     1
                                     =   | det M || det Σ|−1/2 exp     A0 M M 0 A
                                                                     2
                                                                   µ                   ¶
                                                          −1/2       1 0 −1         −1
                                     =   | det M || det Σ|     exp     A (Σ − 2Ω) A                          (A-3)
                                                                     2

Finally, looking at the determinant terms we have:
                                                          µ                     ¶(1/2)
                                                            | det(Σ−1 − 2Ω)−1 |
                              | det M || det Σ|−1/2   =
                                                                   | det Σ|
                                                          µ                 ¶(1/2)
                                                                      1
                                                      =
                                                            det Σ(Σ−1 − 2Ω)
                                                               µ                      ¶
                                                                  1
                                                      =   exp − ln | det(I − 2ΣΩ)|                           (A-4)
                                                                  2

Substituting into (A-3) we obtain the required result. ¥

Constantinides (1992) states a continuous-time version of Lemma A.1, except his result is only for a univariate
case.

    To prove Proposition I.1, consider one cashflow at time t + n in the term in equation (2) divided by Dt :
                                           "Ãn−1          !       #
                                               Y
                                                    −µt+k
                                        Et        e          Dt+n /Dt .                                       (A-5)
                                                 k=0




                                                           28
We show that:               "Ãn−1               !          #
                              Y                     Dt+n
                                        −µt+k
                       Et           e                          = exp(a(n) + b(n)0 Xt + Xt0 H(n)0 Xt ).      (A-6)
                                                     Dt
                              k=0

Summing up over n gives Proposition I.1.
   The initial condition is given by:
                 Et [exp(µt )Dt+1 ]
                                         = Et [exp(−α − ξ 0 Xt − Xt0 ΩXt + e01 Xt+1 )]
                        Dt
                                                µ                                               ¶
                                                                                       1
                                         = exp −α − ξ 0 Xt − Xt0 ΩXt + e01 (c + ΦXt ) + e01 Σe1             (A-7)
                                                                                       2
Equating coefficients gives equation (11).                         hQ                     i
                                                                      n
   Using induction, for arbitrary time t + n + 1 we can evaluate Et ( k=0 e−µt+k ) Dt+n+1
                                                                                     Dt     as:

                = Et {exp(−α − ξ 0 Xt − Xt0 ΩXt + e01 Xt )
                    ×Et [exp(a(n) + b(n)0 Xt+1 + Xt+1 0
                                                         H(n)Xt+1 )]}
                = exp(a(n) − α − ξ 0 Xt + −Xt0 ΩXt )Et [exp((e1 + b(n))0 Xt+1 + Xt+1
                                                                                 0
                                                                                     H(n)Xt+1 )]
                = exp(a(n) − α − ξ 0 Xt + −Xt0 ΩXt )
                    × exp((e1 + b(n))0 (c + ΦXt ) + (c + ΦXt )0 H(n)(c + ΦXt ))
                    ×Et [exp((e1 + b(n))0 ²t+1 + 2(c + ΦXt )0 H(n)²t+1 + ²0t+1 H(n)²t+1 )],                 (A-8)
which involves taking the expectation of a quadratic Gaussian. This can be done using Lemma A.1 to obtain:
                     exp(a(n) − α + (e1 + b(n))0 c + c0 H(n)c
                         −ξ 0 Xt + (e1 + b(n))0 ΦXt + 2c0 H(n)ΦXt − Xt0 ΩXt + Xt0 Φ0 H(n)ΦXt )
                          µ                                                   ¶
                               1                         1 0 −1           −1
                     × exp − ln det(I − 2ΣH(n)) + D (Σ − 2H(n)) D                                           (A-9)
                               2                         2
where D = (e1 + b(n) + 2H(n)(c + ΦXt )). Expanding the expression gives equation (10). ¥

    Our methodology can easily be extended to allow for heteroskedasticity of an affine form in the conditional
volatility, along the lines of Duffie and Kan (1996) in continuous-time or the discrete-time set-up in Ang and Liu
(2001). To implement this, specify the now-constant conditional volatility Σ of the system as time-varying:
                                                     Xt = c + ΦXt−1 + ut ,                                 (A-10)
where ut ∼ IID N (0, Σt−1 ), where
                                                      Σt = Q0 + Q ¯ X t                                    (A-11)
and “¯” represents a tensor product:
                                                                   K
                                                                   X
                                                     Q ¯ Xt ≡            Xtj Q(j) ,
                                                                   j=1

where Xtj refers to the jth element of the K × 1 vector Xt . The K × K matrices Q0 and Q(j) are symmetric. In
this set-up, µt (n) still has the same quadratic form as equation (18), and the recursions for a(n), b(n) and H(n)
take a similar form as equation (10), except with additional terms to accommodate the heteroskedasticity.


                                 B. Proof of Proposition II.1
To prove Proposition II.1, we determine separately the expressions of the numerator and the denominator of the
fraction in the expression:
                                                                             
                                       1                Et [Dt+n ]/Dt
                              µt (n) = ln  h³Q                   ´      i                            (B-12)
                                       n      E
                                                      n−1 −µt+k
                                                           e        D      /D
                                                           t       k=0                t+n   t



                                                                   29
in Definition II.1 of the spot expected return.
    We first begin by showing that:

                                      Et [Dt+n ]/Dt = exp(ā(n) + b̄(n)0 Xt ),                                (B-13)

where ā(n) and b̄(n) given in equations (19) and (20). The solution method is similar to those used in discrete-time
affine economies such as Ang and Liu (2001) and Bekaert and Grenadier (2001). The initial condition is given by:

                              Et [Dt+1 ]/Dt       = Et [exp(gt+1 )] = Et [exp(e01 Xt+1 )]
                                                               1
                                                  = exp(e01 c + e01 Σe1 + e01 ΦXt ).                          (B-14)
                                                               2
Equating coefficients gives the initial conditions in equation (20). For the recursion, we use proof by induction and
take iterative expectations:
                              ·              ·        ¸¸
        Et [Dt+n+1 ]            Dt+1           Dt+n
                        = Et            Et+1
             Dt                   Dt             Dt
                        = Et [exp(e1 Xt+1 + ā(n) + b̄(n)0 Xt+1 )]
                                      0
                                                                                                      1
                       =   exp(e01 c + e10 ΦXt + ā(n) + b̄(n)0 c + b̄(n)0 ΦXt )Et [exp((e1 + b̄(n))0 Σ 2 ²t+1 )]
                              µ                                                                              ¶
                                                                                1
                       =   exp e01 c + ā(n) + b̄(n)0 c + (e1 + b̄(n))0 ΦXt + (e1 + b̄(n))0 Σ(e1 + b̄(n)) (B-15)
                                                                                2

Equating coefficients gives the recursion in equation (19).
   Proposition I.1 shows that the denominator of (B-12) has the form
                         "Ãn−1            !       #
                              Y             Dt+n
                                    −µt+k
                      Et          e                 = exp(a(n) + b(n)0 Xt + Xt0 H(n)0 Xt ),                   (B-16)
                                             Dt
                              k=0

where a(n), b(n) and H(n) follow the recursions in equation (10).
   This allows us to write µt (n) in equation (B-12) as:

                                     µt (n) = A(n) + B(n)0 Xt + Xt0 G(n)Xt ,                                  (B-17)

where A(n) = (ā(n) − a(n))/n, B(n) = (b̄(n) − b(n))/n and G(n) = −H(n)/n. ¥


                            C. Variance of the Discount Rate

Proof of Corollary II.1
    To compute the variance of the discount rate, var(µt (n)), in Corollary II.1 we use the following lemma:

Lemma C.1 For an arbitrary matrix M , the following relationships are true (see Harville (1997)):
                                                        µ           ¶
                                  ∂                          −1 ∂M
                                      ln detM = tr M
                                  ∂λ                            ∂λ
                                       ∂                      ∂M
                                          M −1 = −M −1            M −1 .                                       (C-1)
                                      ∂λ                      ∂λ

Since, from Proposition II.1, µt (n) = A(n) + B(n)0 Xt + Xt0 G(n)Xt we have:

                                 var(µt (n)) = B(n)0 ΣX B(n) + var(Xt0 G(n)Xt ).                               (C-2)

    We use a moment generating function to evaluate the last term. Let:

                                              g(λ) = E[exp(λ²0 M ²)].                                          (C-3)

                                                            30
Then:                                                             µ          ¶2
                                                    ∂ 2 g(λ) ¯¯     ∂g(λ) ¯¯
                                    var(²0 M ²) =             ¯ −          ¯    .                  (C-4)
                                                      ∂λ2 λ=0        ∂λ λ=0
      Using Lemma A.1, we have
                                                µ                   ¶
                                                  1
                                      g(λ) = exp − ln det(I − 2λΣM ) ,                             (C-5)
                                                  2
where Σ is the variance matrix of ². Using Lemma C.1, we have:
                                  ∂                       ¡                ¢
                                     g(λ) ln detM = g(λ)tr (I − 2λΣM )−1 ΣM ,                      (C-6)
                                  ∂λ
and
  ∂2
      g(λ) ln detM
  ∂λ2                     n¡                       ¢2   ¡                                  ¢o
                 = g(λ)        tr(I − 2λΣM )−1 ΣM ) + tr (I − 2λΣM )−1 2ΣM (I − 2λΣM )−1 ΣM .      (C-7)

Therefore, we have:                                          ¡      ¢
                                             var(²0 M ²) = tr (ΣM )2 ,                             (C-8)
evaluating equation (C-5). Hence,
                                  var(µt (n)) = B(n)0 ΣX B(n) + 2tr((ΣX G(n))2 )                   (C-9)
given in equation (21). ¥

Proof of Corollary II.2
      From the definition of µt (n) = A(n) + B(n)0 Xt + Xt0 G(n)Xt we can write:
            µt (n)   = (A(n) − B(n)0 X̄) + B(n)0 (Xt − X̄) + (Xt − X̄ + X̄)0 G(n)(Xt − X̄ + X̄)
                     = (A(n) − B(n)0 X̄ + X̄ 0 G(n)X̄) + (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄)0 (Xt − X̄)
                         +(Xt − X̄)0 G(n)(Xt − X̄).                                               (C-10)
Ignoring the quadratic term, we have:
                               var(µt (n)) = (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄)0 ΣX (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄).               (C-11)
                      0
Since ΣX = LΣZ L , we can rewrite this expression as:
                            var(µt (n)) = (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄)0 LΣZ L0 (B(n) + 2G(n)X̄),              (C-12)
giving us equation (22). ¥


                                 D. Long-Term Discount Rates
It is possible to compute the long-term discount rate µ(∞) using the following proposition:
Proposition D.1 Suppose the following limits exist:
                                                      ā(n)
                                                lim            = ā∞ ,
                                                n→∞     n
                                                      a(n)
                                                 lim           = a∞ ,
                                                n→∞ n
                                                  lim b̄(n)    = b̄∞ ,
                                                n→∞
                                                    lim b(n)   = b∞ ,
                                                n→∞
                                                lim H(n)       = H∞ ,                              (D-1)
                                               n→∞


                                                          31
then the long-term discount rate µ(∞) is given by:

                                             µ(∞) = (ā∞ − a∞ ),                                         (D-2)

where:
                                                  1
                        ā∞     = e01 c + b̄0∞ c + (e1 + b̄∞ )0 Σ(e1 + b̄∞ )
                                                  2
                                                                     1
                        a∞      = −α + (e1 + b∞ )0 c + c0 H∞ c − ln det(I − 2ΣH∞ ).                      (D-3)
                                                                     2
Given H∞ , b̄∞ and b∞ are given by:
                                     −1
                 b̄∞   = (I − Φ0 ) Φ0 e1
                         ¡                                 ¢−1
                 b∞    = I − Φ0 − 2Φ0 H∞ (Σ−1 − 2H∞ )−1
                         ¡                                                           ¢
                           −ξ + Φ0 e1 + 2Φ0 H∞ c + 2Φ0 H∞ (Σ−1 − 2H∞ )−1 (e1 + 2H∞ c) .                  (D-4)

The matrix H∞ solves the relation:

                              H∞ = −Ω + Φ0 H∞ Φ + 2Φ0 H∞ (Σ−1 − 2H∞ )−1 H∞ Φ.                            (D-5)

   In practice, it is easy to solve for H∞ by iterating the recursion for H(n) in equation (10) to a very large
number. After n > 100 years, H(n) is constant. Once H∞ is found, ā∞ and a∞ are closed-form.




                                                      32
                                              References
Adrian, Tobias, and Francesco Franzoni, 2002, Learning about beta: An explanation of the value premium,
  Working paper, MIT.
Ahn, Dong Hyun, Robert. F. Dittmar, and A. Ronald Gallant, 2002, Quadratic term structure models: Theory and
  evidence, Review of Financial Studies 15, 243-288.
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2002, Stock return predictability: Is it there? Working paper, Columbia
  Business School.
Ang, Andrew, and Joseph Chen, 2002, CAPM over the long-run: 1926-2001, Working paper, Columbia Business
  School.
Ang, Andrew, and Jun Liu, 2001, A general affine earnings valuation model, Review of Accounting Studies 6,
  397-425.
Bakshi, Gurdip, and Zhiwu Chen, 2001, Stock valuation in dynamic economies, Working paper, Yale University.
Bekaert, Geert, and Steve Grenadier, 2001, Stock and bond pricing in an affine economy, Working paper,
  Columbia Business School.
Brennan, Michael J., 1997, The term structure of discount rates, Financial Management 26, 81-90.
Brennan, Michael J., and Yihong Xia, 2001, TAY’s as good as CAY, Working paper, Wharton.
Campbell, John Y., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial Economics 18, 373-399.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, Stock prices, earnings and expected dividends, Journal of
  Finance 43, 661-676.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends
  and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira, 1999, Consumption and portfolio decisions when expected returns are
  time varying, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 433-495.
Campbell, John Y., and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2002, Bad beta, good beta, Working paper, Harvard University.
Campbell, John Y. and Motohiro Yogo, 2002, Efficient tests of stock return predictability, Working paper, Harvard
  University.
Cochrane, John H., 1996, A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model, Journal of Political
  Economy 104, 572-621.
Constantinides, George M., 1992, A theory of the nominal term structure of interest rates, Review of Financial
  Studies 5, 531-552.
Duffie, Darrel and Rui Kan, 1996, A yield-factor model of interest rates, Mathematical Finance 6, 379-406.
Fama, Eugene F., 1996, Discounting under uncertainty, Journal of Business 69, 415-428.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal
  of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial Economics 43,
  153-193.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, The equity premium, Journal of Finance 57, 637-659.
Fama, Eugene F., and James MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests, Journal of Political
  Economy 81, 607-636.
Fama, Eugene F., and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inflation, Journal of Financial Economics 5,
  115-146.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1991, The variation of economic risk premiums, Journal of Political
   Economy 99, 385-415.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, The risk and predictability of international equity returns,
   Review of Financial Studies 6, 527-566.


                                                       33
Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1999, Conditioning variables and the cross section of stock returns,
   Journal of Finance 54, 1325-1360.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1995, Do arbitrage pricing models explain the predictability of stock
   returns? Journal of Business 68, 309-349.
Franzoni, Francesco, 2002, Where is beta going? The riskiness of value and small stocks, Working paper, MIT.
Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch, 2003, The myth of predictability: Does the dividend yield forecast the equity
  premium? Management Science 49, 639-654.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from
  the field, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 1-28.
Hahn, Jaehoon, and Hayong Lee, 2002, On the estimation of the consumption-wealth ratio: Cointegrating
  parameter instability and its implications for stock return forecasting, Working paper, University of
  Washington.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1989, Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing models, Journal of
  Financial Economics 24, 289-317.
Harville, David A., 1997, Matrix algebra from a statistician’s perspective (Springer-Verlag, New York).
Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative procedures for inference and
  measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 357-386.
Jagannathan, Ravi, Ellen R. McGrattan, and Anna Scherbina, 2001, The declining US equity premium, Quarterly
   Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 24, Fall, 3-19.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected returns,
   Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.
Jostova, Gergana, and Alex Philipov, 2002, Bayesian analysis of stochastic betas, Working paper, Boston College.
Keim, Donald B., and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the stock and bond markets, Journal of
  Financial Economics 17, 357-390.
Kim, Tong S., and Edward Omberg, 1996, Dynamic nonmyopic portfolio behavior, Review of Financial Studies 9,
  141-161.
Lee, Charles M. C., James N. Myers, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 1999, What is the intrinsic value of the Dow?
  Journal of Finance 64, 1693-1741.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected returns, Journal of
   Finance 56, 815-849.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2002, Measuring and modeling variation in the risk-return tradeoff,
   Working paper, NYU.
Liu, Jun, 1999, Portfolio selection in stochastic environments, Working paper, UCLA.
Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, The time series of the cross section of asset prices,
  Working paper, University of Chicago.
Mundell, Robert, 1963, Inflation and real interest, Journal of Political Economy 71, 280-283.
Newey, Whitney, and Kenneth West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
  autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Shanken, Jay, 1990, Intertemporal asset pricing – An empirical investigation, Journal of Econometrics 45, 99-120.
Tobin, James, 1965, Money and economic growth, Econometrica 33, 671-684.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2002, What drives firm-level stock returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 233-264.




                                                        34
                                      Table 1: Sample Moments

                                      Panel A: Selected Summary Statistics

                           Returns           Dividend Growth gt                 Beta βt           Payout Ratio pot
                   mean     stdev     α      mean stdev    auto          mean    stdev    auto   mean stdev auto

        Growth      0.10    0.22     -0.02   0.05    0.28       -0.27    1.18    0.10     0.76   0.26   0.11   0.69
        Neutral     0.13    0.15      0.02   0.07    0.13       -0.11    0.96    0.07     0.76   0.42   0.08   0.64
         Value      0.16    0.18      0.04   0.09    0.19        0.06    0.99    0.17     0.86   0.41   0.12   0.62

Average Industry    0.13    0.21     -0.01   0.05    0.21       0.04     1.07    0.19     0.76   0.36   0.13   0.38


                                     Panel B: Risk Premium Regression

                                             estim    std err    p-val
                                     const    0.08     0.05      0.13
                                       r     -0.71     0.90      0.43
                                      cay     1.97     1.66      0.24

     Panel A reports summary statistics mean, standard deviation (stdev) and annual autocorrelation
     (auto) for total returns, cashflow growth gt and betas βt of book-to-market decile portfolios 1
     (growth), 6 (neutral) and 10 (value) and the average mean, average standard deviation and aver-
     age autocorrelation across 46 industry portfolios. All growth rates and returns are continuously
     compounded and have an annual horizon but are sampled at a monthly frequency. The column la-
     beled α denotes the CAPM alpha, from running a regression of monthly excess portfolio returns
     onto a constant (α) and the excess market return. The alpha is reported as an annualized number.
     The sample period is July 1965 to December 2000 for the book-to-market portfolios and January
     1965 to December 2000 for the industry portfolios. Panel B reports the result of a predictive regres-
              m
     sion of yt+1 − rt = α + βr rt + βcay cayt , where ytm is the annual market return, rt is a 1 year
     zero coupon bond rate, and cay is Lettau-Ludvigson (2002)’s consumption-asset-labor deviations,
     estimated recursively. The sample period is June 1965 to December 2000 and the regression is run
     at a monthly frequency.




                                                     35
                      Table 2: Companion Form Φ Parameter Estimates
                                              gt       βt      ∆pot       rt      cayt      πt

              Growth Stocks            gt   -0.35      0.45      0.37    -4.06    1.86       1.69
              B/M Decile = 1                (0.17)   (0.32)    (0.32)   (1.43)   (2.40)    (1.23)
                                      βt    -0.00      0.68     -0.08    0.48     0.85      -0.74
                                            (0.03)   (0.11)    (0.08)   (0.48)   (0.54)    (0.44)
                                   ∆pot      0.04      0.11     -0.37     0.71    -0.19     -0.31
                                            (0.02)   (0.15)    (0.18)   (0.58)   (1.42)    (0.68)
                                       rt   -0.00     -0.02     -0.04     0.60    0.21       0.14
                                            (0.00)   (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.12)   (0.18)    (0.14)
                                    cayt     0.00      0.03     -0.01    0.09     0.54       0.07
                                            (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.02)   (0.08)   (0.09)    (0.05)
                                      πt     0.01    -0.04     -0.03    -0.09      0.07      0.73
                                            (0.00)   (0.04)    (0.03)   (0.16)   (0.16)    (0.15)

              Neutal Stocks            gt   -0.13     0.03       0.61    -1.60   -0.06       1.22
              B/M Decile = 6                (0.18)   (0.27)    (0.24)   (0.91)   (1.58)    (1.12)
                                      βt    -0.00     0.57      -0.11     1.20    -0.23     -0.10
                                            (0.05)   (0.12)    (0.09)   (0.38)   (0.50)    (0.34)
                                   ∆pot      0.12    -0.02      -0.32     0.83    0.11      -0.38
                                            (0.07)   (0.10)    (0.13)   (0.51)   (0.57)    (0.34)
                                       rt    0.02     0.02     -0.01      0.58     0.12      0.14
                                            (0.01)   (0.03)    (0.04)   (0.13)   (0.15)    (0.12)
                                    cayt     0.00     0.01     -0.00     0.06      0.65      0.02
                                            (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (0.08)   (0.08)    (0.05)
                                      πt     0.00     0.03     -0.01    -0.16    -0.09       0.81
                                            (0.02)   (0.05)    (0.03)   (0.18)   (0.20)    (0.15)

              Value Stocks             gt   -0.06     0.20      -0.16    1.37     5.83      -1.26
              B/M Decile = 10               (0.12)   (0.20)    (0.13)   (1.19)   (1.50)    (1.48)
                                      βt    -0.04      0.84     -0.12    -0.12    0.40      0.74
                                            (0.04)   (0.07)    (0.07)   (0.42)   (0.82)    (0.44)
                                   ∆pot      0.16     -0.15     -0.43    1.16     0.72      0.44
                                            (0.05)   (0.14)    (0.20)   (0.42)   (1.09)    (0.46)
                                       rt    0.01     0.02      -0.04    0.57     0.16      0.16
                                            (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.11)   (0.14)    (0.14)
                                    cayt     0.00     0.00       0.01     0.06    0.63       0.01
                                            (0.00)   (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.06)   (0.09)    (0.05)
                                      πt     0.03     0.05     -0.04     -0.17   -0.08       0.65
                                            (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (0.14)   (0.15)    (0.14)

              Average Industry         gt   -0.16     -0.04     0.19     -0.75    1.41      1.02
                                            (0.24)   (0.19)    (0.22)   (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)
                                      βt     0.00      0.91     -0.02    -0.03    0.10      0.10
                                            (0.01)   (0.13)    (0.26)   (0.02)   (0.00)    (0.00)
                                   ∆pot     -0.01     0.02      -0.45    0.40     0.40      0.14
                                            (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.14)   (0.02)   (0.01)    (0.00)
                                       rt    0.00      0.00    -0.00      0.58    0.11      0.18
                                            (0.01)   (0.03)    (0.00)   (0.02)   (0.01)    (0.02)
                                    cayt     0.00      0.00    -0.00      0.07    0.64      0.02
                                            (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.01)    (0.03)
                                      πt     0.01      0.01    -0.00     -0.11   -0.11      0.80
                                            (0.11)   (0.08)    (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.02)

The table reports estimates of the companion form Φ of the VAR in (7). The estimation is done at an annual
horizon, using monthly (overlapping) data. For the average industry results, we pool data across all industries.
Standard errors are computed using Newey-West (1987) 12 lags. Parameters significant at the 95% level are
denoted in bold. The sample period is July 1970 to December 2000 for the book-to-market sorted portfolios
and from January 1970 to December 2000 for the industry portfolios.
                                                      36
                                Table 3: Mis-Pricing of Portfolios

                                                          Mis-Pricing Errors %
                                Perpetuity      Unconditional Ignoring         Ignoring
                                    Value            CAPM           Beta Risk Premium

                  Book-to-Market Sorted Portfolios

                  1 Growth              11.17          -13.41      3.72            -8.33
                  2                     16.39          -31.98     -9.69           -28.74
                  3                     10.81           -7.65     12.39            -9.29
                  4                     10.90          -15.09      1.18           -16.31
                  5                     10.97          -15.48      0.84           -18.45
                  6                      8.93          -13.96     -2.34           -14.42
                  7                      9.09           -9.89     -0.22           -13.21
                  8                      7.78          -13.30     -6.85           -14.09
                  9                      7.25          -18.83     -9.44            -8.63
                  10 Value               7.02          -13.54     -4.04            -7.56

                  Average Mis-pricings Across Book-to-Market Sorted Portfolios
                  Mean Error                       -15.31     -1.45            -13.39
                  Stdev Error                        6.59      6.67              6.39


                  Selected Industries

                  FabPr                 17.65          -32.85     -7.04           -16.77
                  Ships                 16.10          -57.87    -51.84             4.84

                  Average Mis-pricings Across All Industry Portfolios
                  Mean Error                        -16.89       -4.81            -12.74
                  Stdev Error                         9.94        9.05              6.82


We value a perpetuity of an expected cashflow of $1 received at the end of each year using the time-varying
expected returns for each book-to-market portfolio at the end of December 2000. We report percentage mis-
pricing errors (wrong-correct)/correct for valuation using a wrong model versus the full model valuation.
Three wrong models are considered: using a constant discount rate, ignoring the time-varying betas and
ignoring the time-varying market risk premium.




                                                     37
                                Figure 1: The Spot Discount Curve µt (n)

                            Et[Dt+1]                      Et[Dt+2]                         Et[Dt+3]


t                              t+1                            t+2                             t+3


            µt( 1 )



                            µt( 2 )



                                             µt( 3 )

    The spot expected return µt (n) is used to discount an expected risky cashflow Et [Dt+n ] of a security at time
    t + s back to time t. The spot expected return µt (n) solves:
                                    "Ãn−1               !        #
                                       X                                Et [Dt+n ]
                                Et         exp(−µt+k ) Dt+n =                         ,
                                                                      exp(n · µt (n))
                                       k=0

    where µt is the one period expected return from t to t + 1.




                                                         38
  1.4



  1.3



  1.2



  1.1



    1



  0.9



  0.8
             Growth
             Neutral
             Value
  0.7
                 1975            1980            1985           1990            1995            2000

The figure shows time-varying betas of growth, neutral and value stocks, computed using rolling 60-month
regressions of excess portfolio returns on market excess returns.

                Figure 2: Time-Varying Beta of Book-to-Market Portfolios




                                                  39
                                             Growth Stocks
                                           Discount Curve µt(n) for BM Decile = 1
                          0.1



                         0.09



                         0.08



                         0.07



                         0.06



                         0.05



                         0.04


                                                                       Spot Discount Curve µ (n)
                         0.03                                                               t
                                                                       Unconditional CAPM
                                                                       Ignoring Time−Varying Betas
                                                                       Ignoring Time−Varying Risk Premiums
                         0.02
                                0   5       10              15               20             25               30

                                             Neutral Stocks
                                           Discount Curve µt(n) for BM Decile = 6
                         0.13




                         0.12




                         0.11




                          0.1




                         0.09




                         0.08




                         0.07                                          Spot Discount Curve µt(n)
                                                                       Unconditional CAPM
                                                                       Ignoring Time−Varying Betas
                                                                       Ignoring Time−Varying Risk Premiums
                         0.06
                                0   5       10              15               20             25               30

                                                 Value Stocks
                                          Discount Curve µt(n) for BM Decile = 10
                         0.16




                         0.15




                         0.14




                         0.13




                         0.12




                         0.11




                          0.1                                          Spot Discount Curve µt(n)
                                                                       Unconditional CAPM
                                                                       Ignoring Time−Varying Betas
                                                                       Ignoring Time−Varying Risk Premiums
                         0.09
                                0   5       10              15               20             25               30




The figure shows discount curves µt (n), with n in years on the x-axis, computed at the end of December
2000 for various book-to-market portfolios.

                                    Figure 3: Discount Curves


                                                        40
                                                                Growth Stocks
                          Discount Curve Volatility                                        Variance Decomposition for BM Decile = 1
 0.05                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                       Cashflows
                                                                                                                                       Beta
                                                                                                                                       Risk−Free Rates
                                                                          0.8                                                          Risk Premium
0.045



                                                                          0.6
 0.04


                                                                          0.4

0.035

                                                                          0.2


 0.03
                                                                               0



0.025
                                                                         −0.2




 0.02                                                                    −0.4
        0      5     10              15               20   25       30             0   5      10              15             20         25               30

                                                                Neutral Stocks
                          Discount Curve Volatility                                        Variance Decomposition for BM Decile = 6
 0.05                                                                    0.9
                                                                                                                                       Cashflows
                                                                                                                                       Beta
                                                                         0.8                                                           Risk−Free Rates
                                                                                                                                       Risk Premium

0.045
                                                                         0.7


                                                                         0.6

 0.04
                                                                         0.5


                                                                         0.4
0.035

                                                                         0.3


                                                                         0.2
 0.03


                                                                         0.1


0.025                                                                     0
        0      5     10              15               20   25       30         0       5     10              15              20         25               30

                                                                Value Stocks
                          Discount Curve Volatility                                        Variance Decomposition for BM Decile = 10
 0.08                                                                     1.2
                                                                                                                                       Cashflows
                                                                                                                                       Beta
                                                                                                                                       Risk−Free Rates
0.075                                                                          1                                                       Risk Premium




 0.07                                                                     0.8




0.065                                                                     0.6




 0.06                                                                     0.4




0.055                                                                     0.2




 0.05                                                                          0




0.045                                                                    −0.2
        0      5     10              15               20   25       30             0   5      10              15             20         25               30



                              p
 The left-hand column plots var(µt (n)), for each n on the x-axis. The right-hand column attributes the
 var(µt (n)) into proportions due to dividend growth, beta, the risk-free rate and the risk premium. The pro-
 portions double-count the covariances and so do not sum to 1.

            Figure 4: Variance Decomposition for the Term Structure of Discount Rates

                                                                    41
                                                    Growth Stocks
                                           Risk−Free Variance Decomposition for BM Decile = 1
                             0.8



                             0.6

                                                                                     Nominal Rate
                                                                                     Ex−post Real Rate
                             0.4                                                     Ex−ante Real Rate


                             0.2



                              0



                            −0.2



                            −0.4



                            −0.6



                            −0.8
                                   0   5           10              15             20               25                30

                                                    Neutral Stocks
                                           Risk−Free Variance Decomposition for BM Decile = 6
                              1
                                                                                                 Nominal Rate
                                                                                                 Ex−post Real Rate
                                                                                                 Ex−ante Real Rate
                             0.8



                             0.6



                             0.4



                             0.2



                              0



                            −0.2



                            −0.4



                            −0.6
                                   0   5           10              15             20               25                30

                                                        Value Stocks
                                           Risk−Free Variance Decomposition for BM Decile = 10
                             0.8
                                                                                                 Nominal Rate
                                                                                                 Ex−post Real Rate
                                                                                                 Ex−ante Real Rate
                             0.6




                             0.4




                             0.2




                              0




                            −0.2




                            −0.4




                            −0.6
                                   0   5           10              15             20               25                30




The figure shows risk-free variance decompositions for growth, neutral and value stocks for nominal risk-free
rates (rt ), ex-post real rates (rt − πt ) and ex-ante real rates Et (rt+1 − πt+1 ). The proportions double-count
the covariances and so do not sum to 1.
                      Figure 5: Risk-Free Rate Variance Decompositions


                                                               42
