NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCT SUBSTITUTABILITY AND PRODUCTIVITY DISPERSION
Chad Syverson
Working Paper 10049
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10049
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

I am grateful to Gary Becker, Mark Duggan, John Haltiwanger, Ali Hortaçsu, Casey Mulligan, John Shea,
Plutarchos Sakellaris, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago and
University of Maryland for their comments. The research in this paper was conducted while the author was
a research associate at the Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of the Census and Chicago Census
Research Data Center. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the author and do not
necessarily indicate concurrence by the Bureau of the Census or the Center for Economic Studies. This paper
has been screened to ensure that no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Chad Syverson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion
Chad Syverson
NBER Working Paper No. 10049
October 2003
JEL No. D2, L0, L1
ABSTRACT
There are tremendous across-plant differences in measured productivity levels, even within narrowly
defined industries. Most of the literature attempting to explain this heterogeneity has focused on
technological (supply-side) factors. However, an industry’s demand structure may also influence
the shape of its plant-level productivity distribution. This paper explores the role of one important
element of demand, product substitutability. The connection between substitutability and the
productivity distribution is intuitively straightforward. When industry consumers can easily switch
between suppliers, it is more difficult for relatively inefficient (high-cost) producers to profitably
operate. Increases in product substitutability truncate the productivity distribution from below,
implying less productivity dispersion and higher average productivity levels in high-substitutability
industries. I demonstrate this mechanism in a simple industry equilibrium model, and then test it
empirically using plant-level data from U.S. manufacturing industries. I find that as predicted,
product substitutability – measured in several ways – is negatively related to within-industry
productivity dispersion and positively related to industries’ median productivity levels.
Chad Syverson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
syverson@uchicago.edu

Empirical explorations into the productivity levels of individual producers have
consistently found large heterogeneity across plants. Perhaps surprisingly, a great amount of
productivity variation between plants is observed within what may seem to be narrowly defined
(e.g., four-digit SIC) industries. Table 1 shows statistics that demonstrate this dispersion. Using
plant-level data from the 1977 Census of Manufactures, I compute productivity distribution
moments for four-digit manufacturing industries for each of four different productivity
measures.1 As can be seen in the first numerical column, the average within-industry
interquartile range of logged plant-level labor productivity values is roughly 0.66. This
corresponds to a nearly 2-to-1 ratio in value added per labor unit (employee or employee-hour)
between the 75th and 25th-percentile plants in an industry’s productivity distribution. Bear in
mind that these differences are observed when restricting attention to the middle half of the
distribution; including more of the tails amplifies intra-industry heterogeneity. The average 9010 and 95-5 percentile productivity ratios within industries are over 4-to-1 and 7-to-1,
respectively. Factor intensity variations are not solely responsible for these large differences,
either. Intra-industry total factor productivity differences, while smaller, are still sizeable. The
values in the bottom half of Table 1 indicate average interquartile total factor productivity (TFP)
ratios between 1.34-to-1 and 1.56-to-1, depending on the measure. It is important to note that
the heterogeneity observed here is a persistent phenomenon. Empirical studies using other (but
perhaps less comprehensive) cross sections have found similar within-industry productivity
differences.
A host of theoretical work has arisen in an attempt to explain the sources of this
dispersion. The great majority of this research focuses on supply-side/production explanations,
such as technology shocks, management skill, R & D, or investment patterns.2 While these
proposed explanations are undoubtedly important, I contend that demand-side (output market)
conditions can also play an important role in explaining persistent productivity dispersion. I
focus in this paper on the influence of one demand characteristic—product substitutability—on
the equilibrium plant-level productivity distribution within an industry.
An obvious question arising from the above facts regards how such wide productivity

1

Details regarding the data and methods used to construct plant-level productivity values will be discussed below.

2

Bartelsman and Doms (2000) review much of this literature.

1

dispersion can exist in equilibrium. One might expect a long-run tendency for industry output to
be reallocated to more productive plants. They can produce output at lower cost than industry
rivals and grab additional market share by undercutting their opponents’ prices without
sacrificing profits. If this process were to continue unabated, industry equilibrium would
expectedly be characterized by a degenerate plant-level productivity distribution within the
industry; all operating plants would share the same (highest possible) productivity level.
The above evidence suggests something impedes this reallocation process, at least
partially. Imperfect product substitutability seems a likely candidate. It prevents industry
customers from costlessly (in either a budgetary or utility sense) shifting purchases between
industry producers. Thus more efficient (lower cost) plants cannot lure away all demand from
their less efficient industry rivals simply with lower prices, and lower-productivity
establishments are able to stay in business despite their cost disadvantage. As a result, the
equilibrium productivity (cost) dispersion in an industry should be related to the extent of
product substitutability. Industries with very segmented (in either geographic or product space)
output markets can support large productivity differences, even in a long-run equilibrium.
Conversely, high-substitutability industries should exhibit little dispersion. Further, since the
productivity truncation only affects the low end of the distribution, greater substitutability
implies higher central tendency in an industry’s productivity distribution.3
Product substitution barriers are manifold. Transport costs prevent costless switching
among suppliers even when industry products are otherwise identical. In the manufactured ice
industry (SIC 2079), for example, it is unlikely that the physical characteristics of output vary
much from plant to plant. However, the obvious transport barriers make manufactured ice in one
locale an imperfect substitute for the same product in another. High-productivity plants would
be unable to take market share from their less efficient industry cohorts given sufficient distance
between them, supporting a range of productivity levels in equilibrium.
Physical product differentiation also limits substitutability. Idiosyncratic consumer
3

This raises questions about why even those producers protected from competition by imperfect substitutability
would not seek to maximize efficiency. An implicit (and I believe reasonable) assumption underlying the intuitive
premise of the paper is that improving productivity is not costless. The model below, as several models used in other
contexts do, makes this stark by assuming that this cost is infinite; a producer’s productivity draw is permanent and
unchangeable. The assumption is not likely to be key to the results, however. One could introduce a costly
productivity-improving technology and still obtain the same qualitative implications. In many theoretical
frameworks, producers would have greater incentive to undertake productivity-enhancing investment when high

2

preferences across attributes allow some producers to remain viable even if they are less
physically efficient than their industry counterparts. Plants producing niche-market specialty
products may often have higher per-unit costs than industry competitors who focus on mass
production. However, niche producers can survive (and indeed thrive) if their product
characteristics appeal to certain purchasers.
Branding and advertising can also lead to consumers perceiving physically identical
products as being less than perfectly interchangeable. The classic example of name-brand bleach
fetching a higher price than chemically identical generic alternatives is illustrative of this.
Sufficient brand identity would allow a producer to operate even in the face an efficiency gap
between itself and its industry competitors.
Real or perceived differences in services bundled with products, such as delivery speed,
documentation, and product support, can also contribute to imperfect output substitutability.
Finally, an array of intangible factors such as specific history-laden relationships between
producers and their customers, interpersonal customer-manager interaction, and other assets of
goodwill make costless substitution of another manufacturer’s output impossible.
Alone or in combination, these factors allow productivity differences to persist among
industry producers. Expectedly, as these substitutability factors vary across industries, certain
moments of the productivity distribution should fluctuate in concert. Table 1 summarizes the
substantial across-industry variance in plant-level productivity distribution moments. The
between-industry standard deviation of within-industry interquartile productivity ranges (that is,
the dispersion of productivity dispersion) is roughly one-third of the mean within-industry
interquartile range. Similarly, the standard deviations of the wider intra-industry productivity
ranges are roughly one-fourth of their means. Across-industry differences in plant productivity
distributions are not restricted to second moments; within-industry median TFP levels have an
across-industry coefficient of variation of 0.20.
The objective of this paper is to test if product substitutability differences are linked with
the observed variation in these moments. Specifically, I test the notions forwarded above: that
greater product substitutability should be correlated with less productivity dispersion and higher
central tendency in industries’ plant-level productivity distributions.

product substitutability exposes them to intense competition.

3

This paper is a broadly-focused complement to Syverson (2001). That study explores the
effect of exogenous differences in output substitutability within an industry (ready-mixed
concrete) on the dispersion and central tendency of productivity distributions in local concrete
markets. The results therein suggest that increased geographic barriers to substitution (lower
demand and plant density in the concrete industry’s case) lead to greater productivity dispersion
and lower average productivity levels in the market. By exploiting substitutability variation
within a given industry, that study holds constant many possible confounding influences on local
productivity distributions. Its limited scope, however, makes generalizing the link between
substitutability and productivity distribution moments (and thus the utility of drawing
implications for aggregate production behavior) slightly more tenuous. The goal of the present
paper is to test if this link holds more broadly across the economy.4
Differences in industry plant-level productivity distributions and their causes are of
obvious interest to those interested in competition and production within industries. Moreover,
as Basu and Fernald (1997) as well as others have pointed out, reallocation of production across
industries with differing technological characteristics can be an important source of changes in
aggregate production data. Therefore addressing issues regarding these across-industry
differences could yield insights about aggregate productivity movements as well.
I show in the next section the link between the shape of the productivity distribution and
product substitutability (as well as some technological parameters) in a simple model of entry
and competition within an industry. I go on to test the predictions of the model and its
extensions by collecting measures of product substitutability within industries and comparing
variations in these factors to moments of industries’ plant-level productivity distributions. These
productivity moments are computed from data from roughly 200,000 establishments from the
U.S. Census of Manufactures. To preview the results, I find that within-industry productivity
dispersion (central tendency) does indeed tend to decrease (increase) when substitutability is
high. These results hold even after controlling for several other plausible causes of
heterogeneity and appear robust to empirical modeling specifications. Furthermore, proxies for
characteristics of industry technologies (fixed operating costs and sunk entry costs specifically)

4

In a recent paper using data from 2300 firms in East Asia, Hallward-Driemeier, Iarossi, and Sokoloff (2002) find
some evidence of a broad-based link between productivity dispersion and the level of market “integration,” which
they define as consisting in part of factors such as transport costs and product differentiation.

4

are also related to industries’ plant-level productivity distribution moments in directions
predicted by theory.
I. Theoretical Motivation
I formalize the above intuition using a theoretical framework where heterogeneousproductivity producers compete in an industry product market with (possibly imperfect)
substitution across producers’ outputs, which are varieties of the industry product. The model
allows the equilibrium plant-level cost/productivity distribution to endogenously respond to
variations in substitutability. Because I am concerned here with differences in productivity
distributions across industries rather than intertemporal fluctuations within them, industry
dynamics are not a primary concern. The equilibrium is a two-stage entry/production decision
meant to model long-run differences in outcomes. For the sake of expositional clarity and to
permit maximum transparency of the selection-driven mechanism, I assume a specific demand
system. It is important to note, however, that similar qualitative implications can be obtained
from other demand systems. While simple, the model shows in a fairly straightforward manner
how differences in product demand and technology structures can create variation in industry
productivity distribution moments.
I.A. Model
An industry is comprised of a continuum of producers of measure N. Each producer
(indexed by i, where I is the set of industry producers) makes a distinct variety of the industry
product. The representative industry consumer has preferences over these varieties given by
2


1 
1
U = y + α ∫ qi di − η  ∫ qi di  − γ ∫ qi2 di
2  i∈I
2 i∈I
i∈I

2


γ 
1
1
2
= y + α ∫ qi di − η +  ∫ qi di  − γ ∫ (qi − q ) di
2
N  i∈I
2 i∈I
i∈I


,

(1)

where y is the quantity of a numeraire good, qi is the quantity of good i consumed, and
q≡

1
qi di,
N i∈∫I

α > 0;

η > 0;

γ ≥0.

Utility is a quadratic function in total consumption of the industry’s output, minus a term that

5

increases in the variance of consumption levels across varieties. This introduces an incentive to
equate consumption levels of different products. The parameter γ embodies substitutability
across varieties; an increase in γ imposes a greater utility loss from consuming idiosyncratically
large or small quantities of particular qi, therefore limiting consumer response to price
differences across industry producers. As γ → 0, substitutability becomes perfect: only the total
quantity of industry varieties consumed—not its composition—affects utility. The parameters α
and η shift demand for the industry’s output relative to the numeraire. This is the utility function
specified by Melitz and Ottaviano (2003) in their theoretical study of market size effects in trade.
It is useful for my purposes because it embeds imperfect product substitutability in a
parsimonious and tractable way.
Utility maximization by consumers implies that producers face the following demand
function:
qi =

α
ηN + γ

−

1

γ

pi +

ηN

1

ηN + γ γ

p,

(2)

where pi is the price of good i and p the average price among industry producers. Note that
demand falls to zero at
p max =

γ
ηN + γ

α+

ηN
ηN + γ

p,

(3)

so no producer will price above this level.
Industry producers operate at a constant marginal cost ci that varies across producers, and
productivity is defined to be some inverse function of this cost. Thus productivity levels are
idiosyncratic to industry producers. Producers must also pay a common fixed operating cost f if
qi > 0. Profits are therefore given by
 α
1
ηN 1 
π i = 
p ( pi − ci ) − f .
− pi +
η
N
γ
γ
η
N
γ
γ
+
+



(4)

Bertrand-Nash profit maximization implies the producer’s optimal price (subject to pi ≤
pmax) is
pi =

1 αγ
1 ηN
1
+
p + ci .
2 ηN + γ 2 ηN + γ
2

(5)

(The individual producer is too small relative to the industry to take into account the effect of its

6

own pricing decision on the industry average.) Not surprisingly, the optimal price is increasing
in the overall demand level (indexed by α), the average price charged by industry competitors,
and the producer’s cost level. Combining (5) with (2) gives the producer’s quantity sold at the
optimal price:
qi =

1 α
1 ηN
1
+
p−
ci .
2 ηN + γ 2γ ηN + γ
2γ

(6)

Then, using (5) and (6), maximized profits are
1
πi =
4γ

2

 αγ

ηN

p − ci  − f .
+
 ηN + γ ηN + γ


(7)

These expressions imply a cost draw c* such that operations are not profitable if ci > c*.5
Setting (7) equal to zero and solving for c* gives this level explicitly:
c* =

αγ
ηN + γ

+

ηN
ηN + γ

p − 2 γf .

(8)

Substituting this back into (7) yields maximized operating profits in terms of the cutoff cost level
c* and own costs:

πi =

(

1
2 γf + c * −ci
4γ

)

2

−f.

(9)

A large pool of ex-ante identical potential entrants decide whether enter the industry as
follows. They first decide whether to pay a sunk entry cost s in order to receive a
cost/productivity draw ci from a known distribution with positive support and probability density
function g(c). If they pay s, they observe ci and decide whether to begin production and earn the
corresponding operating profits (9). Clearly, only those obtaining marginal cost draws yielding
nonnegative operating profits (i.e., ci ≤ c*) choose to produce in equilibrium. Others produce
nothing, earn zero operating profits, and lose their sunk cost. Hence the expected gain from
paying s is the expectation of (9) over g(c), conditional upon drawing ci ≤ c*. This expected
gain is obviously affected by the cutoff cost level c*. Free entry pins down this value: c* must
set the net expected value of entry into the industry Ve equal to zero. Thus c* satisfies

5

Note that due to the quadratic form of the profit function, while (7) implies positive profits for some ci > c*, such
cost levels also imply that pi > pmax and therefore qi < 0, which is impossible.

7

(

)

c*
2
1

Ve = ∫
2 γf + c * −c − f  g (c )dc − s = 0 .
4γ

0 

(10)

This expression summarizes the industry equilibrium. It combines the conditions that all
producers make nonnegative profits from operations (net of fixed operating costs), and that entry
occurs until the net expected value of taking a cost draw is zero.6
I.B. Comparative Statics
The primary comparative static that I seek to test empirically, the effect of withinindustry product substitutability on the cost/productivity distribution, is presented here. I also
derive secondary implications of the model regarding the effects of the technology parameters f
and s. I control for these technological effects in some of the empirical specifications below.
When the model’s parameters change, c* adjusts to maintain equilibrium. Shifts in
exogenous variables therefore affect the truncation point of the equilibrium cost/productivity
distribution. So while the distribution of possible cost draws g(c) is exogenous, the distribution
among equilibrium producers—the truncation g(c)/G(c*)—is endogenous and determined by the
cutoff cost level. I test for this truncation using the moments of industries’ plant-level
cost/productivity distributions. Higher c* results in higher (lower) average cost (productivity)
levels in an industry and lower variation among producers’ cost/productivity levels.7
Product Substitutability. From the implicit function theorem:

− ∂V

e

dc *
∂γ
,
=
e
dγ
∂V
∂c *

(11)

where from (10),

(

)

(

c*
 1
2
∂V e
1
= ∫ − 2 2 γf + c * −c +
2 γf + c * −c
∂γ
2γ
0  4γ

)

f 
 g (c )dc .
γ 

(12a)

The equilibrium mass of producers N is determined by α, η, γ, f, c , and c*, and can be solved for by substituting
the p implied by (5) into (8).
6

7

The implication regarding within-industry productivity dispersion implicitly assumes some regularity conditions on
g(c), since for some distributions (even those with some arbitrary upper-bound cost level), it is possible that further
truncation from below would actually increase dispersion moments rather than decrease them. However, for most
common distributions, truncation implies a reduction in dispersion.

8

Some algebra shows:
c*
 1

∂V e
1 f
2
(
)
= ∫ − 2 (c * −c ) −
c
*
−
c
 g (c )dc < 0 ,
3
∂γ
2
4
γ
γ
0


(12b)

which is clearly negative since the terms in the brackets are less than zero throughout the region
of integration. Further,

(

)

(

)

c*
2
1


∂V e  1
(
)
2 γf + c * −c * − f  g c * + ∫ 
2 γf + c * −c  g (c )dc .
=
2γ
∂c *  4γ


0 

(13a)

The first term in this expression is equal to zero. (Intuitively, the marginal increase in Ve from
letting in formally marginally unprofitable producer is zero.) Simplifying gives
c*

(

)

∂V e
1
=∫
2 γf + c * −c g (c )dc > 0 .
∂c * 0 2γ

(13b)

(12b) and (13b) imply dc*/dγ > 0; a decrease in subsitutability (embodied in an increase
in γ) leads to a higher cutoff cost level. This result is in accordance with the intuition in the
introduction. When substitutability is low, relatively ineffecient producers are protected from
intense competition from their lower-cost competitors and can operate profitably in equilibrium.
Given the inverse relationship between costs and productivity, this implies we should expect
greater dispersion and lower central tendency in the productivity distribution in lowsubstitability industries.
Fixed Operating Costs. Taking the derivative of (10) with respect to the fixed production cost
and simplifying the result yields
∂V e
=
∂f

c*

∫2
0

1

γf

(c * −c )g (c )dc > 0 .

(14)

From above, ∂Ve/∂c* > 0, so the implict function theorem implies dc*/df < 0. Higher fixed
production costs lower the equilibrium cutoff cost level. High fixed costs, as with high product
substitutability, make it more difficult for relatively inefficient producers to be profitable. Thus
all else equal, high f industries should exhibit less dispersion and higher central tendency in their
productivity distribution.
Sunk Entry Costs. The derivative of Ve with respect to the sunk entry cost s is –1. This,
9

combined with the results above, implies dc*/ds > 0. Thus high sunk entry costs make it easier
for relatively inefficient producers to survive in equilibrium. (Note that this is the opposite effect
of high fixed operating costs.) To see this intuitively, suppose the number of equilibrium
producers supported by the market size were fixed at some number n, and imagine the sunk cost
approaching zero. With very low entry costs, it is extremely cheap for potential entrants to buy
cost draws, so a large number end up doing so. The n lowest order statistics of these cost draws
(i.e., those potential entrants that will produce in equilibrium) decrease when sunk costs fall. As
a result, c* falls with s—the cutoff cost level and sunk entry costs move in the same direciton.8
I.C. Extending the Basic Model

Adding Transport Costs. One of the empirical product substitutability measures I use below is a
proxy for average transport costs in an industry. Its purpose is to capture spatial differentiation
differences across industries. While transport costs are not explicitly included in the model
above, one could interpret the derivations with respect to the substitutability parameter γ as a
reduced-form embodiment of spatial substitutability. This would imply that higher transport
costs (lower spatial substitutability) increase the level of c*. However, the same implication can
be derived when the model is augmented to include a transport cost parameter directly. I do so
in the appendix for interested readers.9
International Trade. Melitz (forthcoming) examines theoretically the influence of international
trade on the cutoff and average industry productivity levels when producers have heterogeneous
productivity levels. He finds that increased trade exposure—either moving from autarky to trade
or lowering trade barriers within a regime where trade already exits—drives low productivity
domestic plants out of business and increases market shares of high-productivity domestic
operators. These effects combine to raise the industry’s cutoff productivity level and average
productivity.
The present model could be similarly modified to allow for the possibility of trade by
8

The implication that fixed operating and sunk entry costs move the cutoff cost/productivity level in opposite
directions is a common feature of setups similar to the present model (see Asplund and Nocke (2003) and Melitz
(forthcoming), for example).

9

It can also be shown that c* responds in the augmented model to changes in fixed operating and sunk entry costs in
the same directions as above.

10

incorporating several markets and additional costs incurred if a producer chooses to export.
Given the common structures of the above model and the Melitz framework, equivalent effects
of an industry’s foreign trade exposure are implied here. I attempt to control for trade exposure
differences in some empirical specifications.
Entry and Exit. The two-stage game of entry and production above abstracts from continuous
producer turnover in a dynamic setting. However, dynamics could be added to the model using a
framework of the sort found in Hopenhayn (1992), Asplund and Nocke (2003), and Melitz
(forthcoming). These models share the common characteristic of allowing producer-level
uncertainty while preserving deterministic industry aggregates, including the productivity
distribution.
Both Asplund and Nocke (2003) and Melitz (forthcoming) specify a productivity
evolution process that induces a segment of industry producers to exit each period upon receipt
of a sufficiently bad productivity innovation. Both papers assume that a fraction of producers ρ
retain the same cost/productivity level from one period to the next.10 Since industry aggregates
are constant, this share of producers remains in the industry. Melitz supposes the remaining
fraction of producers receive a “killer” shock which forces exit. In Asplund and Nocke, the 1-ρ
share of producers receive new productivity draws from a common ex-ante distribution (the
same one from which entrants receive their draws). Thus, some producers receive new draws
poor enough to require closure and liquidation, while others are able to remain in the industry—
and may even be more productive than they were previously.
Both papers have the same implication regarding the effect of idiosyncratic productivity
dynamics on the industry productivity distribution. As the persistence of the productivity
process increases (i.e., ρ gets bigger), the cutoff productivity level also climbs, decreasing
productivity dispersion and increasing the average productivity level. Intuitively, greater
persistence implies a larger stream of discounted expected future profits for successful entrants
because of the lower probability of receiving a negative productivity shock. Free entry requires
that this be balanced by a lower probability of successful entry; i.e., a higher productivity cutoff
value. I include a proxy for productivity persistence in one of the empirical tests below.
10

To facilitate discussion, I have changed the notation from the original papers.

11

II. Empirical Method and Data

Testing the product substitutability–productivity distribution link implies a general
empirical specification of the form
y I = β 0 + X sI B s + X cI Bc + ε I .
Here, the plant-level productivity distribution moment yI (a dispersion or central tendency
measure) for industry I is a function of a constant, a vector of substitutability measures XsI, a
vector XcI of other influences on the moments, and an industry-specific error term. I discuss the
components of these vectors below.
The productivity distribution moments in this study are computed for 443 four-digit
industries using plant-level data from the 1977 Census of Manufactures (CM).11 The CM
contains production data for every manufacturing establishment in the U.S., totaling roughly
300,000 plants. To lighten reporting burdens, particularly small plants (typically those with less
than five employees—about one-third of plants), are classified as Administrative Record (AR)
cases. Since all input data for these plants except the number of employees and total payroll is
imputed, my sample includes only the roughly 200,000 non-AR plants in order to minimize
productivity mismeasurement.
I compute industry productivity moments with four different productivity measures,
estimating the model with moments from each of the corresponding distributions as a robustness
check. Two are labor productivity measures: value added per employee, and value added per
employee-hour. Value added is calculated as the difference between a plant’s reported value of
shipments and its expenditures on materials, parts, and energy. I use value added as an output
measure because interplant differences in intermediate input intensity (primarily in materials
expenditures) cause gross-output productivity measures to be quite noisy for some industries.
Plant employee-hours are computed as reported production-worker hours plus nonproduction
worker hours imputed according to the method of Davis and Haltiwanger (1991).12
11

I am restricted to the 1977 cross section because the highly detailed Commodity Transportation Survey data used
to measure geographic substitutability across industries is not available for later years. The CTS is, in effect, the
binding data constraint in this study.
12

The plant’s number of nonproduction workers is multiplied by the average annual hours for nonproduction
workers in the corresponding two-digit industry (calculated from Current Population Survey data).

12

In addition to these labor productivity measures, two total factor productivity (TFP)
values are computed for each establishment. Both follow the typical form
tfp i = y i − α l li − α k k i − α m mi − α e ei ,
where the lower-case letters indicate logarithms of establishment-level TFP, gross output, labor
hours, capital stock, materials, and energy inputs. The two TFP measures differ by the manner
in which the factor elasticities αj, j = {l,k,m,e} are computed. TFP1 uses input cost shares of the
individual plants, while TFP2 uses the average cost shares across all industry plants for each
plant in the corresponding four-digit industry. The plant-specific elasticities in TFP1 better
account for within-industry technology differences manifested in input intensity differences, but
are potentially vulnerable to measurement error because of the noisy nature of establishmentlevel data. Using the average input elasticities for all industry plants in TFP2 trades flexibility
with regard to intraindustry technology differences for a reduction in spurious productivity
dispersion due to measurement error. Reported wage bills, materials costs, and energy
expenditures from the CM are used to compute input cost shares. Capital expenditures are
computed by multiplying reported plant equipment and building stocks by their respective
capital rental rates for each plant’s corresponding two-digit industry.13
I measure industry productivity dispersion as the interquartile productivity difference
divided by the industry’s median productivity level.14 The dispersion measure is standardized to
prevent pure scale differences between industries—primarily a factor for labor productivity
measures due to capital intensity variations—from causing productivity variation neither within
the confines of the model nor very relevant to the paper’s hypothesis. Ordinal moments are used
rather than the coefficient of variation because moments from plant-level data are especially
vulnerable to influence of outliers.
For regressions with a central tendency measure as the dependent variable, I use median
total factor productivity in the industry (both TFP1 and TFP2). Labor productivity levels are not
included in the central tendency regressions because wide capital intensity variation yields
average labor productivity differences between industries that are outside of the theoretical
13

Capital rental rates are from unpublished data constructed and used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for use in
computing their Multifactor Productivity series. Formulas, related methodology, and data sources are described in
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1983) and Harper, Berndt, and Wood (1989).

14

I check the results for robustness to other interquantile differences below.

13

framework. (It is obviously not possible to remove scale effects in central tendency moments.)
TFP is much less susceptible to such scale problems. Median TFP levels are used rather than the
averages to counteract outlier effects.
II.A. Product Substitutability Factors

Ideally, one would regress these productivity moments on an average substitutability
parameter implied by the industry’s demand system. It is unfortunately impossible to estimate
each of these values given the number of industries and products. My strategy is to instead use a
vector XsI of measurable proxies for substitution elasticities among the outputs of industry
producers. To motivate my choices for variables included in XsI, I return to the earlier discussion
on sources of substitutability barriers.
Geographic barriers to substitution arise when transport costs hinder producers from
practicably selling their output beyond certain shipment distances. These distances, of course,
depend on the magnitude of the transport costs. I compute two measures of transport costs for an
industry; both use data from the 1977 Commodity Transport Survey (CTS). This CTS contains
an enormous amount of information on manufacturers’ shipments at a detailed product level
(most by five-digit product class). Included in this unusually rich survey are, for each product
class, the average dollar value per pound of shipments and a decomposition of total tons shipped
by distance category. This information is used to construct the two transport cost measures.
The first metric, VALUELB, is the natural logarithm of the weighted sum of the dollarvalue-to-weight ratios of all product classes in a given four-digit industry. The weights are the
product classes’ shares of total industry product tonnage shipped.15 There is an obvious
relationship between the value of shipments per pound and product transportability. Goods
valuable in relation to their weight are more economical to ship. Industries with high values of
VALUELB expectedly have less geographically segmented output markets and greater product
substitutability.
The second measure of geographic substitutability utilizes CTS product-class data on the
15

While there is close correlation between the CTS product categories and the corresponding four-digit SIC
industries that contain them, they do not perfectly match. Using published descriptions of industry product types
(from U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1972), I was able to aggregate products into their corresponding
industry for nearly every four-digit SIC. Shipment data for the ordnance industries (SICs 3282-4,9) were not
available; these industries are not included in my sample. A concordance is available from the author upon request.

14

tonnage shipped within each of seven distance-from-production-site categories. The measure,
LOCAL, is a metric of the typical geographic size of industry producers’ output markets. It is a
weighted sum of the fraction of output (by ton) shipped within each distance category.16
Industries with plants that ship a large fraction of their output to nearby areas have high values of
LOCAL and expectedly have less spatial product substitutability.17
Differences in the physical configuration of industry goods also create product
substitutability barriers. Producers within textiles industries, for example, can have considerable
variation in their product attributes. I measure this variation using the product differentiation
index of Gollop and Monahan (1991). Their generalized Herfindahl-type product diversification
index, DIVINDX, takes into account not only the number of industry products (as defined by the
SIC product classification system), but also how (un)equal the production shares of product lines
are within the industry, as well as the dissimilarity of products as measured by the input shares of
various intermediate products used to make them.
As a robustness check, I estimate specifications using a less sophisticated but more
interpretable physical differentiation measure: the average primary product specialization ratio
(PPSR) across industry establishments. PPSR is the fraction of plant output accounted for by the
plant’s primary seven-digit SIC product. Industries with a lot of physical product variety are
likely to be comprised of plants that produce a number of product types and therefore low PPSR
values. Conversely, an industry that completely specializes in a single product will have an
average PPSR equal to one.18,19
16

The categories are less than 100 miles, 100-199, 200-299, 300-499, 500-999, 1000-1499, and over 1500 miles.
The weights are constructed as follows. The average shipment distance within each distance category is computed
assuming uniformly distributed shipments within the category. (I use 1750 miles for shipments reported as over
1500 miles.) The sum of these seven distances is divided by each category’s average distance, and these ratios are
normalized so the weight of the under 100 miles category equals one. The resulting weights are: under 100 miles, 1;
100-199 miles, 0.333; 200-299, 0.2; 300-499, 0.133; 500-999, 0.067; 1000-1499, 0.04; and over 1500 miles, 0.029.
17

Use of LOCAL as a transport costs measure requires a caveat. If an industry’s customers are geographically
concentrated and industry plants choose to operate near their customers, it is possible that an industry could have
high output substitutability despite a small average shipment radius. This is not a major issue for consumer goods
industries, whose buyers are distributed throughout the country, but it may be for some industries which serve as
suppliers of intermediate goods to specialized downstream buyers. I attempted to control for this possibility in
specifications using LOCAL by including the measure of industry geographic concentration created by Ellison and
Glaeser (1997). (Thanks to Glenn Ellison for providing the data at the four-digit SIC level.) Inclusion of this
control did not noticeably change the coefficient on LOCAL.

18

It is possible that some industries with large product variety divide their output among a greater number of
specialized establishments rather than producing several products at one plant. However, a low PPSR value is
certainly a sufficient condition for physical product differentiation, if not a necessary one. The across-industry

15

Product substitutability can also be shaped by advertising/branding effects. I account for
such influences by using industry advertising expenditures data from the 1977 Benchmark
Input/Output Tables. A measure of industry advertising intensity, ADV, is constructed as the
ratio of advertising expenditures to total shipments.20
The industrial organization literature is divided on the question of the nature of the
relationship between ADV and output substitutability.21 One strand of research argues that
advertising serves to create artificial product differentiation, largely along the lines of the
branding motive discussed in the introduction. This view holds that industries with higher
advertising intensities should exhibit more product differentiation. An opposing strand contends
that advertising is informative and serves to educate consumers about superior products.
Advertising expenditures under this view allow more productive firms to take market share away
from less efficient competitors (by reducing search costs, say), increasing substitutability across
industry producers. Of course, it is also possible that both effects act simultaneously; if their
impacts have roughly equal magnitudes, estimates would show no overall influence of ADV on
moments of industry productivity distributions.
The model above indicates that higher substitutability will be correlated with greater
truncation of the plant-level productivity distribution, and therefore less dispersion and higher
average productivity levels. Expressed in terms of the product substitutability measures used
here, lower geographic segmentation (higher VALUELB or lower LOCAL) and less physical
correlation between the two product differentiation measures is –0.813, indicating a close (but naturally oppositely
signed) correspondence.
19

Both of these measures of physical product differentiation are limited by the SIC product classification system, of
course. This leads to two vulnerabilities of DIVINDX and PPSR as accurate gauges of product substitutability.
Even the highly detailed seven-digit SIC product classification is only a blunt instrument for characterizing the
enormous variety of manufactured products. A single SIC “product” may in truth encompass dozens, or even
hundreds, of physically distinct products. The coarseness of the taxonomy will not cause empirical problems as long
as product variety is undercounted at the same rate across industries, but this condition is unfortunately not testable.
Second, product codes are somewhat inflexible over time, so new products that do not obviously fit into any of the
categories in the existing system may be misclassified. As more new products are introduced, the original
classification system matches the existing product space less completely. This drift should be minimized in this
paper, because the SIC classification system underwent a major overhaul in 1972, not too long before my sample
was taken. While neither vulnerability is a fatal flaw, one should keep them in mind when interpreting the results.

20

While the detailed BEA industry categorization used in the input-output tables roughly corresponds to the SIC
four-digit system, data had to be pooled across some SIC industries to match more broadly defined BEA groups.
Thus a few four-digit industries have a common measured advertising-to-sales ratio.

21

See, for example, the discussion in Tirole (1988) for a partial review of this literature.

16

product differentiation (lower DIVINDX or higher PPSR) correspond to greater product
substitutability. The effect of higher advertising intensity (higher ADV) on substitutability is
theoretically ambiguous.
II.B. Other Influences on the Productivity Distribution

The model and its extensions indicate factors besides product substitutability can shape
industry productivity distributions. I include in XcI controls for these other influences using
variables constructed from several sources. It is not apparent beforehand whether excluding
these other factors from the regressions would bias the substitutability coefficients, as the other
factors may not be correlated with product substitutability. However, adding proxies for these
other effects also allows further testing of the model’s implications independent of any product
substitutability effects, which is interesting in its own right.
As shown above, both sunk entry costs and fixed operating costs affect the critical
productivity cutoff level, and therefore the moments of an industry productivity distribution.
Controlling for these influences can be empirically difficult. It is not clear which fixed costs
producers face are tied to entry and which are tied to operations. In the model, plants incur the
sunk entry cost s before they learn their productivity level. If in reality plants must actually
produce some output to learn their productivity levels, then any production-related overhead
could be classified as either a fixed operating cost (f in the model) or an entry cost, at least in the
first year of production. This scenario implies difficulties in separately measuring the influences
of the two cost types, as they move the truncation point of the productivity distribution in
opposite directions. Using observables that could be linked to either cost structure could yield
inconclusive results. If, on the other hand, producers learn their productivity levels before
starting operations, it is not immediately clear how to measure entry costs given that most data is
collected after production is underway. I attempt to reconcile these confounding factors by
assuming that sunk entry costs are related to post-production observables while using a fixed
operating production cost measure that conceivably moves independently of entry costs.
I follow the method employed by Sutton (1991) to obtain a measure of sunk entry costs.
This value, SUNKCOST, is the market share of an industry’s median-sized plant multiplied by
the capital-output ratio for the industry. The former element of this product is sometimes used as
a measure of minimum efficient plant scale. Thus SUNKCOST is a proxy for the amount of
17

capital (relative to the industry’s total market size) required to build such a plant.22
Fixed operating costs are measured by the average ratio across industry establishments of
non-production workers to total employment. This value, FIXEDCOST, proxies for the amount
of overhead labor required by the industry technology. Because overhead labor is a fixed cost
explicitly tied to production rather than entry, comovement between FIXEDCOST and entry
costs should be related only through any inherent correlation between f and s in industry
technologies, and not through erroneous measurement of entry costs. Both FIXEDCOST and
SUNKCOST are constructed as proportions to remove scale effects across industries.
Some specifications include controls for international trade exposure. I use both importand export-based metrics computed from the trade data discussed in Feenstra (1997). Industry
import penetration, IMPPEN, is the ratio of industry product imports to the sum of these imports
plus the value of domestic production in the industry. Export intensity EXPINT is the share of
exports in total domestic output for the sector. Larger values of either variable should coincide
with greater trade exposure. As mentioned above, Melitz (forthcoming) shows that if these
variables proxy for the extent of trade barriers in an industry (and therefore the extent of tradedriven truncation of the productivity distribution), they should expectedly have negative
correlations with industry productivity dispersion and positive correspondence with the central
tendency of industry productivity.
Differences in the ex-ante cost/productivity distribution g(c) may also induce variation in
industries’ productivity distributions. To the extent that these are reflected in output scale
differences, normalizing dispersion moments to the median productivity level in the industry
accounts for this influence. I also test for robustness of the dispersion results to the use of other
interquantile differences, which allow determination of the effects across different subsets of the
productivity distribution. While clearly not a flawless solution, these steps should remove a
substantial amount of the influence of different ex-ante distributions across industries.
III. Results

I first regress industry productivity distribution moments on each of the product
substitutability measures. The results are presented in Table 3. Panel A shows the coefficients
22

See Sutton (1991) for a thorough discussion of the advantages and limitations of this measure.

18

obtained by regressing each of the four productivity dispersion measures on the respective
measures separately.23
The results are consistent with the discussion above and the predictions of the model.
Factors that plausibly increase industry product substitutability are negatively correlated with
within-industry productivity dispersion. Regarding spatial substitutability, increases in
VALUELB (the average value per pound of an industry’s output) and decreases in LOCAL (an
inverse measure of average shipment distance)—both of which correspond to greater
substitutability—coincide with declines in productivity dispersion. Physical differentiation
factors play a similar role. Decreases in DIVINDX (the Gollop-Monahan index) and increases
in PPSR (the average fraction of plant output made up of plants’ primary products), which
indicate higher substitutability, are also negatively correlated with productivity dispersion. The
coefficient on ADV (the industry ratio of advertising to sales) is positive in all regressions;
industries with higher advertising intensities exhibit more measured productivity dispersion.
These findings are consistent across dispersion moments of all four productivity
measures. For those substitutability measures with predicted directions of correlation with
productivity dispersion, none of the estimates’ signs contradict the implications of the model.
Further, 12 of these 16 are significant at the 5% level, and another one nearly so. These singlefactor regressions indicate that productivity dispersion and product substitutability are
undoubtedly correlated, and in directions consistent with theory.
Univariate regressions with median industry TFP as the dependent variable are also
largely consistent with expectations. As seen in Panel B of Table 3, industries with higher valueto-weight ratios and longer average shipment distances have higher median productivity levels
on average. Greater physical product differentiation—a higher value of DIVINDX or a lower
PPSR—corresponds to a lower industry median TFP level. The corresponding coefficient
estimates are consistently signed with the productions of the model and are significant at the 5%
level in five of eight cases. The results from the univariate regressions using ADV are more
ambiguous: the coefficients are virtually zero, statistically speaking, and are oppositely signed.
I have two measures of both spatial substitutability (VALUELB and LOCAL) and
physical product differentiation (DIVINDX and PPSR). For the sake of brevity, and because the
23

Although the coefficients are listed in columns under the dispersion measures, the factor coefficients in this table
are for single-variable (and a constant term) regressions.

19

results in Table 3 suggest that all of these measures yield qualitatively similar results, from this
point on I only report results for specifications using the measure of each that is less susceptible
to measurement problems: VALUELB and DIVINDX.24 Estimates from regressions using the
alternative measures, available from the author, largely match the findings presented below.
I next regress the moments on all output substitutability measures simultaneously. The
outcomes are presented in Table 4. Again the consistency of the results is notable. In the
productivity dispersion regressions (the first four columns), all estimates for VALUELB and
DIVINDX have the expected sign, and most are statistically significant at the 5% level (all are at
10%). As with the single-variable regressions, there is a positive and usually statistically
significant correlation between advertising intensity and productivity dispersion. The estimated
magnitudes of the responses to differences in the substitutability measures are nontrivial. A
quadrupling of value density (which ranges from $0.01 to $150 per pound in my sample)
corresponds to a decline in the labor productivity dispersion measures of roughly one-sixth of
their standard deviation, and one-fifth of a standard deviation of the TFP dispersion measures. A
one-standard-deviation increase in DIVINDX coincides with a quarter-standard-deviation drop
in labor productivity variability and one-eighth-standard-deviation decrease in TFP dispersion.
An increase of one percentage point in advertising-to-sales ratio corresponds with labor
productivity and TFP dispersion increases of roughly one-ninth to one-tenth of their respective
standard deviations.
The product substitutability measures jointly explain seven to 12% of across-industry
differences in productivity dispersion. Thus substantial productivity heterogeneity remains to be
explained. This is not surprising given all of the across-industry variation in
technological/supply-side influences that shape productivity distributions. Product
substitutability is surely an economically relevant part of the story, however.25 Furthermore, as
argued in the introduction, there are also non-measurable product differentiation influences
whose impacts obviously cannot be captured here. The present results do hint that these non-

24

Recall that LOCAL may confuse geographic clustering of an industry’s customer base with low spatial
differentiation, and PPSR may indicate spuriously low product differentiation if industries spread many product
types across a number of highly specialized plants.

25

Measurement error in plant productivity levels, doubtlessly present in establishment-level data sets, will create
spurious productivity dispersion. Thus, the variation in true productivity dispersion moments explained by
measurable product substitutability factors may be greater than the amount measured here.

20

measurable factors affect industries’ plant-level productivity distributions in the same manner as
their measurable counterparts. It is possible that the combined effect of measurable and nonmeasurable substitutability differences is considerable.
The two rightmost columns of Table 4 show estimates from the median TFP regressions.
Jointly estimating coefficients for all substitutability factors largely preserves the findings of the
univariate specification. VALUELB is positive and highly significant in both of its regressions.
A quadrupling of value density across industries corresponds with an increase of about 10% in
the median productivity level. DIVINDX is negatively related to median productivity levels.
The (insignificantly) estimated coefficients imply each standard deviation increase in the index
corresponds to a drop in the median productivity level of 2 to 3%. Given the negative partial
correlation seen between advertising intensity with productivity dispersion, the estimates of
ADV from the central-tendency regressions are slightly puzzling. While the direction of the
linkage between advertising intensity and substitutability cannot be pinned down theoretically,
we should expect empirically that ADV has oppositely signed correlations with industry
productivity dispersion and median productivity levels. These ADV estimates are much less
precisely estimated than those in the dispersion regressions, however, so the positive coefficients
here may be spurious. The product substitutability measures jointly explain roughly 13-14% of
the variance in median productivity levels.
The empirical model is further enriched by adding SUNKCOST and FIXEDCOST as
controls. The results are presented in Table 5. Apparently the correlations found above are not
due to correlations between the substitutability factors and features of the cost structure of
industry technologies. In the productivity dispersion regressions, VALUELB and DIVINDX
retain their expected signs and are significantly estimated in every case. ADV still has a
significant positive coefficient in the dispersion regressions, excepting a negative and
insignificant coefficient in the model using the plant-specific input elasticities TFP measure.
The magnitudes of the substitutability coefficients are similar to those obtained without
controlling for fixed costs.
Furthermore, the across-industry comovement between the sunk entry cost measure and
productivity dispersion is as predicted by the model. The coefficient on SUNKCOST is positive
and statistically distinguishable from zero in every specification. The implications of the
FIXEDCOST coefficients are more ambiguous. With regard to labor productivity dispersion,
21

fixed production costs are found to have their expected negative correspondence. However, the
TFP dispersion results are not in tune with the model’s predictions: both FIXEDCOST
coefficients are positively signed, and one of these is precisely estimated. Adding these two
controls for sunk entry and fixed production costs improve the model’s explanatory power
slightly, with a typical increase in R2 of about 0.03.
The results of the median industry productivity level regressions with SUNKCOST and
FIXEDCOST echo the findings of the dispersion regressions. Value-to-weight ratios and the
product diversity index have nonzero coefficients with the expected signs. Unlike in the
productivity level regressions without fixed cost controls, the ADV coefficients in this
specification are negatively signed (albeit insignificantly estimated). This is consistent with the
estimated positive correlation between ADV and productivity dispersion. All SUNKCOST and
FIXEDCOST estimated coefficients have the expected signs. In a turnabout from the dispersion
regressions, here it is the FIXEDCOST estimates that are statistically significant while the
SUNKCOST coefficients are less precise. The explanatory power of the model for acrossindustry differences in median productivity levels ranges from 15 to 18%.26
These findings largely agree both with intuitive priors and the model presented above.
Measurable product substitutability factors have expected correlations with moments of
industries’ plant-level productivity distributions. More spatially localized industries have plantlevel productivity distributions with greater dispersion and lower central tendencies. Industries
with greater physical product differentiation have higher dispersion and lower median
productivity levels. Advertising intensity is positively correlated with productivity dispersion,
and at least in when technology controls are added, is weakly associated with declines in median
productivity levels. Moreover, these results are found in a number of empirical specifications.
Substitutability factors are correctly signed and significantly estimated in models ranging from
26

SUNKCOST combines measures of the median establishment-level market share and the capital-to-output ratio in
an industry. Arguably, either of these could be related to industries’ cost structures separately through other
channels. While its interpretation is not critical to the key results here on product substitutability, the results indicate
that the measure may be related to the shape of within-industry productivity distributions in directions predicted by
theory. To see if the two components of SUNKCOST have separable effects, I ran a specification where the
components entered separately. Median market share was significantly and positively correlated with productivity
dispersion and negatively correlated with the median productivity level in the industry. These correlations are the
same as those implied for SUNKCOST. On the other hand, increases in the industry capital-to-output ratio were
associated (statistically significantly) with less productivity dispersion and higher median productivity levels.
Entering the components separately had no substantive effect on the product substitutability measure coefficients.

22

simple bivariate correlations to those including other substitutability measures and controls for
sunk entry and fixed operating costs. The results also hold across several productivity measures.
The estimated effects of sunk and fixed costs, while somewhat weaker than those for the product
substitutability measures because of the difficulty finding measurable proxies, are also on
balance consistent with the theory.
III.A. Robustness Checks

To see if the results discussed above hold in more generalized frameworks, I have
conducted several robustness checks. These are described here.
Foreign Trade. I estimate a specification that includes in XcI industry-level measures of import
penetration and export intensity (IMPPEN and EXPINT) to see if international trade affects the
measured relationship between product substitutability and productivity distribution moments.
The results are presented in Table 6. Importantly, the qualitative and quantitative features of the
substitutability factor and sunk and fixed costs estimates are unaffected when the extra controls
are included. It does not appear that the results obtained above arise due to omitted variable bias
regarding this other influence.
As for the coefficients on the additional controls, the weight of the evidence suggests
(although a greater proportion of their coefficients are statistically insignificant) that industries
with greater exposure to international trade (higher IMPPEN and EXPINT) have more
productivity variability. This correspondence is counter to the implications of Melitz
(forthcoming). The benefits of exposure to foreign markets enjoyed by the more productive
domestic firms should drive the least efficient domestic producers out of business, thereby
decreasing productivity dispersion. Perhaps the positive comovement seen here is explained in
part by reverse causation, if foreign producers deliberately target industries with wide
productivity distributions to better their relative competitive position. It could also be that
foreign trade serves to increase product differentiation in an industry, counteracting the
competitive effect of trade productivity dispersion.
The regressions using median industry productivity as the dependent variable are also
largely unaffected by the inclusion of the additional controls. Product substitutability factors are
still correlated with productivity distributions’ central tendencies in the predicted manner.
23

Advertising intensity again has a negative but weak comovement with the median. Three of the
four sunk and fixed cost coefficients have the expected sign, but only the FIXEDCOST
coefficients are statistically significant. The coefficients for the trade exposure controls yield
results that, because they have oppositely signed correlations with the median productivity, are
consistent with their measured correlations with productivity dispersion. All are insignificant,
however.
Productivity Dispersion Measure. I check if the results are sensitive to the productivity
dispersion measure (the interquartile range divided by the median) by performing the industry
productivity dispersion regressions using the difference between the 90th and 10th productivity
percentiles divided by the median as the dispersion measure. These results are shown in Table
6a. The results are qualitatively consistent with those presented earlier. The FIXEDCOST
coefficients gain statistical significance in the labor productivity regressions, while DIVINDX
and SUNKCOST lose significance in the TFP dispersion regressions. Excepting these
differences, the choice of a narrower range to gauge productivity dispersion does not seem to
greatly influence the results.27
Dynamics. The theoretical framework abstracts from dynamic evolution of producers’
productivity levels. Asplund and Nocke (2003) and Melitz (forthcoming) show that changes in
the persistence of the (exogenous) productivity process affect the cutoff productivity level; more
persistence implies a higher cutoff. To control for the possible influence of across-industry
difference in producer-level productivity persistence, I estimate a specification that includes in
XcI the fraction of industry plants in the 1972 Census of Manufactures—the census that most
immediately precedes my data—that still operate (in the same industry) in the 1977 CM.28 This
measure, SURVRT, is meant to proxy for the persistence of the industry’s plant-level
productivity evolution. A higher SURVRT value, all else being equal, implies a higher
probability that operating plants receive updated productivity draws above the threshold (i.e., a
27

The magnitudes of the coefficients are changed because the dependent variable is now scaled differently. I also
estimated the model using the 95th-5th percentile range and obtained similar results.
28

I do include Administrative Record plants when computing survival rates, because here I only need to know of
their existence, not their production specifics.

24

higher ρ). Increases in SURVRT should expectedly be correlated with lower productivity
dispersion and higher median TFP levels.29
The results of this exercise are shown in Table 7. The results for both the productivity
dispersion and the central tendency regressions closely match those in Table 6. Furthermore, the
coefficients on SURVRT have the predicted signs. While the sensitivity of survival rates to
changes in industry equilibria means that SURVRT may capture more than exogenous influences
on the evolution of plant productivity levels, it does suggest that any mismeasurement in this
regard is not correlated with the other regressors in a way that would affect the benchmark
results.
Capital Measurement. As discussed above, I have excluded Administrative Record plants from
my sample because much of their production data is imputed. The remaining establishments
report virtually all production data directly. The exceptions to this are establishments not in the
current Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM) panel. (Roughly 35% of the 198,000
establishments in my sample are in the ASM panel.) These plants have imputed capital stocks,
and these imputations can then in turn lead to TFP mismeasurement. To ensure that productivity
mismeasurement arising from capital stock imputation is not driving the results, I re-estimate the
TFP specifications using only ASM plants to compute within-industry productivity moments.
Another form of capital mismeasurement arises when plants vary their capital services
inputs by changing the intensity with which they utilize their capital stock. When this is the
case, the value of a plant’s capital stock does not accurately reflect capital’s contribution to
production. Systematic differences in capital utilization patterns across industries could
potentially affect the above findings for those specifications using TFP measures.
To check for the influence of variable capital utilization, I estimate a specification where
I compute plant TFP levels according to the suggestion of Basu and Kimball (1997). They show
that under the assumptions of cost minimization by plants and a production function that is

29

Controlling for differences in industries’ productivity evolution processes with survival rates is at best an
imperfect solution. Measured survival rates are likely to confound any underlying dynamics in the producer-level
productivity process with the industry equilibrium effects of changes in product market and technological parameters
that also affect exit rates. (Indeed, exploring these effects is an interesting avenue for future research.) Hence I only
report results including SURVRT as a robustness check rather than incorporating this control into the main
specification.

25

Leontief in capital services and materials (i.e., one cannot substitute extra materials for capital in
production) that TFP can be defined as
tfp i = y − α l l i − (α k + α m )mi − α e ei − δα l hi ,
where variables are defined as in the standard TFP measure above, hi is the log of hours per
employee, and δ is a parameter which Basu and Kimball estimate as having a value of 1.06.
Intuitively, including the product of labor’s cost share and logged hours per worker and adding
capital’s cost share to material’s cost share in the TFP measure controls for increases in capital
utilization intensity because materials use is proportional to capital services flows. Including
hours per worker captures variations in the intensity of labor utilization.
The results of these exercises can be found in Table 8.30 It does not appear that capital—
and therefore TFP—mismeasurement due to either through capital stock imputation or variable
utilization is driving the results obtained above. While some precision is lost in the ASM-plantonly results, the product substitutability estimates, both in the productivity dispersion and central
tendency regressions, are qualitatively (and to a lesser extent, quantitatively) comparable to
those discussed above. The notable difference is that the (still imprecisely estimated)
coefficients on ADV in the central tendency regressions are now positive.
IV. Caveats

The key results linking output substitutability and the moments of the industry
productivity distribution seem to be robust across a number of empirical specifications, with the
possible exception of a weak connection between industry advertising intensity and the central
tendency of the productivity distribution. As with nearly any study, however, the findings come
with some caveats. Several potential concerns are discussed below, along with mitigating
factors that may minimize their influence on the key results.
It is important to note that the empirical tests above were performed using moments of
measured productivity distributions. The introductory discussion and the model make the
common conceptualization that productivity is the efficiency of input use with respect to
production of output, and as such is related to production costs. Empirical productivity
measures, however, are not so cleanly obtained. One particular difficulty is that producer output
30

For the specification adjusting for variable utilization, I again use the full sample of plants, including those not in

26

is measured in terms of revenue rather than more appropriate units, due to a lack of
comprehensive physical output data or plant-specific deflators. Plant-level price variation enters
into output measures and can create measured productivity variation independent of efficiency
differences.
Melitz (2000) points out one effect of this is an under-measurement bias in between-plant
productivity differences, where the size of this bias is larger when the elasticity of output
substitution is low. Notice, however, that this effect works against my empirical results. Intraindustry productivity dispersion should be most underestimated when substitutability is lowest.
The results above, despite this possible influence, show that productivity dispersion in an
industry grows with the amount of product substitution. The true dispersion might be even
greater than measured in low-substitutability industries, and the true correlation with
substitutability greater.
A similar byproduct of revenue-based output measures is that any across-industry
differences markups would create variation in median revenue-based TFP through price effects.
If high fixed operating costs in an industry support higher average markups, for instance, this
would appear as a higher median TFP. It is possible that this is in part driving the related results
in the central tendency regressions. However, the influence of markups on median TFP
differences may also tend to work against some of the results above rather than spuriously create
them. If higher markups are sustainable in low substitutability industries, this would induce a
negative correlation between measured TFP and substitutability: revenue-based TFP would tend
to overstate (understate) true productivity in low- (high-) substitutability industries. The
empirical results indicate that despite this possibility, average TFP levels tend to instead be
positively correlated with substitutability.
The measurement problems inherent to quantifying sunk and fixed costs are additional
empirical hurdles. While I took care in finding proxies for these influences on productivity
distributions, the resulting controls are at best approximate. However, this concern is balanced
by the facts that the product substitutability results are qualitatively invariant to inclusion of
technological controls, and that the sunk entry and fixed operating cost proxies are usually
observed to be correlated with productivity moments in the expected directions. Additionally,

the ASM.

27

even if these proxies were not able to separately identify the influence of sunk and fixed costs,
their inclusion still can remove their joint influence on industry productivity distributions.
The model also assumes that product substitutability varies exogenously across
industries. This is not necessarily true in reality. While across-industry differences in spatial
substitutability (caused by the inherent physical characteristics of products) might be presumed
to be out of the hands of producers, advertising intensity certainly is not, and perhaps a great deal
of physical differentiation is endogenous as well. Productivity dispersion itself may cause
producers to increase differentiation by physically altering their product or through their
advertising behavior. Less efficient plants might have the incentive to put greater distance in
product space between themselves and their more efficient competitors. This would reverse the
direction of causation implied by the present theory. While an exploration of such producer
efforts is a worthy research topic, it is beyond the scope of this paper. My focus here is
determining whether there is indeed a systematic relationship between product substitutability
and moments of the productivity distribution, not characterizing the causal connection. Since
endogenous substitutability would preserve the direction of the correlations implied by the
model, the correspondences found here are consistent with the presence of both exogenous and
endogenous substitutability differences.
Finally, exploiting across-industry differences to empirically test the implications of the
model raises issues of inter-industry heterogeneity affecting the results. Unfortunately, data
limitations prevent the use of within-industry substitutability changes from being measured at a
disaggregate level. However, I reference the aforementioned within-industry case study of
similar concept in Syverson (2001). The results there within an industry are consistent with
those found here across industries, suggesting that the links between substitutability and
productivity moments found above are legitimate.
V. Conclusion

The evidence presented in the paper suggests that product substitutability—a
characteristic of industry demand—is systematically related to the shape of the industry’s
equilibrium plant-level productivity distribution. Measurable factors likely correlated with high
substitutability, such as low transport costs and less physical product differentiation, are shown
to be negatively related with productivity dispersion and positively with median productivity in
28

an industry. These findings are robust; they are found both in simple bivariate correlations as
well as when controls for other influences on industries’ productivity distributions are included
in empirical specifications. Additionally, the empirical results suggest that across-industry
differences in these other influences on the productivity distribution, such as the size of sunk
entry and fixed operating costs, are correlated with variability in productivity distribution
moments in the expected direction. The exception to this is an industry’s trade exposure, which
seems to correspond with productivity moments in directions opposite that predicted in Melitz
(forthcoming).
These results suggest that, while the technological/supply-side factors that have been the
focus of the related literature doubtlessly play a role in creating productivity dispersion, demandside influences are also important. Measurable substitutability factors explain a nontrivial
fraction of the total interindustry variation in productivity moments. Further, additional
unmeasured (or unmeasurable) types of substitutability barriers may explain some of the
remaining variation. Exploring the specific output market mechanisms driving these results may
be a fruitful path for further research.
The findings offer help in understanding why productivity differences exist within
industries and what factors affect their magnitude, a puzzle discussed in the introduction. On a
broader scale, they also lend insight into how aggregate productivity dynamics might be
affected, either by shifts in output shares across industries with different shapes of their
productivity distribution, or by shifts over time of the product substitutability factors within
industries.

29

Appendix: Incorporating Transport Costs into the Model
Assume industries operate in two markets, each identical to the one in the base model. I assume, as in
Melitz and Ottaviano (2003), that producers can produce not only for their home market (as above), but for the
outside market if they so choose. Selling to the outside market, however, involves paying transport costs to ship
output. I assume these are of the standard “iceberg” variety, where τ > 1 units must be shipped for one unit to arrive.
Thus the marginal cost of producing for the outside market is τci,, while still only ci for the home market. A large
set of potential entrants in each market considers the entry decision specified above.
Producers can charge different prices in each market. Therefore the optimal price in the home market is
still that given by (5) above, but now the optimal price and resulting demand in the outside market are given by:

p i ,outside =

τ
1 αγ
1 ηN
+
p + ci
2 ηN + γ 2 ηN + γ
2

qi ,outside =

1 α
1 ηN
τ
+
p−
ci .
2 ηN + γ 2γ ηN + γ
2γ

(A.1)

and
(A.2)

Variable profits from the outside market are then:

π i ,outside =

1
4γ

2

 αγ

ηN

+
p − τci  .
 ηN + γ η N + γ


(A.3)

Note that because of the symmetric markets assumption, the average price p (which includes prices of both home
and exporting outside market producers) is the same in both markets.
From inspection of (6) and (A.2), it is clear that there will be a range of productivity levels for which homemarket sales are positive but will be zero for the outside market. Define co* and ch* as the cost levels where qi,outside
= 0 and qi,home = 0, respectively. From (6) and (A.2), these levels are
ch * =

αγ
ηN + γ

+

ηN
ηN + γ

p

and

co * =


ηN
1  αγ

+
p 
τ  η N + γ ηN + γ 

(A.4)

Clearly, any potential entrants drawing ci > ch* will choose not to operate, since they would have zero sales in both
markets. However, because of the fixed operating costs, there will also be a set of producers with ci < ch* that will
find production unprofitable. If fixed costs are not too large, there will be a cost level c* ∈ [co*, ch*] where a
producer with ci = c* will not sell to the outside market and will be just indifferent to operating in the home market,
since the variable profits from doing so are just enough to cover the fixed operating costs.31 This level is given by

31

The fixed cost must satisfy c* ≥ co* in equilibrium; i.e.,
2

τ − 1  αγ

ηN

+
p  .

 τ  ηN + γ ηN + γ 
If fixed operating costs are larger than this, but not so large as to make any entry unprofitable, only those producers
who can sell in both markets will choose to operate, since the extra sales are necessary to recoup the high fixed
1
f ≤
4γ

30

(8), and the relationship between co* and c* is
co * =

1

τ

(c * +2 γf ).

(A.5)

Expression (A.4) can be substituted into (A.3) to obtain

π i ,outside =

τ2
(co * −ci )2 ,
4γ

(A.6)

and the value of entry is now

(

)

c*
2
1

Ve = ∫
2 γf + c * −c − f  g (c )dc +
4
γ

0

co *(c* )

∫0

τ 2
2
 (co * −c )  g (c )dc − s = 0 .
4
γ



(A.7)

I have explicitly noted in the above expression that co* is a function of c*, with ∂co*/∂c* > 0. The comparative static
of interest is dc*/dτ. The relevant components of the implicit function theorem are as follows (note that co* is also a
function of τ):
c *(c* )
c * +2 γf
∂V e
(co * −co *)2 g (co *) + ∫ τ (co * −c )(co * −c ) + τ ∂co *  g (c )dc (A.8a)
=−
∂τ
∂τ 
4γ
2γ

0
o

Using the fact that ∂co*/∂τ = –co*/τ, this simplifies to
∂V e
=
∂τ

co *(c* )

∫0

−

τ
2γ

c(c o * −c )g (c )dc < 0 ,

(A.8b)

which is negative since the integral is over c ≤ co*. Further using the fact that ∂co*/∂c* = 1/τ,
∂V e
=
∂c *

c*

(

)

1
∫0 2γ 2 γf + c * −c g (c )dc +

co *(c*)

∫0


τ
 (c o * −c ) g (c )dc > 0 .

 2γ

(A.9)

Therefore dc*/dτ > 0; higher transport costs are akin to lower product substitutability. They support efficiency gaps
between industry competitors because they act as a barrier keeping certain consumers from shifting purchases to
more productive producers.

costs. Here, I consider the case where there are both home-only and home-and-outside market producers. Melitz
and Ottaviano (2003) obtain similar qualitative implications in the exporters-only case with no fixed operating costs.

31

References

Asplund, Marcus and Volker Nocke. “Firm Turnover in Imperfectly Competitive Markets.”
PIER Working Paper 03-010, 2003.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Mark Doms. “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal
Microdata.” Journal of Economic Literature, 38(3), 2000, pp. 569-95.
Basu, Susanto and John G. Fernald. “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
Implications.” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 1997, pp. 249-283.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger. “Wage Dispersion between and within U.S.
Manufacturing Plants, 1963-1986.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Microeconomics 1991, 115-80.
Ellison, Glenn and Edward L. Glaeser. “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
Industries: A Dartboard Approach.” Journal of Political Economy, 105(5), 1997, pp. 889927.
Feenstra, Robert C. “NBER Trade Database, Disk 3: U.S. Exports, 1972-1994, with State
Exports and Other U.S. Data” NBER Working Paper no. 5990, 1997.
Gollop, Frank M. and James L. Monahan. “A Generalized Index of Diversification: Trends in
U.S. Manufacturing.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 73(2), 1991, pp. 318-30.
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Giuseppe Iarossi, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. “Exports and
Manufacturing Productivity in East Asia: A Comparative Analysis of Firm-Level Data.”
NBER Working Paper 8894, 2002.
Harper, Michael J., Ernst R. Berndt, David O. Wood. “Rates of Return and Capital Aggregation
Using Alternative Rental Prices.” in D.W. Jorgenson and R. London, Technology and
Capital Formation, MIT Press, 1989.
Hopenhayn, Hugo A. “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.”
Econometrica, 60(5), 1992, pp. 1127-50.
Melitz, Marc J. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity.” Econometrica, Forthcoming.
Melitz, Marc J. “Estimating Firm-Level Productivity in Differentiated Product Industries.”
Mimeo, Harvard University, December 2000.
Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano. “Estimating Firm-Level Productivity in
Differentiated Product Industries.” Mimeo, Harvard University, 2003.

Sutton, John. Sunk Costs and Market Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.
Syverson, Chad. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.” Mimeo, University
of Chicago, July 2001.
Tirole, Jean. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Commodity Transport Survey. Washington, DC. 1977.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Trends in Multifactor Productivity, 1948-81. Bulletin 2178,
1983.
U.S. Office of Management and Budget. Standard Industrial Classification Manual.
Washington, DC. 1972.

Table 1: Dispersion Across Industries of Within-Industry Productivity Distribution
Moments

Productivity Measure

Within-Industry
Productivity Moment
Median*
IQ Range
90-10 Percentile Range
95-5 Percentile Range

Mean

Std Dev.

IQ Range

3.174
0.662
1.417
2.014

0.407
0.208
0.388
0.568

0.449
0.213
0.407
0.565

Labor
log(Value Added /
Hours)

Median*
IQ Range
90-10 Percentile Range
95-5 Percentile Range

2.521
0.653
1.391
1.969

0.376
0.216
0.389
0.553

0.428
0.242
0.391
0.570

Total Factor Prod. 1
(Plant-Specific
Input Elasticities)

Median*
IQ Range
90-10 Percentile Range
95-5 Percentile Range

1.642
0.447
0.986
1.356

0.370
0.146
0.238
0.291

0.474
0.153
0.276
0.329

Total Factor Prod. 2
(Industry Average
Input Elasticities)

Median*
IQ Range
90-10 Percentile Range
95-5 Percentile Range

1.790
0.290
0.651
0.935

0.342
0.087
0.173
0.233

0.430
0.102
0.196
0.296

Labor Productivity
log(Value Added /
Employees)

N=443
* Due to data disclosure restrictions, the reported median is actually the average of 49th and 51st
percentile values

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Regression Variables

Variable
Value Added per Employee Dispersion
Value Added per Employee-Hour Dispersion
TFP1 Dispersion
TFP2 Dispersion
VALUELB
LOCAL
DIVINDX
PPSR
ADV
FIXEDCOST
SUNKCOST
IMPPEN
EXPINT

Mean
0.209
0.259
0.293
0.165
0.352
0.412
0.151
0.896
0.010
0.232
2.66E-3
0.076
0.059

Std. Dev.
0.058
0.073
0.145
0.047
1.641
0.163
0.096
0.068
0.019
0.093
0.012
0.104
0.069

Table 3: Regression Results—Univariates on Product Substitutability Factors

A. Dispersion Regressions (Interquartile Range ÷ Median Productivity as Dependent Variable)

Factor

Labor
(Output/Employee)

VALUELB

-6.29E-3*
(1.69E-3)
0.048*
(0.170)
0.062*
(0.301)
-0.064
(0.041)
0.703*
(0.151)

LOCAL
DIVINDX
PPSR
ADV

Productivity Measure
Labor
TFP1
(Output/Hour)
-7.21E-3*
(2.12E-3)
0.045*
(0.021)
0.076
(0.039)
-0.084
(0.055)
0.784*
(0.170)

-0.022*
(0.004)
0.082*
(0.041)
0.293*
(0.088)
-0.553*
(0.127)
0.238
(0.244)

TFP2
-6.01E-3*
(1.52E-3)
0.023
(0.014)
0.089*
(0.030)
-0.126*
(0.043)
0.543*
(0.098)

B. Central Tendency Regressions (Median Productivity as Dependent Variable)

Factor
VALUELB
LOCAL
DIVINDX
PPSR
ADV

Productivity Measure
TFP1
TFP2
0.079*
(0.012)
-0.286*
(0.115)
-0.151
(0.240)
0.695*
(0.345)
0.031
(0.727)

0.079*
(0.011)
-0.126
(0.103)
-0.239
(0.226)
0.848*
(0.321)
-0.250
(0.714)

TFP1 is computed using plant-specific input elasticities; TFP2 uses industry average elasticities.
All regressions include a constant term.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.
* Indicates significance at the 5% level.

Table 4: Regression Results—All Substitutability Factors

Productivity Dispersion Regressions

Factor

Labor
(emp)

Labor
(hours)

VALUELB -6.23E-3* -7.15E-3*
(1.66E-3) (2.09E-3)
DIVINDX
0.052
0.065
(0.029)
(0.038)
ADV
0.663*
0.735*
(0.143)
(0.163)
R2
0.094
0.074

TFP1

TFP2

-0.023*
(0.004)
0.308*
(0.084)
0.028
(0.256)
0.106

-6.07E-3*
(1.49E-3)
0.083*
(0.028)
0.487*
(0.088)
0.118

Central Tendency
Regressions
TFP1
TFP2
0.079*
(0.012)
-0.212
(0.217)
0.303
(0.597)
0.125

0.079*
(0.011)
-0.295
(0.201)
0.067
(0.611)
0.149

Table 5: Regression Results—Model with Sunk and Fixed Costs

Productivity Dispersion Regressions
Labor
(emp)
VALUELB

Labor
(hours)

-5.56E-3* -5.94E-3*
(1.70E-3) (2.13E-3)
DIVINDX
0.067*
0.081*
(0.031)
(0.039)
ADV
0.705*
0.796*
(0.156)
(0.178)
SUNKCOST 0.418*
0.850*
(0.143)
(0.182)
FIXEDCOST -0.059
-0.075*
(0.031)
(0.037)
2
R
0.110
0.104

TFP1

TFP2

-0.022*
(0.004)
0.254*
(0.089)
-0.017
(0.259)
1.726*
(0.578)
0.156*
(0.072)
0.136

-5.41E-3*
(1.50E-3)
0.068*
(0.030)
0.483*
(0.088)
0.679*
(0.123)
0.038
(0.027)
0.153

Central Tendency
Regressions
TFP1
TFP2
0.077*
(0.012)
-0.416
(0.216)
-0.098
(0.641)
-0.008
(0.624)
0.726*
(0.163)
0.155

0.076*
(0.011)
-0.482*
(0.200)
-0.330
(0.621)
-0.849
(0.502)
0.683*
(0.167)
0.181

TFP1 is computed using plant-specific input elasticities; TFP2 uses industry average elasticities.
All regressions include a constant term.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*Denotes significance at the 5% level.

Table 6: Regression Results—Model with Trade Exposure Measures

Productivity Dispersion Regressions
Labor
(emp)

Labor
(hours)

Central Tendency
Regressions
TFP1
TFP2

TFP1

TFP2

-6.60E-3* -7.93E-3*
(1.87E-3) (2.44E-3)
DIVINDX
0.071*
0.087*
(0.031)
(0.040)
ADV
0.689*
0.780*
(0.158)
(0.179)
SUNKCOST
0.284
0.625*
(0.162)
(0.212)

-0.023*
0.004
0.249*
(0.089)
0.025
(0.262)
1.668*
(0.591)

-7.20E-3*
(1.70E-3)
0.068*
(0.029)
0.496*
(0.086)
0.538*
(0.141)

0.080*
(0.012)
-0.422*
(0.215)
-0.088
(0.645)
0.341
(0.707)

FIXEDCOST

0.139
(0.081)
0.024
(0.080)
0.122
(0.135)
0.139

0.038
(0.028)
0.072
(0.024)
0.075
(0.056)
0.188

0.703*
(0.190)
-0.187
(0.170)
-0.077
(0.288)
0.158

VALUELB

IMPPEN
EXPINT
R2

-0.044
(0.031)
0.074*
(0.027)
-0.002
(0.055)
0.126

-0.056
(0.037)
0.122*
(0.033)
0.025
(0.072)
0.131

0.080*
(0.011)
-0.481*
(0.199)
-0.365
(0.625)
-0.596
(0.578)
0.687*
(0.192)
-0.129
(0.134)
-0.159
(0.245)
0.183

TFP1 is computed using plant-specific input elasticities; TFP2 uses industry average elasticities.
All regressions include a constant term.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*Denotes significance at the 5% level.

Table 6a: Regression Results—Alternative Dispersion Measure

Dependent Variable is Industry 90–10 Percentile Productivity Range ÷ Median
Productivity Dispersion Regressions
Labor
Labor
TFP1
TFP2
(emp)
(hours)
VALUELB -9.37E-3*
-0.011*
-0.050*
-0.013*
(3.68E-3)
(0.005)
0.010
(0.003)
DIVINDX
0.063*
0.089*
0.424
0.087
(0.061)
(0.080)
(0.217)
(0.066)
ADV
0.963*
1.037*
0.075
0.897*
(0.243)
(0.302)
(0.472)
(0.319)
SUNKCOST
0.746
0.948*
0.420
0.267
(0.755)
(0.949)
(1.136)
(0.334)
FIXEDCOST -0.127*
-0.194*
0.169
-0.027
(0.061)
(0.075)
(0.145)
(0.059)
IMPPEN
0.177*
0.249*
-0.005
0.107
(0.059)
(0.073)
(0.149)
(0.061)
EXPINT
-0.030
-0.003
0.335
0.122
(0.107)
(0.129)
(0.238)
(0.103)
R2
0.098
0.099
0.104
0.081

TFP1 is computed using plant-specific input elasticities; TFP2 uses industry average elasticities.
All regressions include a constant term.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*Denotes significance at the 5% level.

Table 7: Regression Results—Model Controlling for Survival Rate

Productivity Dispersion Regressions
Labor
(emp)
VALUELB

Labor
(hours)

-7.96E-3* -9.26E-3*
(1.80E-3) (2.39E-3)
DIVINDX
0.097*
0.112*
(0.033)
(0.042)
ADV
0.650*
0.743*
(0.154)
(0.176)
SUNKCOST 0.345*
0.684*
(0.133)
(0.173)
FIXEDCOST -0.046
-0.057
(0.030)
(0.036)
IMPPEN
0.062*
0.110*
(0.027)
(0.034)
EXPINT
0.011
0.037
(0.055)
(0.072)
SURVRT
-0.094*
-0.093*
(0.026)
(0.034)
2
R
0.154
0.147

TFP1

TFP2

-0.022*
0.004
0.235*
(0.090)
0.046
(0.261)
1.635*
(0.580)
0.139
(0.080)
0.030
(0.080)
0.115
(0.134)
0.051
(0.058)
0.140

-7.60E-3*
(1.71E-3)
0.076*
(0.031)
0.485*
(0.085)
0.555*
(0.134)
0.038
(0.028)
0.069*
(0.024)
0.078
(0.056)
-0.027
(0.021)
0.192

Central Tendency
Regressions
TFP1
TFP2
0.084*
(0.013)
-0.486*
(0.221)
0.007
(0.635)
0.189
(0.712)
0.706*
(0.191)
-0.156
(0.170)
-0.108
(0.289)
0.232
(0.167)
0.162

0.079*
(0.012)
-0.477*
(0.205)
-0.370
(0.633)
-0.587
(0.564)
0.687*
(0.192)
-0.131
(0.136)
-0.157
(0.244)
-0.014
(0.156)
0.183

TFP1 is computed using plant-specific input elasticities; TFP2 uses industry average elasticities.
All regressions include a constant term.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*Denotes significance at the 5% level.

Table 8: Regression Results—Capital Measurement Robustness Checks

VALUELB
DIVINDX
ADV
SUNKCOST
FIXEDCOST
IMPPEN
EXPINT
R2

Productivity Dispersion Regressions
ASM Plants Only Variable Utilization
TFP1
TFP2
TFP1
TFP2

Central Tendency Regressions
ASM Plants Only Variable Utilization
TFP1
TFP2
TFP1
TFP2

-0.021* -7.87E-3* -0.020* -4.63E-3*
0.005 (2.05E-3) (0.004) (2.13E-3)
0.140
0.059
0.188*
0.047
(0.098)
(0.037)
(0.090)
(0.037)
0.143
0.595*
0.063
0.486*
(0.244)
(0.142)
(0.235)
(0.120)
1.133
0.291
1.628*
0.338
(0.663)
(0.201)
(0.610)
(0.205)
0.112
0.008
0.109
0.013
(0.081)
(0.035)
(0.079)
(0.036)
0.059
0.104*
0.034
0.086*
(0.090)
(0.030)
(0.075)
(0.026)
0.201
0.065
0.115
0.057
(0.163)
(0.066)
(0.151)
(0.066)
0.081
0.127
0.107
0.089

0.084*
(0.012)
-0.490*
(0.216)
-0.038
(0.650)
0.540
(0.709)
0.798*
(0.194)
-0.269
(0.177)
-0.043
(0.286)
0.176

0.088*
(0.012)
-0.527*
(0.209)
-0.639
(0.625)
-0.257
(0.620)
0.749*
(0.199)
-0.134
(0.147)
-0.076
(0.272)
0.199

0.047*
(0.011)
-0.297
(0.191)
0.251
(0.522)
0.662
(0.704)
0.718*
(0.163)
-0.108
(0.132)
0.011
(0.244)
0.113

0.049*
(0.010)
-0.354*
(0.179)
0.003
(0.524)
0.058
(0.649)
0.701*
(0.172)
-0.043
(0.108)
-0.094
(0.207)
0.128

TFP1 is computed using plant-specific input elasticities; TFP2 uses industry average elasticities. All regressions include a constant term.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*Denotes significance at the 5% level

