NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WINNERS AND LOSERS OF TAX COMPETITION
IN THE EUROPEAN UNION
Enrique G. Mendoza
Linda L. Tesar
Working Paper 10051
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10050
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

This paper was prepared for the 2003 Kiel Week Conference on Macroeconomic Policies in the World
Economy. We thank conference participants, and in particular our discussant Soren Nielsen, for helpful
comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to V.V. Chari, Michael Devereux, Jonathan Heathcote, Jim
Hines, Pat Kehoe, Paul Klein, Vincenzo Quadrini, Assaf Razin and Peter Birch Sorensen for their comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Enrique G. Mendoza and Linda L. Tesar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Winners and Losers of Tax Competition in the European Union
Enrique G. Mendoza and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 10051
October 2003
JEL No. F3, F36, F42
ABSTRACT
This paper quantifies the macroeconomic effects of capital income tax competition in the European
Union using a two-country neoclassical dynamic general equilibrium model. This model incorporates
three key externalities of tax competition: the relative price externality, the wealth distribution externality
and the fiscal solvency externality. We consider tax strategies limited to the class of time-invariant taxes
and allow governments to issue debt to smooth the tax burden. The analysis starts from a pre-taxcompetition equilibrium calibrated to represent the United Kingdom and Continental Europe (France,
Germany and Italy) using data from the early 1980s, just before the European integration of financial
markets. When labor taxes adjust to maintain fiscal solvency, competition does not trigger a “race to the
bottom” in capital taxes. The UK makes a large welfare gain and cuts its capital tax. Continental Europe
increases both labor and capital taxes and suffers a large welfare loss. These results are consistent with
evidence showing that over the last two decades the UK lowered its capital tax, while Continental Europe
increased both capital and labor taxes. When consumption taxes adjust to maintain fiscal solvency, there
is a “race to the bottom” in capital taxes but both the UK and Continental Europe are better off than in
the pre-tax-competition equilibrium. The gains from coordination in all of these experiments are trivial.

Enrique G. Mendoza
Center for International Economics
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

Linda L. Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu

1.

Introduction.
The European Union is engaged in a heated debate about international tax competition

over capital income taxes. The controversy has its origins in the series of competitive cuts in
corporate income taxes that EU countries began to undertake shortly after the implementation of
the reforms enhancing financial market integration in the early 1980s. The first move was made
by the United Kingdom with a cut of its corporate income tax rate from 52 to 35 percent, and
since then other European countries have largely followed suit by lowering corporate tax rates
and by adjusting other elements of their tax structure (Ireland, for example, has cut its corporate
tax rate down to 12.5 percent and it is now seen as the pace-setter in corporate tax cuts). The
1997 report by the ECOFIN Ministers of the European Community (The Package to Tackle
Harmful Tax Competition) documents in more detail the recent rounds of competitive corporate
income tax cuts throughout Europe.
The opposing views in the European debate on capital income tax competition are nicely
summarized in recent statements made by Frits Bolkenstein, EU Commissioner for the Internal
Market, and by former French president Valéry Giscard d'Estaing. Mr. Bolkenstein is quoted as
saying:
“The priority is to reduce the tax burden EU wide. And don’t even attempt to harmonize
national tax systems across the board….the EU is already pledged to eliminate harmful
tax competition, but a reasonable degree of tax competition would not be harmful at all: it
would lead to a market-driven convergence towards lower tax rates...” (The Economist,
Feb. 10, 2001, p. 52)
An article in the Financial Times (May 2, 2003, p. 2) summarizes the views of Mr. Giscard
d'Estaing, which are apparently shared by the large economies of Continental Europe, as follows:
“Plans to scrap the national veto on tax to eliminate "unfair" tax competition will be
proposed by Valéry Giscard d'Estaing...He believes that without reform, the EU's single
market will be distorted as countries embark on a damaging race to undercut one
another's company tax rates…Britain was a pioneer in the 1980s, cutting corporation
taxes from 52% to 35%, but Ireland today is the pace-setter with a rate of just 12.5%….
Both countries believe such competition is healthy…However, France and Germany are
pushing for more tax harmonisation…”
In this paper we show that quantitative dynamic macroeconomic analysis can go a long
way toward explaining key features of the EU competition in capital income taxes after financial
liberalization and in rationalizing the opposing views represented by Frits Bolkenstein, the UK
and Ireland vis-à-vis Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and Continental Europe. Our framework for the
analysis is a two-country version of the workhorse neoclassical dynamic general equilibrium

1

model with exogenous, labor-augmenting technological change. We use this model to compare
the cooperative and non-cooperative outcomes of one-shot games over capital income taxes
played by countries that set taxes on factor incomes and consumption and have access to
domestic debt markets in an environment of perfect international capital mobility. We calibrate
the model to mimic basic macroeconomic facts of the large economies in the EU and to the tax
structures they had at the beginning of the 1980s. The data show that the United Kingdom had at
that time a significantly different tax structure compared to France, Germany and Italy (the three
large economies of Continental Europe, or C3).

In particular, capital income taxes were

significantly higher in the U.K. than in the C3 and the opposite was true for labor income taxes
(see Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994)).
The model we use in our quantitative analysis incorporates the three main international
externalities of tax competition emphasized in the theoretical literature on the subject (see
Persson and Tabellini (1995), Frenkel, Razin and Sadka (1991) and Turnovsky (1997)). The first
externality is a variant of the traditional market-power or beggar-thy-neighbor effect on relative
prices: countries engaged in tax competition use tax policy so as to influence the terms of trade or
the world real interest rate in their favor.

The second externality operates via a wealth-

redistribution effect. Strategic cuts in capital income taxes are used to attract physical capital to
locate in the tax-cutting country. Mendoza and Tesar (1998) and Mendoza (2002) show that this
wealth-redistribution externality is large and can have significant welfare effects. The third
externality is the fiscal solvency externality triggered by the adverse effect of tax competition on
tax revenue. If tax competition triggers a “race to the bottom” in capital taxes, tax revenues are
most likely to fall because (a) revenues from taxes on capital decline on account of lower tax
rates (assuming these tax rates are in the upward-slopping region of their Laffer curves), (b) the
flow of mobile factors of production from a high-tax country to a low-tax country directly
reduces the tax base in the high tax country, and (c), in general equilibrium, the relocation of
mobile factors can lower factor payments to immobile factors and overall factor income in the
high tax country, thus further eroding its tax base. As tax revenue falls, governments are forced
either to reduce expenditures or to raise other taxes. If government outlays have utility or
production benefits, or if the alternative taxes are distorting, this fiscal solvency externality
reduces welfare.
In our model, countries tax a mobile factor of production (physical capital), an immobile
factor (labor) and consumption by setting time-invariant tax rates. They also trade one-period
bonds under perfect international mobility of financial capital. This allows physical capital to
relocate across countries even though ownership shares of each country’s capital stock are not

2

traded. The international mobility of physical capital is less than perfect, however, because
capital-adjustment costs limit the pace at which capital migrates across countries. The model also
features domestic public debt so that the fiscal authorities do not need to balance the primary
deficit each period, but instead equate the present value of tax revenue with the present value of a
pre-determined, time-invariant amount of government outlays (i.e., current government purchases
plus transfer payments). Thus, the fiscal solvency externality imposes endogenous tax
adjustments but with the flexibility to use public debt as a means to smooth the tax burden.
The analysis we undertake here is mainly intended to contribute to the policy debate on
tax competition in the EU, but it also contributes to the literature on international tax competition
by filling two important gaps.

First, this literature typically treats the three international

externalities of tax policy separately, studying them in simplified dynamic environments under
partial equilibrium and with governments running balanced budgets in every period. Second,
most of the literature is theoretical in nature and there have been few attempts to study the
quantitative implications of the theory (particularly the outcomes of tax competition and the
magnitude of the gains from tax coordination). One important exception is the study by Klein,
Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2001), which examines optimal, time-consistent tax policies in a setting
with dynamic strategic interaction to explain why the tax on capital income is higher in the
United States than in Europe. Recent papers by Sorensen (1999, 2003) and Eggert (1998)
quantify the gains from tax coordination using static models that focus mainly on the relative
price externality.
We examine two types of tax competition games. In the first case, the fiscal solvency
externality forces endogenous adjustments in labor income tax rates so as to ensure that the
present value of tax revenue in each country matches the present value of their unchanged
government outlays. The second case preserves fiscal solvency by requiring instead adjustments
in consumption tax rates. Examining these two alternative scenarios is important because the
welfare loss of increasing consumption taxes is typically much lower than that of increasing labor
taxes in dynamic neoclassical models like the one we use. Moreover, examining the capital-forlabor tax competition game is important because the harmonization of indirect taxes in the EU
left little room for European countries to respond to the fiscal solvency externality by adjusting
indirect taxes.
Based on these experiments we find that tax competition is immiserizing for Continental
Europe and welfare-improving for the UK when labor taxes are used to maintain fiscal solvency.
The UK starts the game with a lower labor income tax rate and a higher capital income tax rate.
The model is consistent with the data in predicting that tax competition would not result in a race

3

to the bottom in capital tax rates. Instead, the model and the data show that the UK lowered its
capital income tax, while the C3 increased both capital and labor income taxes to maintain fiscal
solvency. These dynamics produce a non-trivial relocation of capital from the C3 to the UK. The
gains from coordination are small for both the UK and the C3, and do not allow the C3 to recoup
its losses from tax competition.
In the tax competition game with adjustment in the consumption tax, we do observe a
race to the bottom in capital income taxes. However, as Frits Bolkenstein suggested, both
countries gain from tax competition (relative to the status quo) as the more distorting capital
income tax is replaced by higher consumption taxes. Coordination continues to yield only trivial
welfare gains over the Nash competition outcome, which may explain why further tax policy
coordination has proven to be an elusive goal.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the model and defines the tax
competition environment. Section 3 calibrates the model to European data and reports the results
of the tax competition experiments. Section 4 concludes.
2.

The Model Economy & The Tax Competition Environment
We study international tax competition using a standard two-country, neoclassical model

with exogenous long-run growth driven by labor-augmenting technological change. The model is
a deterministic version of the typical two-country real-business-cycle model to which we
introduce fiscal policy following the setup developed by Mendoza and Tesar (1998).2 Each
country is inhabited by identical, infinitely-lived individuals. Both countries produce a single
tradable commodity using capital and labor as inputs, and trade this good and real one-period
bonds issued by the private sector. All markets are perfectly competitive. To help isolate the
effects of the international externalities of tax policy and their impact on tax competition, we
assume that countries are fully symmetric in technology and preferences.
The rate of labor-augmenting technological change is defined as γ . All variables, except
leisure and labor input, are detrended by dividing through by γ and the resulting stationary
variables are written in lower case. Since long-run growth is exogenous, we can focus on the
competitive equilibrium of the detrended model without loss of generality.
Households
The representative household in the home country maximizes lifetime utility over
consumption, ct , and leisure, l t :

2

A more detailed discussion of the model and an analysis of a broader set of tax policy experiments can be
found in Mendoza and Tesar (2003).

4

∞

∑

t=0

 β (1 + γ )

1− σ

 ( c l a )1 − σ
t t
 
 1−σ

t


,



σ > 1,

a > 0, 0 < β < 1.

(1)

In this expression, β is the household’s subjective discount factor, 1/σ is the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in consumption, and a is a coefficient that governs the intertemporal
elasticity of labor supply for a given value of σ. Note that the stationary transformation of the
model implies an effective discount factor given by β(1+γ )1-σ instead of β.
The household maximizes (1) subject to the sequence of period budget constraints:
2
η  x


(1 + τ C ) c t + (1 + γ ) ( k t + 1 + q t b t + 1 + q tg d t + 1 ) +   t − z  − 1  k t =
 2  kt




(1 − τ L ) w t L t + (1 − τ K )( rt − δ ) k t + b t + d t + e t

(2)

for t = 0,..., ∞ , given the initial conditions k0>0, b0, and d0. The household takes as given tax
rates on consumption, labor income and capital income, denoted τ C , τ L , and τ K , respectively,
and lump-sum government transfer or entitlement payments, denoted by et. The household also
takes as given the factor payment rates to labor, wt and capital, rt , and the prices of government
bonds and foreign bonds, qtg and qt (the gross real rates of return on these bonds are Rt/(1/qt) and
Rt g/(1/qtg) respectively).
The left-hand-side of (2) measures household expenditures. These include purchases of
consumption goods inclusive of the indirect tax, new capital goods, kt+1, private international
bonds, bt+1, and domestic government bonds dt+1. Investment incurs quadratic capital-adjustment
costs as a function of the ratio of net investment (xt ) to existing capital (kt). Net investment
adjusted for exogenous technological progress is defined as xt / (1+γ)kt+1-(1-δ)kt, where δ is the
rate of depreciation of the capital stock.
The right-hand side of (2) shows the household's after-tax income. We assume that the
capital income tax is based on the residence principle and the tax code provides for a depreciation
allowance. Also implicit in (2) is the assumption that international bond payments are tax-free
(Mendoza and Tesar (1998) examined the implications of relaxing this assumption and found that
it can have important effects on the quantitative predictions of the model).
We also assume that domestic physical capital and public debt are owned entirely by
domestic households; i.e. complete “home bias” in the holdings of these assets. This assumption
is required for the model to support competitive equilibria in which international trade in private
bonds and residence-based taxation co-exist with different country-specific tax rates on domestic
capital income. As we show in Mendoza and Tesar (1998), this is not possible if shares on

5

physical capital and/or government bonds are freely traded across countries (see also Frenkel et
al. (1991)).

The assumptions of extreme home bias and residence-based taxation could be

replaced with source-based taxation and this would result in saving and investment optimality
conditions similar to the ones obtained with those assumptions, which would support competitive
equilibria with different capital income tax rates across countries. However, actual tax systems
are a mixture of residence- and source-based systems. Frenkel et al. (1991) show that personal
income taxes across OECD countries are mainly residence based, while corporate income taxes
are source based in principle but supplemented by treaties that allow for credits or deductions so
as to approximate residence-based taxation.
Households also face a standard no-Ponzi-game restriction. This restriction, together
with (2) implies that the present value of household income must equal that of expenditures plus
any initial asset holdings.
Households allocate their time between labor and leisure subject to the time constraint:

l t + Lt = 1

(3)

where we normalize the total number of hours to unity. Labor is immobile across countries.
Firms
Firms employ labor and capital so as to maximize profits, taking factor prices as given.
The production function is Cobb-Douglas:

F ( kt , Lt ) = kt1−α Lαt ,

0 < α < 1.

(4)

where α is the labor income share. We assume that firms operate under perfect competition, and
therefore earn zero profits in equilibrium and factor demands are given by standard marginal
productivity conditions. Without loss of generality, all corporate taxes are viewed as included in
the capital income tax levied on households.
The Public Sector
Fiscal policy in each country has three components: first, a predetermined sequence of
government outlays made up of unproductive expenditures and entitlement payments, (gt+et) for
t=0,..., ∞ ; second, a set of time-invariant tax rates τ =(τC , τL , τK); and third, a sequence of public
bond issues, dt, for t=0,..., ∞ . The period government budget constraint is given by:

(g t

+ e t ) + d t = τ c c t + τ L w t L t + τ K ( rt − δ ) k t + (1 + γ ) q tg d t + 1

(5)

The left-hand-side of equation (5) measures uses of government income (i.e. goods
purchases, entitlement payments, and debt payments). The right-hand-side measures sources of
government income: tax revenue and the proceedings from sales of newly-issued bonds (adjusted
to conform with the stationary transformation of the model). Government purchases, entitlement

6

payments, and tax rates are the instruments of fiscal policy. Thus, a primary fiscal deficit or
surplus at date t (i.e., a gap between goods purchases, entitlement payments and tax revenue) is
offset by an endogenous change in public debt (net of interest and principal on existing debt).
However, since the government also faces a no-Ponzi-game constraint, the intertemporal
government budget constraint requires that the present value of government expenditures plus
entitlement payments must equal the present value of tax revenue net of payments on initial
public debt.3
Competitive Equilibrium
A competitive equilibrium is defined by sequences of prices [rt, rt*, qt, wt, wt*] and
allocations [kt+1, kt+1*, bt+1, bt+1*,xt, xt*,Lt, Lt*, l t , l t * , ct, ct*,Tt, Tt*] for t=0,…,∞ such that: (a)
households in each country maximize utility subject to their corresponding budget constraints,
time constraints and no-Ponzi-game constraints, taking as given pre-tax prices and factor rental
rates, the values of all fiscal policy variables, and date-0 holdings of capital and foreign bonds,
(b) firms maximize profits subject to the Cobb-Douglas technologies taking as given pre-tax
factor prices, (c) the government budget constraints hold for given tax rates and exogenous
sequences of government purchases and entitlements, and (d) the following market-clearing
conditions for the global markets of goods and bonds hold:
k t1− α Lαt + ( k t* )

1− α *

(L )
*
t

α*

=

η  xt

2

2


η *  x t*
* 
*
*
− z  k t + x t* +
ct + c + xt + 
 * − z  kt + gt + gt ,
2  kt
2
k

 t

*
t

bt + bt* = 0

(6)

(7)

The Three International Externalies of National Tax Policy
The international externalities of tax policy operating in the model can be understood by
studying the implications of the tax distortions on saving, investment and labor supply. This
issue is covered in detail in Mendoza and Tesar (1998).

We provide here a condensed

description.
One of the main driving forces of international tax policy externalities in the model is the
arbitrage of after-tax real returns to physical capital that is obtained via international bond
trading. Bond trading ensures that the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in consumption
in each country equals the common real rate of return on bonds. In turn, households set optimal
3

Note that (2), (5), and the no-Ponzi-game constraints on households and government imply that the
present value of the trade balance equals b0 .

7

investment in their country’s physical capital so that the after-tax net return on capital equals the
return on international bonds. Thus, after-tax returns on capital are equalized across countries.
To see how the externalities come into play, it is useful to consider a unilateral cut in the
home capital income tax rate. As a result of the tax cut, there is an increase in the home country
after-tax return on capital relative to the foreign country. Home agents borrow from abroad to
spread the resulting increase in wealth across consumption in all periods and to offset the shortrun burden of increased investment as the economy evolves toward a higher capital stock. The
home country accumulates debt in the short-run, which then must be serviced in the new long-run
equilibrium.
The increased borrowing by the domestic economy causes a temporary increase in the
world interest rate. In the long run, however, the interest rate is determined by the model’s
balanced growth restrictions, independently of the tax structure. In particular, the gross long-run
real interest rate is given by R=β -1-γσ. However, we show in Mendoza and Tesar (1998) that
even though the interest rate hike is only temporary and quantitatively small, it can trigger large
reallocations of capital across countries and large adjustments in consumption (which in turn can
have sizable welfare effects).
In this example of a unilateral home capital income tax cut, the international externality
operating via the intertemporal relative price of consumption is reflected in the transitory interest
rate hike discussed above. There are also price externalities working through changes in wages
and the rental rate of capital in each country. The wealth redistribution effect results from
changes in the present value of factor income induced by the reallocation of capital across
countries and the changes in the dynamics of capital and labor allocated to production.
The adjustments in prices, factor incomes and the distribution of wealth in turn have an
impact on the tax base in the two countries. Government outlays are constant, so the decline in
the foreign country’s present value of tax revenue means that the foreign labor income and/or
consumption taxes must increase to bring the present value of tax revenue back into balance with
the present value of unchanged government outlays. These changes in consumption or labor
taxes abroad are distorting because they drive the traditional wedge between the marginal rate of
substitution in consumption and leisure and the pre-tax real wage. Labor and consumption taxes
have symmetric distorting effects on account of this wedge, but they are not equivalent because
labor is not the sole source of factor income and capital and labor income are not taxed at the
same rates.4 Moreover, around the calibrated values of the tax rates we work with later, labor and
4

See Frenkel et al. (1991) for details on direct versus indirect taxation equivalences. The equivalence in
our model would also require an inelastic capital stock because otherwise the common labor-capital tax that

8

consumption taxes have very different effects on tax revenue, welfare and household income. As
we show below, the increase in the labor tax needed to replace the loss in the present value of tax
revenue due to a reduction in the capital income tax involves greater distortions than those caused
by the consumption tax.
Tax Competition Environment
The strategic interaction between the two countries takes place starting from a pre-taxcompetition stationary equilibrium with zero net foreign asset positions that represents the status
quo before financial market integration. This pre-tax-competition equilibrium is determined by
assigning values to the model’s preference, technology and fiscal policy parameters and solving
for steady-state allocations along the long-run balanced-growth path. With regard to fiscal
policy, this calibration exercise specifies a pair of initial tax structures τ = [τ c , τ L , τ k ] and
τ * = [τ c *, τ L *, τ k * ] , and time-invariant levels of transfer payments and government purchases in

each country [g,e] and [g*,e*]. The solution to the stationary equilibrium yields a solution for the
primary fiscal balances T and T*, which represent the debt service of the steady-state stocks of
public debt in each country.
Once the prices and allocations of the pre-tax competition equilibrium are determined, we
calculate the payoff that each country receives under a particular choice of capital tax strategies
played by each country’s fiscal authority. These payoffs correspond to the welfare gain or loss
that each country stands to make at the competitive equilibrium supported by the chosen capital
tax rates and the endogenous labor or consumption taxes needed to satisfy the intertemporal
government budget constraints. Welfare gains or payoffs are computed as percent variations in
consumption at all dates that render households indifferent between the pre-tax-competition
levels of lifetime utility and the lifetime utility derived under the competitive equilibrium of the
new tax rates.
The welfare calculations take into account the transitional dynamics that the two
countries follow in moving from the pre-tax-competition equilibrium to the new long-run
equilibrium implied by the new set of tax rates.5 Both the transitional dynamics and the new
long-run equilibrium need to be solved simultaneously because models of the class we study here
display dependency on initial conditions in the long-run allocations of foreign bonds, and because
of the endogenous adjustment in either the labor or the consumption tax needed to preserve fiscal
could yield a leisure-consumption distortion identical to that of a given consumption tax would imply a
different distortion on the investment margin.

9

solvency. We employ the solution method proposed in Mendoza and Tesar (1998), which takes
care of these two issues by ensuring that the tax rates in each country and the dynamics of foreign
assets satisfy the present-value constraints of private agents and the government in both countries.
In principle, for given capital income taxes (τK,τK*) and their associated fiscal solvency
externalities, each country could adjust a combination of its labor and consumption taxes to
maintain fiscal solvency by adjusting these taxes so as to equalize the present value of total tax
revenues with the present value of the unchanged government outlays. For tractability, we
narrow the analysis to tax competition experiments that adopt one of these two rules to maintain
fiscal solvency: adjust consumption taxes only (keeping labor tax rates constant) or adjust labor
taxes only (keeping consumption taxes constant). These rules are known to both governments
and both governments are assumed to be credibly committed to follow them.
The government of each country chooses its capital income tax rate so as to maximize the
payoff to that country’s residents taking as given the other country’s capital income tax and
subject to the constraints that: (a) the implied allocations and prices for a global tax structure
(τ,τ*) are a competitive equilibrium, and (b) labor or consumption taxes in both countries adjust
so that the intertemporal government budget constraints of the two countries hold.
A Nash equilibrium for the capital-income-tax competition game is defined by a pair of
capital income tax rates (τKN,τK*N) and the associated payoffs for each country such that: (a) τKN
maximizes the home country payoff given τK*N, (b) τK*N maximizes the foreign country payoff
given τKN, (c) the payoffs are supported by the prices and allocations corresponding to the
competitive equilibrium for (τKN,τK*N), and (d) the fiscal solvency rules of both countries (setting
either (τC,τC*) or (τL,τL*)) are satisfied. Thus, the Nash equilibrium is at the intersection of the
reaction curves in the strategy space of time-invariant capital income tax rates.
A cooperative equilibrium is defined as a pair (τKC,τK*C) that maximizes the weighted
sum of country payoffs for any home country weight λ ∈ [0,1] and foreign weight λ-1 subject to
the constraint that each country is at least as well off as in the Nash equilibrium. Thus, there can
be several cooperative equilibria supported by different λ’s and the set of all cooperative
equilibria determines the core of the players’ contract curve. Cooperative equilibria are still taxdistorted competitive equilibria because cooperation undoes the effects of the international tax
externalities but not those of domestic tax distortions.

5

We consider a strategy space where countries can only choose from the class of time-invariant tax rate. In
the closed-economy context, Lucas (1990) and Cooley and Hansen (1992) show that the welfare gains from
tax reform with time-invariant tax rates dwarf the additional gains from allowing time-variation in tax rates.

10

3.

Pre-Tax Competition Calibration & Outcomes of Tax Competition in the EU
We construct the pre-tax competition calibration so that the steady-state, balanced-growth

equilibrium of the model matches key features of macroeconomic and fiscal policy data for
France, Italy, Germany and the United Kingdom. Since our goal is to characterize the outcome of
tax competition under perfect international capital mobility, we calibrate the model using data for
the beginning of the 1980s just before the barriers to capital mobility across Europe were
dismantled.6 Hence, we view the pre-tax-competition status quo under restricted capital mobility
as setting the initial conditions for tax competition under perfect capital mobility. As such, we do
not consider the pre-tax-competition status quo as a situation that should be obtained as the
equilibrium of the strategic interaction of financially-integrated economies that we modeled in the
last section.

The calibrated values of technology and preference parameters, tax rates and

government expenditure shares used in the pre-tax-competition calibration are listed in Table 1.
The values of preference and technology parameters listed at the top of the Table are taken from
Mendoza and Tesar (1998).
Figures 1 through 3 plot the time series of capital, labor and consumption taxes in the C3
and the UK over the 1979-96 period. These tax rates are updated estimates of the effective tax
rates proposed by Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994). Figure 1 shows that the UK capital income
tax has fallen sharply since 1981, those of France and Germany have remained fairly constant,
hovering around 25-30 percent, and the one for Italy has increased significantly. On average, the
capital tax rates of France, Germany and Italy have remained consistently below the capital
income taxes in the UK. Labor income taxes in the C3 (see Figure 2) have steadily risen over
time and are significantly higher than labor income tax rates in the UK. Consumption taxes used
to differ significantly across all European countries, but the treaties for indirect tax harmonization
have resulted in significant convergence in effective consumption taxes over the course of the
1990s. For the purposes of the pre-tax competition calibration, we use the 1979 taxes of the UK
(τK=0.53, τL=0.25, τC=0.14) and for the C3 we take the average of each tax rate across France,
Germany and Italy in 1980 (τK=0.265, τL=0.374 τC = 0.166).7
Government expenditure shares have remained fairly steady since 1980. The 1980-1999
sample averages for France, Germany, Italy and the UK range between 17 and 24 percent. We
use a value of g/y =0.18 for the calibration.

6

We are grateful to Peter Birch Sorensen for suggesting that we place our analysis in this context.
The C3 tax rates are not based on 1979 data because we did not have enough data to construct the
estimate of the capital income tax rate in Italy before 1980.
7

11

The bottom panel of Table 1 shows that the model’s pre-tax competition steady state does
well at mimicking the GDP shares of key macroeconomic aggregates observed in European data.
The calibration forces the model to reproduce the GDP shares of government expenditures and
investment, and the trade balance is set equal to zero by the assumption of restricted capital
mobility before the 1980s. However, the consumption, tax revenue and net transfers shares are
produced endogenously. The model generates slightly higher consumption-GDP and tax revenueGDP ratios than is observed in the data (58 v. 57 percent and 38 percent v. 37 percent
respectively).8

The ratio of transfers to output (e/y) is roughly the same as the average of the

observed transfers-GDP ratios for France, Italy and Germany in 1985. The 1985 average of net
transfers (including subsidies and payments stemming from welfare, healthcare and other
entitlement programs) as a share of GDP in the C3 was 24 percent of GDP. Any remainder after
the level of transfer payments is subtracted from the primary deficit (i.e., the gap between the
levels of tax revenue and current expenditures) represents interest payments on the steady-state
level of public debt. We keep the level of government expenditures and entitlement payments
constant throughout all the tax competition calculations.
Capital Income Tax Competition with Labor Tax Adjustments
The first tax competition game assumes that countries adjust labor tax rates to maintain
fiscal solvency. We believe this is an interesting case because the agreements to harmonize
indirect taxes in Europe put binding limitations on the countries’ ability to deal with the fiscal
solvency externality of capital income tax competition by adjusting indirect taxes.

Hence,

adjustments to maintain fiscal solvency fell largely on labor income.
The top part of Table 2 shows the changes in observed tax rates over time. The lower part
of the table, Sections B.1 and B.2, shows the model’s predictions for capital and labor taxes and
the welfare gains when countries play Nash and when they cooperate. The model is consistent
with the observed tax rate estimates in predicting that the UK would lower its capital tax and the
C3 would increase both labor and capital taxes. The increase in the C3 capital tax rate in the
model is similar to that observed in the data, while the cut in the capital income tax in the UK is
larger than in the data and the increase in the labor tax in the C3 is smaller. The model deviates
from the observed pattern of the UK labor tax, which hovered around 25 percent instead of
increasing to 31.7 percent as the model predicted. However, this is due in part to the fact that we
do not correct for cuts in public expenditures and transfers that took place in the United Kingdom

8

Tax revenue as a share of GDP was fairly stable during the 1985-1999 period in France and the UK but it
rose sharply in Germany and Italy, reflecting largely the process of debt reduction undertaken in these
countries to reach the Maastricht guidelines. The average for the C3 in 1985 tax was 37 percent.

12

and would allow a lower labor tax to maintain fiscal solvency in the model. We view these
results as suggesting that the adjustments in tax rates observed in Europe after barriers to capital
mobility were removed can be rationalized in part as the outcome of capital income tax
competition in an environment of perfect capital mobility.
The model predicts that tax competition produced a substantial increase in UK welfare
equivalent to an increase of 3.87 percent in consumption in every period, and a large welfare loss
for the C3 of 2.17 percent in trend consumption. In the model, the large cut in UK capital income
tax from 53 to 20 percent induces a large relocation of capital from the C3 to the UK. As a
consequence, the tax base in the C3 erodes, and the tax authorities on the Continent are forced to
increase both the capital and labor income taxes to balance the budget. With tax coordination, the
capital income tax rate is higher in both regions relative to the Nash outcome. 9 However, the
welfare gains from cooperation over the Nash competition outcome are very small, ranging from
0.01 to 0.24 percent of trend consumption.
It is important to note that even under cooperation, the C3 end up worse off than in the
pre-tax-competition equilibrium. The welfare loss (gain) for the C3 (UK) under cooperation is
between 1.93 (3.88) and 2.17 (4.16) percent depending on the country weighs in the cooperative
payoff function. This suggests that, relative to the pre-tax competition baseline, the C3 were at a
disadvantage relative to the UK in the process of financial integration – given the higher initial
labor taxes and lower capital taxes in the C3, engaging in cooperative or noncooperative tax
competition with the UK under perfect mobility of financial capital was immiserizing for the C3.
Capital Income Tax Competition with Consumption Tax Adjustments
We next turn to the tax competition game when the consumption tax is used to maintain
fiscal solvency (see Table 2.B.2). Given the small distortion associated with increasing the
consumption tax, Nash competition triggers the familiar “race to the bottom” in capital income
taxes. Nash competition leads to a large reduction in the capital income tax in the United
Kingdom and in the C3.
income.

10

In fact, in the Nash equilibrium both countries subsidize capital

To maintain the present value of tax revenue equal to the present value of the

unchanged government outlays, the consumption tax rate goes up by 13 percentage points in the
UK and by 10 percentage points in the C3. Still, Nash competition is beneficial in the sense that
households in both countries obtain a gain in lifetime utility relative to the pre-tax competition
9

Since the core of the contract curve of the cooperative solution contains a range of cooperative equilibria
that are Pareto improvements over the Nash equilibrium, we report in Table 2 the bounds of this range.
10
Note that tax competition does not drive taxes on capital to zero in this model even if the two countries
were symmetric because countries are large enough to affect the world interest rate. At the point of zero

13

stationary state. UK households obtain a large welfare gain that is equivalent to an increase of
5.3 percent in consumption in every period. The welfare gain for the C3 is much smaller at just
0.35 percent of trend consumption.
The driving force of the “race to the bottom” in capital income taxes is the incentive that
each country has to attempt to undercut the capital income tax in the other country, and use the
resulting inflow of financial capital to help smooth the cost of increasing the capital stock. There
are three limiting factors to this “race to the bottom.” One is the trade-off between labor and
leisure – as the capital stock increases, work effort must increase and at some point the marginal
value of leisure offsets the consumption benefit from higher output. The second limiting factor is
the fact that, since strategic interaction leads the two countries to cut capital taxes simultaneously,
access to global capital markets cannot help households reduce the welfare cost of having to
expand the capital stock by borrowing from abroad, and hence they must sacrifice lower current
consumption for higher future consumption (as they would in a closed economy undertaking a tax
reform). Although the real interest rate increases to compensate for this sacrifice, the households’
private rate of discount places a limit on the extent to which they are willing to forego current
consumption. The last limiting factor is the distortion of the consumption tax. In the model, this
distortion is generally weaker than the distortions of the capital and labor taxes, but at some point
increasingly large subsidies on capital income would need to be traded for increasingly large
consumption taxes that would induce large distortions.
In the Nash game, policymakers fail to internalize the impact of the reduction in the
capital income tax in each country on the world interest rate. When countries cooperate and the
joint effect on the interest rate is internalized, each country prefers a somewhat smaller tax.
Because of the shift to more efficient taxation, the welfare gains under tax coordination (relative
to the pre-tax-competition equilibrium) are larger than under Nash competition. However, as in
the previous game with the labor adjusting to satisfy fiscal solvency, the magnitude of the
incremental welfare gains of tax coordination over the Nash competition outcome are negligible.
The largest incremental gain from cooperation is 0.29 percent of trend consumption, and it is
obtained by the UK in the case in which the labor tax adjusts to maintain fiscal solvency and the
weigh of the UK in the cooperative payoff function is set to maximize the payoff to the UK.
These findings suggest that if there are small costs involved in coordinating tax policy, these costs
would likely eliminate all incentives for cooperation.

capital income taxes, each country has an incentive to subsidize capital, pushing up the world interest rate
and forcing some of the costs of capital accumulation onto the rest of the world.

14

4.

Conclusions.
This paper explored the quantitative effects of international tax competition over capital

income taxes in the EU using a two-country version of the workhorse neoclassical balancedgrowth model with exogenous, labor-augmenting technological change. We computed the
solutions of one-shot games over time-invariant capital income tax rates in a framework that
incorporates the three basic externalities of tax policy emphasized in the international tax
competition literature (the relative-price, wealth-redistribution, and fiscal solvency externalities).
National tax authorities are benevolent and assess the payoff of their capital-income-tax strategies
in terms of the welfare gains, net of welfare costs of transitional dynamics, accruing to their
countries’ residents. These welfare gains are computed as cardinal equivalents of the lifetime
utility variations induced by the changes in competitive equilibrium allocations obtained under
alternative tax strategies. The tax authorities also have access to domestic debt markets so that
they can smooth the effects of the fiscal solvency externality on the tax burden over time.
The quantitative analysis starts from a pre-tax-competition equilibrium calibrated to
mimic basic macroeconomic and fiscal policy features of the four large European economies
(France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom) at the beginning of the 1980s, just before the
barriers to financial capital mobility in the EU were dismantled. Tax rates in France, Germany
and Italy did not differ nearly as much as they did between them and the UK, so we calibrate one
country to represent the UK and the other to represent an average of the three large economies of
Continental Europe (the C3). The data show that prior to the 1980s the UK taxed capital more
and labor less than the C3 did and that the differences in the tax rates were large.
We consider capital income tax competition between the C3 and the UK under two
scenarios, one in which labor taxes are adjusted in response to the fiscal solvency externality and
one in which consumption taxes are adjusted instead. In general, we find that the C3 fares poorly
under both the Nash and the cooperative outcomes because of the significantly less efficient tax
system it starts with at the pre-tax-competition status quo. Remarkably, in the case in which labor
taxes adjust (which is the most relevant for the EU given the existence of VAT tax harmonization
treaties that prevented adjustments in consumption taxes), the Nash equilibrium yields changes in
capital and labor taxes that are qualitatively similar to those observed in Europe since the 1980s.
In particular, the model matches the data in predicting that there would be no race to the bottom
in capital income taxes and that the countries in Continental Europe would increase both capital
and labor taxes. The net gains from moving from the Nash outcome to a cooperative equilibrium
by means of tax coordination are small at less than a quarter of a percent of trend consumption.
These findings suggest that the factor income tax rates prevailing in Europe could be rationalized

15

as the outcome of tax competition, and that the lack of progress in further tax policy coordination
in the region could reflect the fact that the costs of coordination exceed the small benefits.
In the case in which the fiscal solvency externality triggers adjustments in consumption
taxes, Nash competition in capital income taxes produces a staggering “race to the bottom” in
capital tax rates. However, contrary to the conventional wisdom that this reduction in capital
taxes is harmful to society, we find that both the C3 and the UK benefit from tax competition.
The C3 obtain a modest welfare gain of about 0.4 percent in lifetime consumption compared to
the pre-tax competition equilibrium while the UK obtain a large gain equivalent to a 5.3
permanent increase in consumption. The race to the bottom is harmful in the formal sense that
the cooperative equilibrium dominates the Nash outcome, but from a quantitative standpoint the
gains from tax coordination are still negligible.
In Mendoza and Tesar (2003) we explored the robustness of our findings to three
important modifications of the initial pre-tax-competition calibration considering the case of two
symmetric countries. First, we allowed for countries to differ in that one starts as a net debtor and
the other as net creditor in the pre-tax-competition equilibrium. Second, we made labor inelastic,
so that the labor tax becomes a non-distorting tax. Third, we lowered capital adjustment costs to
speed up significantly the transitional dynamics between the pre- and pos-tax-competition
equilibria. The results show that faster transitional dynamics and asymmetries between net
creditors and debtors can increase the gains of tax coordination, up to 0.76 percent of trend
consumption. Reducing the elasticity of labor supply increases the domestic efficiency gains of
reducing capital income taxes and weakens the three international externalities of unilateral
capital income tax cuts. As a result, instead of replicating the observed changes in capital and
labor taxes in Europe, the capital-for-labor tax game with inelastic labor supply results in a strong
“race to the bottom” in capital income taxes reminiscent of the outcome obtained in the capitalfor-consumption tax game. The gains from tax policy coordination were once again negligible
The framework used in our quantitative analysis generalizes the standard setup used in
many theoretical studies on international tax competition, yet it is subject to several caveats. One
important caveat is that we do not address issues of time inconsistency and dynamic strategic
interaction because the tax competition games modeled here are one-shot games, in which tax
authorities are assumed to meet once and to remain committed to the tax structure obtained as the
outcome of the one-shot game. We implicitly assume that there is an institutional arrangement
(such as an international tax treaty) that operates as a credible commitment mechanism that
prevents countries from deviating in the future from the outcome of the one-shot game. Still,
even though the game is played once, the payoffs of the players are dynamic in that they reflect

16

levels of lifetime utility along intertemporal competitive equilibrium paths, including the
transitional dynamics from the pre-tax-competition equilibrium to the new stationary equilibrium
under competition. It is interesting to note, however, that Klein, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2001))
found that when time-inconsistency is taken into account, strategic interaction amongst two
national tax authorities in a repeated game results in equilibrium strategies that feature large
adjustments in capital income taxes in the first period followed by nearly time-invariant taxes.
A second caveat is that even though our model captures three of the most widely studied
externalities of international tax competition, it still leaves out some potentially important
externalities that can operate via other elements of the tax system. In particular, our analysis does
not consider the possibility of labor migration in response to labor tax changes, cross-border
shopping in response to consumption tax changes, imperfect information regarding the origins
and amounts of foreign-earned income of residents, international cross-ownership of firms, and
taxation of internationally traded assets. Theory suggests that tax coordination can be desirable
when these issues are considered (see, for example, Huizinga and Nielsen (1997) and (2002)), but
whether the resulting magnitudes of the welfare gains from coordination in models with these
features could be larger than the small gains from coordination reported here remains an open
question.
Two other potentially important caveats are that we ignore production and utility benefits
of government expenditures as well as the effects of tax competition on long-run growth.
However, the effects of productive government expenditures are approximated by assuming that
the fiscal solvency externality forces upward adjustments in distortionary tax rates, and the
assumption abstracting from long-run-growth effects of taxation seems to be supported by
existing empirical evidence (see Mendoza, Milesi-Ferretti and Asea (1997)).

17

References
Bovenberg, A. L., “Capital Taxation in the World Economy,” in F. van der Ploeg, ed. The
Handbook of International Macroeconomics, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 1994, pp.
116-150.
Bucovetsky, S., “Asymmetric Tax Competition,” Journal of Urban Economics, 1991, 30, pp.
167-181.
Chamley, C.P., “The welfare cost of capital income taxation in a growing world economy,”
Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89, pp. 468-96.
Chari, V.V., L. Christiano and P.J. Kehoe, “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Business Cycle Model,”
Journal of Political Economy, August 1994, 102(4), pp. 617-52.
Chari, V.V. and P.J. Kehoe, “International Coordination of Fiscal Policy in Limiting Economies,”
Journal of Political Economy, 1990, pp. 617-36.
Chennels, L. and R. Griffith, Taxing Profits in a Changing World, Institute for Fiscal Studies,
London, 1997.
Cooley, T. F. and G.D. Hansen, “Tax Distortions in a Neoclassical Monetary Economy,” Journal
of Economic Theory, December 1992, 58(2), pp. 290-316.
Correia, I.H., “Gains from Coordination,” Bank of Portugal Working Paper, 1998.
Daveri, F. and G. Tabellini, “Unemployment, Growth and Taxation in Industrial Countries,”
Economic Policy, April 2000.
De Bonis, V., “Regional Integration and Factor Income Taxation,” Working Paper, download
from www.inomics.com.
Devereux, M.P., “Tax Competition and the Impact on Capital Flows,” in H. Siebert, ed.,
Locational Competition in the World Economy, Tubingen: Mohr, 1996.
The Economist, “A Survey of Globalization and Tax: The mystery of the vanishing taxpayer,”
January 9, 2000.
Eggert, W., “International Repercussions of Direct Taxes,” Working Paper, download from
www.inomics.com, 1999.
Frenkel, J.A., A. Razin and E. Sadka, International Taxation in an Integrated World, Cambridge:
MA, MIT Press, 1991.
Frey, B.S. and R. Eichenberger, “To Harmonize or to Compete? That’s not the Question,”
Journal of Public Economics, 1996.
Giovannini A. and J.R. Hines, Jr., “Capital Flight and Tax Competition: Are There Viable
Solutions to Both Problems?” in A. Giovannini and C. Mayer, eds., European Financial
Integration, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991, pp. 172-210.

18

Haufler, A., Taxation in a Global Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Hines, J.R., “Lessons from Behavorial Responses to International Taxation,” National Tax
Journal, 1999.
Huber, B., “Tax Competition and Tax Coordination in an Optimum Income Tax Model,” Journal
of Public Economics, March 1999, 71:3, pp. 441-458.
Huizinga, H. and S.B. Nielsen, “Capital Income and Profit Taxation with Foreign Ownership of
Firms,” Journal of International Economics, 1997.
___________________, “The Coordination of Capital Income and Profit Taxation with CrossOwnerhsip of Firms,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2002, v. 32, pp. 1-26.
___________________., “Is Coordination of Fiscal Deficits Necessary?” download from
www.inomics.com, 1998.
Kanbur, R., and M. Keen, “Jeux sans frontiers: Tax Competition and Tax Coordinations when
Countries Differ in Size,” American Economic Review, 1993, 83, pp. 877-892.
Keen, M. and J. Edwards, “Tax Competition and the Leviathan,” European Economic Review,
1996.
Keen, M. and M. Marchand, “Fiscal Competition and the Pattern of Public Spending,” Journal of
Public Economics, October 1997, 66:1, pp. 33-54.
King, R.G., C.I. Plosser, and S.T. Rebelo, “Production, Growth and Business Cycles, I: The Basic
Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, March/May 1988, 90(358), pp. 314-29.
Klein, P., V. Quadrini, and J. Rios-Rull, “Optimal and time-consistent fiscal policy with
international mobility of capital: Why does the U.S. tax capital more than Europe?” University of
Pennsylvania Working paper, 2001.
Lockwood, B., “Tax Competition and Coordination under Origin and Destination Principles: A
Synthesis,” Mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Warwick, 1999.
Lopez-Garcia, M. “On Welfare and Revenue Effects of Indirect Tax Harmonization,” Economics
Letters, 60:2, 1998, pp. 185-93.
Lucas, R.E. Jr., “Supply-Side Economics: An Analytical Review,” Oxford Economic Papers,
April 1990, 42(2), pp. 293-316.
Mendoza,E.G., “The International Macroeconomics of Taxation and the Case Against European
Tax Harmonization,” in Contemporary Economic Policy: Essays in Honor of Assaf Razin, edited
by E. Heplman and E. Sadka, Cambridge University Press, forthcoming, 2002
Mendoza, E.G. and L.L. Tesar, “The International Ramifications of Tax Reforms: Supply-Side
Economics in a Global Economy,” American Economic Review, March 1998, 88:1, pp. 226-45.

19

Mendoza, E.G. and L.L. Tesar, “A Quantitative Analysis of Tax Competition vs. Tax
Coordination under Perfect Capital Mobility,” May 2003, NBER working paper no. 9746.
Mendoza, E.G., G.M. Milesi-Ferretti and P. Asea, (1997), “On the Ineffectiveness of Tax Policy
in Altering Long-run Growth: Harberger's Superneutrality Conjecture," Journal of Public
Economics, 66, 99-126.
Mendoza, E.G., A. Razin and L.L. Tesar, “Effective Tax Rates in Macroeconomics: CrossCountry Estimates of Tax Rates on Factor Incomes and Consumption,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, December 1994, 34:3, pp. 297-323.
OECD, Harmful Tax Competition – An Emerging Global Issue. Report of the OECD Committee
on Fiscal Affairs, Paris, 1998.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini, “Double-Edged Incentives: Institutions and Policy Coordination,” in
G. Grossman and K. Rogoff, eds. Handbook of International Economics, Vol III, New York:
North-Holland, 1995.
Razin, A. and E. Sadka, “Integration of the International Capital Markets: The Size of
Government and Tax Coordination,” in A. Razin and J. Slemrod, eds. Taxation in the Global
Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990, pp. 331-48.
_________________., “International Tax Competition and Gains from Tax Harmonization,”
Economics Letters, 1991.
Razin, A. and C.W. Yuen, “International Fiscal Policy Coordination and Competition,” in F. van
der Ploeg, ed. The Handbook of International Macroeconomics, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell
Publishers, 1994, pp. 116-150.
_________________., “Labor Mobility and Fiscal Coordination,” Journal of Public Economics,
1997.
Rehme, G., “Economic Growth, (Re)-Distributive Policies, Capital Mobility and Tax
Competition in Open Economies,” Working Paper ECO 97/24, European University Institute.
Florence Italy, 1997.
Rodrik, D. and T. van Ypersele, “Capital Mobility, Distributive Conflict and International Tax
Coordination,” Journal of International Economics, 2001, 54(1).
Sinn, H.W., “Tax Harmonization and Tax Competition in Europe,” European Economic Review,
1990, 34, pp. 489-504.
Sorensen, P.B., “The Case for International Tax Coordination Reconsidered,” Economic Policy,
October 2000, 31, pp.431-472.
___________., “International Tax Coordination: Regionalism versus Globalism,” forthcoming in
the Journal of Public Economics, 2003.
___________., “TAXCOM – A Model of Tax Competition and Tax Coordination,” Technical
Working Paper, Economic Policy Research Unit, University of Copenhagen, 1999.

20

Tanzi, V. and L.A. Bovenberg, “Is there a Need for Harmonizing Capital Income Taxes within
EC Countries?” in H. Siebert, ed., Reforming Capital Income Taxation, Tubingen: Mohr, 1990,
pp. 171-97.
van Ypersele, Tanguy, “Coordination of Capital Taxation Among a Large Number of
Asymmetric Countries,” Tilburg University Working Paper, 1998.
Volkerink, B. and J. de Haan, “Tax Ratios: A Critical Survey,” Working Paper, Faculty of
Economics, University of Groningen, 1999.
Wildasin, D.E., “Nash Equilibria in Models of Fiscal Competition,” Journal of Public Economics,
1988, 35, pp. 229-40.
Wilson, J.D., “Theories of Tax Competition,” National Tax Journal, 1999.

21

TABLE 1: Parameter Values and Pre-tax Competition, Steady-State Allocations
for Calibration to Europe
Parameter values
Technology and preferences
δ
0.0161
α
0.64
γ
0.0039
η
10
Β
0.993
σ
2
a
2.675
C3 tax policy parameters (in percent)
τK
26.5
τL
37.44
τC
16.62
Pre-tax competition, balanced-growth allocations (GDP ratios for the C3)
Data
Model
c/y

0.57 a

0.58

x/y

0.24

a

0.24

0.18

b

0.18

-0.02

a

0

0.37

c

0.38

0.24

c

0.24

g/y
tb/y
tax revenue/y
net transfers/y

Data sources: Tax rates are authors' estimates based on the methodology described in Mendoza,
Razin and Tesar (1994). Consumption, investment, trade balance and government expenditure ratios
are based on OECD National Income Accounts. Tax revenue and net transfers are
from the Revenue Statistics for the OECD countries
a. Average for France, Germany and Italy in 1980.
b. Average of France (1980), Italy (1980) and Germany (1991).
c. Average of France, Italy and Germany in 1985.

22

Table 2: Nash and Cooperative Equilibria of Capital Income Tax Competition between Europe and the UK
Tax Rates
Pre-tax-competitiona
A. Observed tax rates
τK
a. C3
τL
τC
b. UK

τK*
τL*
τC

0.271
0.439
0.172

0.280
0.466
0.157

0.530
0.250
0.140

0.570
0.245
0.165

0.472
0.244
0.152

B. Predictions from Tax Competition Game
1. Labor tax adjusts to maintain fiscal solvency
τK
a. C3
0.265
τL
0.374
τK*
τL*

0.530
0.250

2. Consumption tax adjusts to maintain fiscal solvency
τK
a. C3
0.265
τC
0.166
b. UK

τK*
τC*

1996

0.265
0.374
0.166

Initial

b. UK

1990

0.530
0.140

Tax Rates
Nash

Cooperative

Welfare gain (percent)
Nash
Cooperative

Equilibriab

Equilibriab

cooperation

0.295
0.397

[0.31, 0.37]
[0.376, 0.390]

-2.17

[-2.17, -1.929]

[0, 0.241]

0.195
0.317

0.245
[0.306, 0.309]

3.87

[3.882, 4.156]

[0.012, 0.286]

-0.152
0.263

[-0.115, -0.10]
[0.253, 0.255]

0.349

[0.349, 0.365]

[0.001, 0.016]

-0.092
0.272

[-0.05, -0.0325]
[0.259, 0.263]

5.285

[5.288, 5.313]

[0.003, 0.028]

a. The benchmark year for pre-tax-competition is 1979 for the UK, and 1980 for C3 as complete 1980 data were unavailable for all countries.
b. The table shows data for the range of all Cooperative equilibria that are Pareto improvements over the Nash outcome. The range of tax rates are reported from
lowest to the highest tax rate for the set of Cooperative equilibria. Note, however, that the lower the capital tax rate, the higher the labor tax rate must be to satisfy
budget balance.

Figure 1
Capital income tax rates in France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom: 1979-96
80

70

United Kingdom
60

50

40
Italy
30

Germany
France

20

10
1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Figure 2
Labor income tax rates in France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom: 1979-96
55

50

Franc

45

Italy
Germany

40

35

30

United Kingdom

25

20
1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

25

Figure 3:
Consumption tax rates in France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom: 1979-96
24

22

France
20
Germany
18
United Kingdom

16

14
Italy

12

10
1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

26

