NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH STRATEGIES
Dani Rodrik
Working Paper 10050
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10050
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

This is a working draft for eventual publication in the Handbook of Economic Growth. I gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Carnegie Corporation of New York. I also thank, without implicating,
Richard Freeman, Steph Haggard, Ricardo Hausmann, Murat Iyigun, Sharun Mukand, José Antonio Ocampo,
Andrei Shleifer, and Arvind Subramanian for comments that substantially improved this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth Strategies
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 10050
October 2003
JEL No. O1, O4
ABSTRACT
This is an attempt to derive broad, strategic lessons from the diverse experience with economic
growth in last fifty years. The paper revolves around two key arguments. One is that neoclassical
economic analysis is a lot more flexible than its practitioners in the policy domain have generally
given it credit. In particular, first-order economic principles – protection of property rights, marketbased competition, appropriate incentives, sound money, and so on – do not map into unique policy
packages. Reformers have substantial room for creatively packaging these principles into
institutional designs that are sensitive to local opportunities and constraints. Successful countries
are those that have used this room wisely. The second argument is that igniting economic growth
and sustaining it are somewhat different enterprises. The former generally requires a limited range
of (often unconventional) reforms that need not overly tax the institutional capacity of the economy.
The latter challenge is in many ways harder, as it requires constructing over the longer term a sound
institutional underpinning to endow the economy with resilience to shocks and maintain productive
dynamism. Ignoring the distinction between these two tasks leaves reformers saddled with
impossibly ambitious, undifferentiated, and impractical policy agendas.
Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
79 Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu

GROWTH STRATEGIES
Dani Rodrik

“[A]s far as the LDCs are concerned, it is probably fair
to say that at least a crude sort of ‘justice’ prevails in
the economic policy realm. Countries that have run
their economies following the policy tenets of the professionals
have on the whole reaped good fruit from the effort;
likewise, those that have flown in the face of these
tenets have had to pay the price.”
-- Arnold C. Harberger (1985, p. 42)
“When you get right down to business, there aren’t
too many policies that we can say with certainty
deeply and positively affect growth.”
-- Arnold C. Harberger (2003, p. 215)
I. Introduction
Real per-capita income in the developing world grew at an average rate of 2.3
percent per annum during the four decades between 1960 and 2000.1 This is a high
growth rate by almost any standard. At this pace incomes double every 30 years,
allowing each generation to enjoy a level of living standards that is twice as high as the
previous generation’s. To provide some historical perspective on this performance, it is
worth noting that Britain’s per-capita GDP grew at a mere 1.3 percent per annum during
its period of economic supremacy in the middle of the 19th century (1820-1870) and that
the United States grew at only 1.8 percent during the half century before World War I
when it overtook Britain as the world’s economic leader (Maddison 2001, Table B-22,
265). Moreover, with few exceptions, economic growth in the last few decades has been
accompanied by significant improvements in social indicators such as literacy, infant
mortality, life expectation, and the like. So on balance the recent growth record looks
quite impressive.
However, since the rich countries themselves grew at a very rapid clip of 2.7
percent during the period 1960-2000, few developing countries consistently managed to
1

This figure refers to the exponential growth rate of GDP per capita (in constant 1995 US$) for the group
of low- and middle-income countries. The data come from the World Development Indicators 2002 CDROM of the Word Bank.

2
close the economic gap between them and the advanced nations. As Figure 1 indicates,
the countries of East and Southeast Asia constitute the sole exception. Excluding China,
this region experienced per-capita GDP growth of 4.4 percent over 1960-2000. Despite
the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98 (which shows as a slight dip in Figure 1), countries
such as South Korea, Thailand and Malaysia ended the century with productivity levels
that stood significantly closer to those enjoyed in the advanced countries.
Elsewhere, the pattern of economic performance has varied greatly across
different time periods. China has been a major success story since the late 1970s,
experiencing a stupendous growth rate of 8.0 percent (as compared to 2.0 percent in
1960-80). Less spectacularly, India has roughly doubled its growth rate since the early
1980s, pulling South Asia’s growth rate up to 3.3 percent in 1980-2000 from 1.2 percent
in 1960-1980. The experience in other parts of the world was the mirror image of these
Asian growth take-offs. Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa both experienced robust
economic growth prior to the late 1970s and early 1980s—2.9 percent and 2.3 percent
respectively—but then lost ground subsequently in dramatic fashion. Latin America’s
growth rate collapsed in the “lost decade” of the 1980s, and has remained anemic despite
some recovery in the 1990s. Africa’s economic decline, which began in the second half
of the 1970s, continued throughout much of the 1990s and has been aggravated by the
onset of HIV/AIDS and other public-health challenges. Measures of total factor
productivity run parallel to these trends in per-capita output (see Table 1).
Hence the aggregate picture hides tremendous variety in growth performance,
both geographically and temporally. We have high growth countries and low growth
countries; countries that have grown rapidly throughout, and countries that have
experienced growth spurts for a decade or two; countries that took off around 1980 and
countries whose growth collapsed around 1980.
This paper is devoted to the question: what do we learn about growth strategies
from this rich and diverse experience? By “growth strategies” I refer to economic
policies and institutional arrangements aimed at achieving economic convergence with
the living standards prevailing in advanced countries. My emphasis will be less on the
relationship between specific policies and economic growth—the stock-in-trade of crossnational growth empirics—and more on developing a broad understanding of the
contours of successful strategies. Hence my account harks back to an earlier generation
of studies that distilled operational lessons from the observed growth experience, such as
Albert Hirschman’s The Strategy of Economic Development (1958), Alexander
Gerschenkron’s Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (1962) or Walt
Rostow’s The Stages of Economic Growth (1965). This paper follows an unashamedly
inductive approach in this tradition.
A key theme in these works, as well as in the present paper, is that growthpromoting policies tend to be context specific. We are able to make only a limited
number of generalizations on the effects on growth, say, of liberalizing the trade regime,
opening up the financial system, or building more schools. The experience of the last
two decades has frustrated the expectations of policy advisers who thought we had a good

3
fix on the policies that promote growth—see the shift in mood that is reflected in the two
quotes from Harberger that open this paper. And despite a voluminous literature, crossnational growth regressions ultimately do not provide us with much reliable and
unambiguous evidence on such operational matters.2 An alternative approach, and the
one I adopt here, is to shift our focus to a higher level of generality and to examine the
broad design principles of successful growth strategies. This entails zooming away from
the individual building blocks and concentrating on how they are put together.
The paper revolves around two key arguments. One is that neoclassical economic
analysis is a lot more flexible than its practitioners in the policy domain have generally
given it credit. In particular, first-order economic principles—protection of property
rights, contract enforcement, market-based competition, appropriate incentives, sound
money, debt sustainability—do not map into unique policy packages. Good institutions
are those that deliver these first-order principles effectively. There is no unique
correspondence between the functions that good institutions perform and the form that
such institutions take. Reformers have substantial room for creatively packaging these
principles into institutional designs that are sensitive to local constraints and take
advantage of local opportunities. Successful countries are those that have used this room
wisely.
The second argument is that igniting economic growth and sustaining it are
somewhat different enterprises. The former generally requires a limited range of (often
unconventional) reforms that need not overly tax the institutional capacity of the
economy. The latter challenge is in many ways harder, as it requires constructing a
sound institutional underpinning to maintain productive dynamism and endow the
economy with resilience to shocks over the longer term. Ignoring the distinction between
these two tasks leaves reformers saddled with impossibly ambitious, undifferentiated, and
impractical policy agendas.
The plan for the paper is as follows. The next section sets the stage by evaluating
the standard recipes for economic growth in light of recent economic performance.
Section III develops the argument that sound economic principles do not map into unique
institutional arrangements and reform strategies. Section IV re-interprets recent growth
experience using the conceptual framework of the previous section. Section V discusses
a two-pronged growth strategy that differentiates between the challenges of igniting
growth and the challenges of sustaining it. Concluding remarks are presented in section
VI.
II. What we know that (possibly) ain’t so
Development policy has always been subject to fads and fashions. During the
1950s and 1960s, the “big push,” planning, and import-substitution were the rallying
2

Easterly (2003) provides a good overview of these studies. See also Temple (1999), Brock and Durlauf
(2001), and Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001).

4
cries of economic reformers in poor nations. These ideas lost ground during the 1970s to
more market-oriented views that emphasized the role of the price system and outwardorientation.3 By the late 1980s a remarkable convergence of views had developed around
a set of policy principles that John Williamson (1990) infelicitously termed the
“Washington Consensus.” These principles remain at the heart of today’s conventional
understanding of a desirable policy framework for economic growth, even though they
have been greatly embellished and expanded in the years since.
The left panel in Table 2 shows Williamson’s original list, which focused on
fiscal discipline, “competitive” currencies, trade and financial liberalization, privatization
and deregulation. These were perceived to be the key elements of what Krugman (1995,
29) has called the “Victorian virtue in economic policy,” namely “free markets and sound
money”. Towards the end of the 1990s, this list was augmented in the thinking of
multilateral agencies and policy economists with a series of so-called second-generation
reforms that were more institutional in nature and targeted at problems of “good
governance.” A complete inventory of these Washington Consensus-plus reforms would
take too much space, and in any case the precise listing differs from source to source.4 I
have shown a representative sample of ten items (to preserve the symmetry with the
original Washington Consensus) in the right panel of Table 2. They range from anticorruption and corporate governance to social safety nets and targeted anti-poverty
programs.
The perceived need for second-generation reforms arose from a combination of
sources. First, there was growing recognition that market-oriented policies may be
inadequate without more serious institutional transformation, in areas ranging from the
bureaucracy to labor markets. For example, trade liberalization may not reallocate an
economy’s resources appropriately if the labor markets are “rigid” or insufficiently
“flexible.” Second, there was a concern that financial liberalization may lead to crises
and excessive volatility in the absence of a more carefully delineated macroeconomic
framework and improved prudential regulation. Hence the focus on non-intermediate
exchange-rate regimes, central bank independence, and adherence to international
financial codes and standards. Finally, in response to the complaint that the Washington
Consensus represented a trickle-down approach to poverty, the policy framework was
augmented with social policies and anti-poverty programs.
It is probably fair to say that a listing along the lines of Table 2 captures in broad
brushstrokes mainstream thinking about the key elements of a growth program. How
does such a list fare when held against the light of contemporary growth experience?
Imagine that we gave Table 2 to an intelligent Martian and asked him to match the
growth record displayed in Figure 1 and Table 1 with the expectations that the list
3

Easterly (2001) provides an insightful and entertaining account of the evolution of thinking on economic
development. See also Lindauer and Pritchett (2002) and Krueger (1997).

4

For diverse perspectives on what the list should contain, see Stiglitz (1998), World Bank (1998), Naim
(1999), Birdsall and de la Torre (2001), Kaufmann (2002), Ocampo (2002), and Kuczynski and Williamson
(2003).

5
generates. How successful would he be in identifying which of the regions adopted the
standard policy agenda and which did not?
Consider first the high performing East Asian countries. Since this region is the
only one that has done consistently well since the early 1960s, the Martian would
reasonably guess that there is a high degree of correspondence between its policies and
the list in Table 2. But he would be at best half-right. South Korea’s and Taiwan’s
growth policies, to take two important illustrations, exhibit significant departures from
the Washington Consensus. Neither country undertook significant deregulation or
liberalization of their trade and financial systems well into the 1980s. Far from
privatizing, they both relied heavily on public enterprises. South Korea did not even
welcome direct foreign investment. And both countries deployed an extensive set of
industrial policies that took the form of directed credit, trade protection, export
subsidization, tax incentives, and other non-uniform interventions. Using the minimal
scorecard of the original Washington Consensus (left panel of Table 2), the Martian
would award South Korea a grade of 5 (out of 10) and Taiwan perhaps a 6 (Rodrik 1996).
The gap between the East Asian “model” and the more demanding institutional
requirements shown on the right panel of Table 2 is, if anything, even larger. I provide a
schematic comparison between the standard “ideal” and the East Asian reality in Table 3
for a number of different institutional domains such as corporate governance, financial
markets, business-government relationships, and public ownership. Looking at this, the
Martian might well conclude that South Korea, Taiwan, and (before them) Japan stood
little chance to develop. Indeed, such were the East Asian anomalies that when the Asian
financial crisis of 1997-98 struck, many observers attributed the crisis to the moral
hazard, “cronyism,” and other problems created by East Asian-style institutions (see
MacLean 1999, Frankel 2000).
The Martian would also be led astray by China’s boom since the late 1970s and
by India’s less phenomenal, but still significant growth pickup since the early 1980s.
While both of these countries have transformed their attitudes towards markets and
private enterprise during this period, their policy frameworks bear very little resemblance
to what is described in Table 2. India deregulated its policy regime slowly and undertook
very little privatization. Its trade regime remained heavily restricted late into the 1990s.
China did not even adopt a private property rights regime and it merely appended a
market system to the scaffolding of a planned economy (as discussed further below). It is
hardly an exaggeration to say that had the Chinese economy stagnated in the last couple
of decades, the Martian would be in a better position to rationalize it using the policy
guidance provided in Table 2 than he is to explain China’s actual performance.5

5

Vietnam, a less well known case than China, has many of the same characteristics: rapid growth since the
late 1980s as a result of heterodox reform. Vietnam has benefited from a gradual turn toward markets and
greater reliance on private entrepreneurship, but as Van Arkadie and Mallon (2003) argue, it is hard to
square the extensive role of the state and the nature of the property rights regime with the tenets of the
Washington Consensus.

6
The Martian would be puzzled that the region that made the most determined
attempt at remaking itself in the image of Table 2, namely Latin America, has reaped so
little growth benefit out of it. Countries such as Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, Colombia,
Bolivia, and Peru did more liberalization, deregulation and privatization in the course of a
few years than East Asian countries have done in four decades. Figure 2 shows an index
of structural reform for these and other Latin American countries, taken from Lora
(2001a). The index measures on a scale from 0 to 1 the extent of trade and financial
liberalization, tax reform, privatization, and labor-market reform undertaken. The
regional average for the index rises steadily from 0.34 in 1985 to 0.58 in 1999. Yet the
striking fact from Figure 1 is that Latin America’s growth rate has remained significantly
below its pre-1980 level. The Martian would be at a loss to explain why growth is now
lower given that the quality of Latin America’s policies, as judged by the list in Table 2,
has improved so much.6 A similar puzzle, perhaps of a smaller magnitude, arises with
respect to Africa, where economic decline persists despite an overall (if less marked)
“improvement” in the policy environment.7
The Martian would recognize that the growth record is consistent with some of
the higher-order economic principles that inspire the standard policy consensus. A
semblance of property rights, sound money, fiscal solvency, market-oriented incentives—
these are elements that are common to all successful growth strategies.8 Where they have
been lacking, economic performance has been lackluster at best. But the Martian would
also have to conclude that the mapping from our more detailed policy preferences (such
as those in Table 2) to economic success is quite imperfect. He would wonder if we
cannot do better.

6

Lora (2001b) finds that structural reforms captured by this index do correlate with growth rates in the
predicted manner, but that the impacts (taking the decade of the 1990s as a whole) are not that strong.
Another econometric study by Loayza et al. (2002) claims that Latin America’s reforms added significantly
to the region’s growth. However the latter paper uses outcome variables such as trade/GDP and financial
depth ratios as its indicators of “policy,” and therefore is unable to link economic performance directly to
the reforms themselves. Lin and Liu (2003) attribute the failure of the Washington Consensus to the nonviability of enterprises created under the previous “distorted” policy regime and the political impossibility
of letting these go bust.
7

See also Milanovic (2003) for a closely related Martian thought experiment. Milanovic emphasizes that
economic growth has declined in most countries despite greater globalization.
8

Here is how Larry Summers (2003) summarizes the recent growth evidence: “[The] rate at which
countries grow is substantially determined by three things: their ability to integrate with the global
economy through trade and investment; their capacity to maintain sustainable government finances and
sound money; and their ability to put in place an institutional environment in which contracts can be
enforced and property rights can be established. I would challenge anyone to identify a country that has
done all three of these things and has not grown at a substantial rate.” Note how these recommendations
are couched not in terms of specific policies (maintain tariffs below x percent, raise the government
primary surplus above y percent, privatize state enterprises, and so on), but in terms of “abilities” and
“capacities” to get certain outcomes accomplished. I will suggest below that these “abilities” and
“capacities” do not map neatly into the standard policy preferences, and can be generated in a variety of
ways.

7

III. The indeterminate mapping from economic principles to institutional arrangements
Here is another thought experiment. Imagine a Western economist was invited to
Beijing in 1978 in order to advise the Chinese leadership on a reform strategy. What
would she recommend and why?
The economist would recognize that reform must start in the rural areas since the
vast majority of the poor live there. An immediate recommendation would be the
liberalization of agricultural markets and the abolition of the state order system under
which peasants had to make obligatory deliveries of crops at low, state-controlled prices.
But since price liberalization alone would be inadequate to generate the appropriate
supply incentives under a system of communal land ownership, the economist would also
recommend the privatization of land. Next, the economist would have to turn her
attention to the broader implications of price liberalization in agriculture. Without access
to cheap grains, the state would be left without a source of implicit tax revenue, so tax
reform must be on the agenda as well. And in view of the rise of food prices, there must
be a way to respond to urban workers’ demand for higher wages. State enterprises in
urban areas must be corporatized, so that their managers are in a position to adjust their
wages and prices appropriately.
But now there are other problems that need attention. In an essentially closed and
non-competitive economy, price-setting autonomy for the state behemoths entails the
exercise of monopoly power. So the economist would likely recommend trade
liberalization in order to “import” price discipline from abroad. Openness to trade in turn
calls for other complementary reforms. There must be financial sector reform so that
financial intermediaries are able to assist domestic enterprises in the inevitable
adjustments that are called forth. And of course there must be social safety nets in place
so that those workers who are temporarily displaced have some income support during
the transition.
The story can be embellished by adding other required reforms, but the message
ought to be clear. By the time the Western economist is done, the reform agenda she has
formulated looks very similar to the Washington Consensus (see Table 4). The
economist’s reasoning is utterly plausible, which underscores the point that the
Washington Consensus is far from silly: it is the result of systematic thinking about the
multiple, often complementary reforms needed to establish property rights, put market
incentives to work, and maintain macroeconomic stability. But while this particular
reform program represents a logically consistent way achieving these end goals, it is not
the only one that has the potential of doing so. In fact, in view of the administrative and
political constraints that such an ambitious agenda is likely to encounter, it is not
implausible that there would be better ways of getting there.
How can we be sure of this? We know this because China took a very different
approach to reform—one that was experimental in nature and relied on a series of
institutional innovations that departed significantly from Western norms. What is

8
important to realize about these innovations is that in the end they delivered—for a period
of a couple of decades at least—the very same goals that the Western economist would
have been hoping for: market-oriented incentives, property rights, macroeconomic
stability. But they did so in a peculiar fashion that, given the Chinese historical and
political context, had numerous advantages.
For example, the Chinese authorities liberalized agriculture only at the margin
while keeping the plan system intact. Farmers were allowed to sell surplus crops freely at
a market-determined price only after they had fulfilled their obligations to the state under
the state order system. As Lau, Qian, and Roland (2000) explain, this was an ingenious
system that generated efficiency without creating any losers. In particular, it was a
shortcut that neatly solved a conundrum inherent in wholesale liberalization: how to
provide microeconomic incentives to producers while insulating the central government
from the fiscal consequences of liberalization. As long as state quotas were set below the
fully liberalized market outcome (so that transactions were conducted at market prices at
the margin) and were not ratcheted up (so that producers did not have to worry about the
quotas creeping up as a result of marketed surplus), China’s dual-track reform in effect
achieved full allocative efficiency. But it entailed a different infra-marginal
distribution—one that preserved the income streams of initial claimants. The dual track
approach was eventually employed in other areas as well, such as industrial goods (e.g.
coal and steel) and labor markets (employment contracts). Lau et al. (2000) argue that
the system was critical to achieve political support for the reform process, maintain its
momentum, and minimize adverse social implications.
Another important illustration comes from the area of property rights. Rather
than privatize land and industrial assets, the Chinese government implemented novel
institutional arrangements such as the Household Responsibility System (under which
land was “assigned” to individual households according to their size) and Township and
Village Enterprises (TVEs). The TVEs were the growth engine of China until the mid1990s (Qian 2003), with their share in industrial value added rising to more than 50
percent by the early 1990s (Lin et al. 1996, 180), so they deserve special comment.
Formal ownership rights in TVEs were vested not in private hands or in the central
government, but in local communities (townships or villages). Local governments were
keen to ensure the prosperity of these enterprises as their equity stake generated revenues
directly for them. Qian (2003) argues that in the environment characteristic of China,
property rights were effectively more secure under direct local government ownership
than they would have been under a private property-rights legal regime. The efficiency
loss incurred due to the absence of private control rights was probably outweighed by the
implicit security guaranteed by local government control. It is difficult to explain
otherwise the remarkable boom in investment and entrepreneurship generated by such
enterprises.
Qian (2003) discusses other examples of “transitional institutions” China
employed to fuel economic growth—fiscal contracts between central and local
governments, anonymous banking—and one may expand his list by including
arrangements such as Special Economic Zones. The main points to take from this

9
experience are the following. First, China relied on highly unusual, non-standard
institutions. Second, these unorthodox institutions worked precisely because they
produced orthodox results, namely market-oriented incentives, property rights,
macroeconomic stability, and so on. Third, it is hard to argue, in view of China’s
stupendous growth, that a more standard, “best-practice” set of institutional arrangements
would have necessarily done better.
The Chinese experience helps lay out the issues clearly because its institutional
innovations and growth performance are both so stark. But China’s experience with nonstandard growth policies is hardly unusual; in fact it is more the rule than the exception.
The (other) East Asian anomalies noted previously (Table 3) can be viewed as part of the
same pattern: non-standard practices in the service of sound economic principles. I
summarize a few non-Chinese illustrations in Table 5.
Consider for example the case of financial controls. I noted earlier that few of the
successful East Asian countries undertook much financial liberalization early on in their
development process. Interest rates remained controlled below market-clearing levels
and competitive entry (by domestic or foreign financial intermediaries) was typically
blocked. It is easy to construct arguments as to why this was beneficial from an
economic standpoint. Table 5 summarizes the story laid out by Hellman, Morduck, and
Stiglitz (1997), who coin the term “financial restraint” for the Asian model. Where
asymmetric information prevails and the level of savings is sub-optimal, Hellman et al.
argue that creating a moderate amount of rents for incumbent banks can generate useful
incentives. These rents induce banks to do a better job of monitoring their borrowers
(since there is more at stake) and to expand effort to mobilize deposits (since there are
rents to be earned on them). The quality and level of financial intermediation can both be
higher than under financial liberalization. These beneficial effects are more likely to
materialize when the pre-existing institutional landscape has certain properties—for
example when the state is not “captured” by private interests and the external capital
account is restricted (see last two columns of Table 5). When these preconditions are in
place, the economic logic behind financial restraint is compelling.
The second illustration in Table 5 comes from South Korea’s and Taiwan’s
experiences with industrial policy. The governments in these countries rejected the
standard advice that they take an arms’ length approach to their enterprises and actively
sought to coordinate private investments in targeted sectors. Once again, it is easy to
come up with economic models that provide justification for this approach. In Rodrik
(1995), I argued that the joint presence of scale economies and inter-industry linkages can
depress the private return to investment in non-traditional activities below the social
return. Industrial policy can be viewed as a “coordination device” to stimulate socially
profitable investments. In particular, the socialization of investment risk through implicit
bailout guarantees may be economically beneficial despite the obvious moral hazard risk
it poses. However, once again, there are certain prerequisites and institutional
complements that have to be in place for this approach to make sense (see Table 5).

10
The third illustration in Table 5 refers to Japan and concerns the internal
organization of the workplace, drawing on Aoki’s (1997) work. Aoki describes the
peculiar institutional foundations of Japan’s postwar success as having evolved from a set
of arrangements originally designed for wartime mobilization and centralized control of
resources. He presents Japan’s team-centered approach to work organization and its
redistribution of economic resources from advanced to backward sectors—arrangements
that he terms “horizontal hierarchy” and “bureau-pluralism,” respectively—as solutions
to particular informational and distributive dilemmas the Japanese economy faced in the
aftermath of World War II. Unlike the previous authors, however, he views this fit
between institutions and economic challenges as having been unintended and
serendipitous.
Lest the reader think this is solely an East Asian phenomenon, an interesting
example of institutional innovation comes from Mauritius (Rodrik 1999). Mauritius
owes a large part of its success to the creation in 1970 of an export-processing zone
(EPZ), which enabled an export boom in garments to European markets. Yet, instead of
liberalizing its trade regime across the board, Mauritius combined this EPZ with a
domestic sector that was highly protected until the mid-1980s, a legacy of the policies of
import-substituting industrialization (ISI) followed during the 1960s. The industrialist
class that had been created with these policies was naturally opposed to the opening up of
the trade regime. The EPZ scheme provided a neat way around this difficulty (Wellisz
and Saw 1993). The creation of the EPZ generated new profit opportunities, without
taking protection away from the import-substituting groups. The segmentation of labor
markets was particularly crucial in this regard, as it prevented the expansion of the EPZ
(which employed mainly female labor) from driving wages up in the rest of the economy,
and thereby disadvantaging import-substituting industries. New profit opportunities were
created at the margin, while leaving old opportunities undisturbed. At a conceptual level,
the story here is essentially very similar to the two-track reforms in China described
earlier. To produce the results it did, however, the EPZ also needed a source of investible
funds, export-oriented expertise, and market access abroad, which were in turn provided
by a terms-of-trade boom, entrepreneurs from Hong Kong, and preferential market access
in Europe, respectively (Rodrik 1999; Subramanian and Roy 2003).
In reviewing cases such as these, there is always the danger of reading too much
into them after the fact. In particular, we need to avoid several fallacies. First, we cannot
simply assume that institutions take the form that they do because of the functions that
they perform (the functionalist fallacy). Aoki’s account of Japan is a particularly useful
reminder that a good fit between form and function might be the unintended consequence
of historical forces. Second, it is not correct to ascribe the positive outcomes in the cases
just reviewed only to their anomalies (the ex-post rationalization fallacy). Many accounts
of East Asian success emphasize the standard elements--fiscal conservatism, investment
in human resources, and export orientation (see for example World Bank 1993). As I
will discuss below, East Asian institutional anomalies have often produced perverse
results when employed in other settings. And it is surely not the case that all anomalies
are economically functional.

11
The main point I take from these illustrations is robust to these fallacies, and has
to do with the “plasticity” of the institutional structure that neoclassical economics is
capable of supporting. All of the above institutional anomalies are compatible with, and
can be understood in terms of, neoclassical economic reasoning (“good economics”).
Neoclassical economic analysis does not determine the form that institutional
arrangements should or do take. What China’s case and other examples discussed above
demonstrate is that the higher-order principles of sound economic management do not
map into unique institutional arrangements.
In fact, principles such as appropriate incentives, property rights, sound money,
and fiscal solvency all come institution-free. We need to operationalize them through a
set of policy actions. The experiences above show us that there may be multiple ways of
packing these principles into institutional arrangements. Different packages have
different costs and benefits depending on prevailing political constraints, levels of
administrative competence, and market failures. The pre-existing institutional landscape
will typically offer both constraints and opportunities, requiring creative shortcuts or bold
experiments. From this perspective, the “art” of reform consists of selecting
appropriately from a potentially infinite menu of institutional designs.
A direct corollary of this line of argument is that there is only a weak
correspondence between the higher-order principles of neoclassical economics and the
specific policy recommendations in the standard list (as enumerated in Table 2). To see
this, consider for example one of the least contentious recommendations in the list,
having to do with trade liberalization. Can the statement “trade liberalization is good for
economic performance” be derived from first principles of neoclassical economics? Yes,
but only if a number of side conditions are met:
The liberalization must be complete or else the reduction in import restrictions
must take into account the potentially quite complicated structure of
substitutability and complementarity across restricted commodities.9
There must be no microeconomic market imperfections other than the trade
restrictions in question, or if there are some, the second-best interactions that
are entailed must not be adverse.10
The home economy must be “small” in world markets, or else the
liberalization must not put the economy on the wrong side of the “optimum
tariff.”11

9

There is a large theoretical literature on partial trade reform, which shows the difficulty of obtaining
unambiguous characterizations of the welfare effects of incomplete liberalization. See Hatta (1977),
Anderson and Neary (1992), and Lopez and Panagariya (1993). For an applied general equilibrium
analysis of how these issues can complicate trade reform in practice, see Harrison, Rutherford, and Tarr
(1993).
10

For an interesting empirical illustration on how trade liberalization can interact adversely with
environmental externalities, see Lopez (1997).

12
The economy must be in reasonably full employment, or if not, the monetary
and fiscal authorities must have effective tools of demand management at
their disposal.
The income redistributive effects of the liberalization should not be judged
undesirable by society at large, or if they are, there must be compensatory taxtransfer schemes with low enough excess burden.12
There must be no adverse effects on the fiscal balance, or if there are, there
must be alternative and expedient ways of making up for the lost fiscal
revenues.
The liberalization must be politically sustainable and hence credible so that
economic agents do not fear or anticipate a reversal.13
All these theoretical complications could be sidestepped if there were convincing
evidence that in practice trade liberalization systematically produces improved economic
performance. But even for this relatively uncontroversial policy, it has proved difficult to
generate unambiguous evidence (see Rodriguez and Rodrik 2001, Vamvakidis 2002, and
Yanikkaya 2003).14
The point is that even the simplest of policy recommendations—“liberalize your
trade”—is contingent on a large number of judgment calls about the economic and
political context in which it is to be implemented.15 Such judgment calls are often made
implicitly. Rendering them explicit has a double advantage: it warns us about the
potential minefields that await the standard recommendations, and it stimulates creative
thinking on alternatives (as in China) that can sidestep those minefields. By contrast,
when the policy recommendation is made unconditionally, as in the Washington

11

This is not a theoretical curiosum. Gilbert and Varangis (2003) argue that the liberalization of cocoa
exports in West African countries has depressed world cocoa prices, with most of the benefits being
captured by consumers in developed countries.

12

The standard workhorse model of international trade, the factor-endowments model and its associated
Stolper-Samuelson theorem, comes with sharp predictions on the distributional effects of import
liberalization (the “magnification effect”).

13

Calvo (1989) was the first to point out that lack of credibility acts as an intertemporal distortion. See also
Rodrik (1991).
14

Recent empirical studies have begun to look for non-linear effects of trade liberalization. In a study of
India’s liberalization, Aghion et al. (2003) find that trade liberalization appears to have generated
differentiated effects across Indian firms depending on prevailing industrial capabilities and labor market
regulations. Firms that were close to the technological frontier and in states with more “flexible”
regulations responded positively while others responded negatively. See also Helleiner (1994) for a useful
collection of country studies that underscores the contingent nature of economies’ response to trade
liberalization.

15

This is one reason why policy discussions on standard recommendations such as trade liberalization and
privatization now often take the formulaic form: “policy x is not a panacea; in order to work, it must be
supported by reforms in the areas of a, b, c, d, and so on.”

13
Consensus, the gamble is that the policy’s prerequisites will coincide with our actual
draw from a potentially large universe of possible states of the world.
I summarize this discussion with the help of Tables 6, 7, and 8 dealing with
microeconomic policy, macroeconomic policy, and social policy, respectively. Each
table contains three columns. The first column displays the ultimate goal that is targeted
by the policies and institutional arrangements in the three domains. Hence
microeconomic policies aim to achieve static and dynamic efficiency in the allocation of
resources. Macroeconomic policies aim for macroeconomic and financial stability.
Social policies target poverty reduction and social protection.
The next column displays some of the key higher-order principles that economic
analysis brings to the table. Allocative efficiency require property rights, the rule of law,
and appropriate incentives. Macroeconomic and financial stability requires sound
money, fiscal solvency, and prudential regulation. Social inclusion requires incentive
compatibility and appropriate targeting. These are the “universal principles” of sound
economic management. They are universal in the sense that it is hard to see what any
country would gain by systematically defying them. Countries that have adhered to these
principles—no matter how unorthodox their manner of doing so may have been—have
done well while countries that have flouted them have typically done poorly.
From the standpoint of policy makers, the trouble is that these universal principles
are not operational as stated. In effect, the answers to the real questions that preoccupy
policy makers—how far should I go in opening up my economy to foreign competition,
should I free up interest rates, should I rely on payroll taxes or the VAT, and the others
listed in the third column of each table--cannot be directly deduced from these principles.
This opens up space for a multiplicity of institutional arrangements that are compatible
with the universal, higher-order principles.
These tables clarify why the standard recommendations (Table 2) correlates
poorly with economic performance around the world. The Washington Consensus, in its
various forms, has tended to blur the line that separates column 2 from column 3. Policy
advisors have been too quick in jumping from the higher-order principles in column 2 to
taking unconditional stands on the specific operational questions posed in column 3. And
as their policy advice has yielded disappointing results, they have moved on to
recommendations with even greater institutional specificity (as with “second generation
reforms”). As a result, sound economics has often been delivered in unsound form.
I emphasize that this argument is not one about the advantages of gradualism over
shock therapy. In fact, the set of ideas I have presented are largely orthogonal to the
long-standing debate between the adherents of the two camps (see for example Lipton
and Sachs 1990, Aslund et al. 1996, Williamson and Zagha 2002). The strategy of
gradualism presumes that policy makers have a fairly good idea of the institutional
arrangements that they want to acquire ultimately, but that for political and other reasons
they can proceed only step-by-step in that direction. The argument here is that there is
typically a large amount of uncertainty about what those institutional arrangements are,

14
and therefore that the process that is required is more one of “search and discovery” than
one of gradualism. The two strategies may coincide when policy changes reveal
information and small-scale policy reforms have a more favorable ratio of information
revelation to risk of failure.16 But it is best not to confuse the two strategies. What stands
out in the real success cases, as I will further illustrate below, is not gradualism per se but
an unconventional mix of standard and non-standard policies well attuned to the reality
on the ground.
IV. Back to the real world
Previously we had asked our Martian to interpret economic performance in the
real world from the lens of the standard reform agenda. Suppose we now remove the
constraint and ask him to summarize the stylized facts as he sees them. Here is a list of
four stylized facts that he may come up with.
1. In practice, growth spurts are associated with a narrow range of policy reforms.
One of the most encouraging aspects of the comparative evidence on economic
growth is that it often takes very little to get growth started. To appreciate the point, it is
enough to turn to Table 9, which lists 64 cases of growth transitions. The table shows all
cases of significant growth accelerations since the 1950s that can be identified
statistically. The definition of a growth acceleration is the following: an increase in an
economy’s per-capita GDP growth of 2.5 percentage points or more (relative to the
previous 5 years) that is sustained over at least 10 years. The timing of the growth
acceleration is determined by fitting a spline centered on the candidate break years, and
selecting the break that maximizes the fit of the equation (see Hausmann, Pritchett, and
Rodrik forthcoming, for details on the procedure).17
Most of the usual suspects are included in the table, for example Taiwan 1961,
South Korea 1962, Botswana 1966, Brazil 1966, Singapore 1968, Mauritius 1969, China
1978, Chile 1985 and so on. But the exercise also yields a large number of much less
well-known cases, such as Egypt 1976 or Pakistan 1977. In fact, the large number of
countries that have managed to engineer at least one instance of transition to high growth
may appear as surprising. As I will discuss later, most of these growth spurts have
eventually collapsed. Nonetheless, an increase in growth of 2.5 percent (and typically
more) over a decade is nothing to sneer at, and it is worth asking what produces it.
In the vast majority of the cases listed in Table 9, the “shocks” (policy or
otherwise) that produced the growth spurts were apparently quite mild. Asking most
development economists about the policy reforms of Pakistan in 1977 or Syria in 1969
16

For example, Dewatripont and Roland (1995) and Wei (1997) present models in which gradual reforms
reveal information and affect subsequent political constraints.

17

The selection strategy allows multiple accelerations, but they must be at least five years apart.

15
would draw a blank stare. This reflects the fact that not much reform was actually taking
pace in these cases. Relatively small changes in the background environment can yield
significant increase in economic activity.
Even in the well-known cases, policy changes at the outset have been typically
modest. The gradual, experimental steps towards liberalization that China undertook in
the late 1970s were discussed above. South Korea’s experience in the early 1960s was
similar. The military government led by Park Chung Hee that took power in 1961 did not
have strong views on economic reform, except that it regarded economic development as
its key priority. It moved in a trial-and-error fashion, experimenting at first with various
public investment projects. The hallmark reforms associated with the Korean miracle,
the devaluation of the currency and the rise in interest rates, came in 1964 and fell far
short of full liberalization of currency and financial markets. As these instances
illustrate, an attitudinal change on the part of the top political leadership towards a more
market-oriented, private-sector-friendly policy framework often plays as large a role as
the scope of policy reform itself (if not larger). Such an attitudinal change appears to
have had a particularly important effect in India in the early 1980s (de Long 2003).
This is good news because it suggests countries do not need an extensive set of
institutional reforms in order to start growing. Instigating growth is a lot easier in
practice than the standard recipe, with its long list of action items, would lead us to
believe. This should not be surprising from a growth theory standpoint. When a country
is so far below its potential steady-state level of income, even moderate movements in the
right direction can produce a big growth payoff. Nothing could be more encouraging to
policy makers, who are often overwhelmed and paralyzed by the apparent need to
undertake policy reforms on a wide and ever-expanding front.
2. The policy reforms that are associated with these growth transitions typically combine
elements of orthodoxy with unorthodox institutional practices.
No country has experienced rapid growth without minimal adherence to what I
have termed higher-order principles of sound economic governance—property rights,
market-oriented incentives, sound money, fiscal solvency. But as I have already argued,
these principles were often implemented via policy arrangements that are quite
unconventional. I illustrated this using examples such as China’s two-track reform
strategy, Mauritius’ export processing zone, and South Korea’s system of “financial
restraint.”
It is easy to multiply the examples. When Taiwan and South Korea decided to
reform their trade regimes to reduce anti-export bias, they did this not via import
liberalization (which would have been a Western economist’s advice) but through
selective subsidization of exports. When Singapore decided to make itself more
attractive to foreign investment, it did this not by reducing state intervention but by
greatly expanding public investment in the economy and through generous tax incentives
(Young 1992). Botswana, which has an admirable record with respect to macroeconomic
stability and the management of its diamond wealth, also has one of the largest levels of

16
government spending (in relation to GDP) in the world. Chile, a country that is often
cited as a paragon of virtue by the standard check list, has also departed from it in some
important ways: it has kept its largest export industry (copper) under state ownership; it
has maintained capital controls on financial inflows through the 1990s; and it has
provided significant technological, organizational, and marketing assistance to its
fledgling agro-industries.
In all these instances, standard desiderata such as market liberalization and
outward orientation were combined with public intervention and selectivity of some sort.
The former element in the mix ensures that any economist so inclined can walk away
from the success cases with a renewed sense that the standard policy recommendations
really “work.” Most egregiously, China’s success is often attributed to its turn towards
market—which is largely correct—and then with an unjustified leap of logic is taken as a
vindication of the standard recipe—which is largely incorrect. It is not clear how helpful
such evaluations are when so much of what these countries did is unconventional and fits
poorly with the standard agenda.18
It is difficult to identify cases of high growth where unorthodox elements have not
played a role. Hong Kong is probably the only clear-cut case. Hong Kong’s government
has had a hands-off attitude towards the economy in almost all areas, the housing market
being a major exception. Unlike Singapore, which followed a free trade policy but
otherwise undertook extensive industrial policies, Hong Kong’s policies have been as
close to laissez-faire as we have ever observed. However, there were important
prerequisites to Hong Kong’s success, which illuminate once again the contextspecificity of growth strategies. Most important, Hong Kong’s important entrepôt role in
trade, the strong institutions imparted by the British, and the capital flight from
communist China had already transformed the city-state into a high investment, high
entrepreneurship economy by the late 1950s. As Figure 3 shows, during the early 1960s
Hong Kong’s investment rate was more than three times higher than that in South Korea
or Taiwan. The latter two economies would not reach Hong Kong’s 1960 per-capita
GDP until the early 1970s.19 Hence Hong Kong did not face the same challenge that
Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore did to crowd in private investment and stimulate
entrepreneurship.
It goes without saying that not all unorthodox remedies work. And those that
work sometimes do so only for a short while. Consider for example Argentina’s
experiment in the 1990s with a currency board. Most economists would consider a
currency board regime as too risky for an economy of Argentina’s size insofar as it
prevents expenditure switching via the exchange rate. (Hong Kong has long operated a
18

Another source of confusion is the mixing up of policies with outcomes. Successful countries end up
with much greater participation in the world economy, thriving private sectors, and a lot of financial
intermediation. What we need to figure out, however, are the policies that produce these results. It would
be a great distortion of the strategy followed by countries such as China, South Korea, Taiwan and others to
argue that these outcomes were the result of trade and financial liberalization, and privatization.
19

These and investment data are from the Penn World Tables 6.1.

17
successful marketing board.) However, as the Argentinean economy began to grow
rapidly in the first half of the 1990s, many analysts altered their views. Had the Asian
crisis of 1997-98 and the Brazilian devaluation of 1999 not forced Argentina off its
currency board, it would have been easy to construct a story ex post about the virtues of
the currency board as a growth strategy. The currency board sought to counteract the
effects of more than a century of financial mismanagement through monetary discipline.
It was a shortcut aimed at convincing foreign and domestic investors that the rules of the
game had changed irrevocably. Under better external circumstances, the credibility
gained might have more than offset the disadvantages. The problem in this case was the
unwillingness to pull back from the experiment even when it became clear that the
regime had left the Argentine economy with a hopelessly uncompetitive real exchange
rate. Institutional innovation requires a pragmatic approach that avoids ideological lockin.
3. Institutional innovations do not travel well.
The more discouraging aspect of the stylized facts is that the policy packages
associated with growth accelerations—and particularly the elements therein that are nonstandard—tend to vary considerably from country to country. China’s two-track strategy
of reform differs significantly from India’s gradualism. South Korea’s and Taiwan’s
more protectionist trade strategy differs markedly from the open trade policies of
Singapore (and Hong Kong). Even within strategies that look superficially similar, closer
look reveals large variation. Taiwan and South Korea both subsidized non-traditional
industrial activities, but the former did it through tax incentives and the latter through
directed credit.20
Attempts to emulate successful policies elsewhere often fail. When Gorbachev
tried to institute a system similar to China’s Household Responsibility System and twotrack pricing in the Soviet Union during the mid- to late-1980s, it produced few of the
beneficial results that China had obtained.21 Most developing countries have export
processing zones of one kind or another, but few have been as successful as the one in
Mauritius. Import-substituting industrialization (ISI) worked in Brazil, but not in
Argentina.22
In light of the arguments made earlier, this experience should not be altogether
surprising. Successful reforms are those that package sound economic principles around
local capabilities, constraints and opportunities. Since these local circumstances vary, so
do the reforms that work. An immediate implication is that growth strategies require
20

On the institutional differences among East Asian economies, see Haggard (2003).

21

Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992) analyze this failure and attribute it to the inability of the Soviet
state to enforce the plan quotas once market pricing was allowed (albeit at the margin). This had been
critical to the success of the Chinese approach.
22

TFP growth averaged 2.9 and 0.2 percent per annum in Brazil and Argentina, respectively, during 196073. See Rodrik (1999) and Collins and Bosworth (1996).

18
considerable local knowledge. It does not take a whole lot of reform to stimulate
economic growth—that is the good news. The bad news is that it may be quite difficult
to identify where the binding constraints or promising opportunities lie. A certain
amount of policy experimentation may be required in order to discover what will work.
China represents the apotheosis of this experimental approach to reform. But it is worth
noting that many other instances of successful reform were preceded by failed
experiments. In South Korea, President Park’s developmental efforts initially focused on
the creation of white elephant industrial projects that ultimately went nowhere (Soon
1994, 27-28). In Chile, Pinochet’s entire first decade can be viewed as a failed
experiment in “global monetarism.”
Economists can have a useful role to play in this process: they can identify the
sources of inefficiency, describe the relevant trade offs, figure out general-equilibrium
implications, predict behavioral responses, and so on. But they can do these well only if
their analysis is adequately embedded within the prevailing institutional and political
reality. The hard work needs to be done at home.
4. Sustaining growth is more difficult than igniting it, and requires more extensive
institutional reform.
The main reason that few of the growth accelerations listed in Table 9 are etched
in the consciousness of development economists is that most of them did not prove
durable. In fact, as discussed earlier, over the last four decades few countries except for a
few East Asian ones have steadily converged to the income levels of the rich countries.
The vast majority of growth spurts tend to run out of gas after a while. The experience of
Latin America since the early 1980s and the even more dramatic collapse of Sub-Saharan
Africa are emblematic of this phenomenon. In a well-known paper, Easterly, Kremer,
Pritchett and Summers (1993) were the first to draw attention to a related finding, namely
the variability in growth performance across time periods. The same point is made on a
broader historical canvas by Goldstone (forthcoming).
Hence growth in the short-term does not guarantee success in the long-term. A
plausible interpretation is that the initial reforms need to be deepened over time with
efforts aimed at strengthening the institutional underpinning of market economies. It
would be nice if a small number of policy changes—which, as argued above, is what
produces growth accelerations—could produce growth over the longer term as well, but
this is obviously unrealistic. I will discuss some of the institutional prerequisites of
sustained growth in greater detail later in the paper. But the key to longer-term
prosperity, once growth is launched, is to develop institutions that maintain productive
dynamism and generate resilience to external shocks.
For example, the growth collapses experienced by many developing countries in
the period from the mid-1970s to the early 1980s seem to be related mainly to the
inability to adjust to the volatility exhibited by the external environment at that time. In
these countries, the effects of terms-of-trade and interest-rate shocks were magnified by
weak institutions of conflict management (Rodrik 1999b). The required macroeconomic

19
policy adjustments set off distributive struggles and proved difficult to undertake. The
weakness of Indonesia’s institutions explains why that country could not extricate itself
from the 1997-98 East Asian financial crisis (see Temple 2003), while South Korea, for
example, did a rapid turnaround. These examples are also a warning that continued
growth in China cannot be taken for granted: without stronger institutions in areas
ranging from financial markets to political governance, the Chinese economy may well
find itself having outgrown its institutional underpinnings.23
V. A two-pronged growth strategy
As the evidence discussed above reveals, growth accelerations are feasible with
minimal institutional change. The deeper and more extensive institutional reforms
needed for long-term convergence take time to implement and mature. And they may not
be the most effective way to raise growth at the outset because they do not directly target
the most immediate constraints and opportunities facing an economy. At the same time,
such institutional reforms can be much easier to undertake in an environment of growth
rather than stagnation. These considerations suggest that successful growth strategies are
based on a two-pronged effort: a short-run strategy aimed at stimulating growth, and a
medium- to long-run strategy aimed at sustaining growth.24 The rest of this section takes
these up in turn.
1. An investment strategy to kick-start growth
From the standpoint of economic growth, the most important question in the short
run for an economy stuck in a low-activity equilibrium is: how do you get entrepreneurs
excited about investing in the home economy? “Invest” here has to be interpreted
broadly, as referring to all the activities that entrepreneurs undertake, such as expanding
capacity, employing new technology, producing new products, searching for new
markets, and so on. As entrepreneurs become energized, capital accumulation and
technological change are likely to go hand in hand—too entangled with each other to
separate out cleanly.
What sets this process into motion? There are two kinds of views on this in the
literature. One approach emphasizes the role of government-imposed barriers to
entrepreneurship. In this view, policy biases towards large and politically-connected
firms, institutional failures (in the form of licensing and other regulatory barriers,
inadequate property rights and contract enforcement), and high levels of policy
uncertainty and risk create dualistic economic structures and repress entrepreneurship.
23

Young (2000) argues that China’s reform strategy may have made things worse in the long run, by
increasing the number of distorted margins.

24

A similar distinction is also made by Ocampo (2003), who emphasizes that many of the long-run
correlates of growth (such as improved institutions) are the result, and not the instigator, of growth. There
is also an analogue in the political science literature in the distinction between the political prerequisites of
initiating and sustaining reform (see Haggard and Kaufman 1983).

20
The removal of the most egregious forms of these impediments is then expected to
unleash a flurry of new investments and entrepreneurship. According to the second view,
the government has to play a more pro-active role than simply getting out of the private
sector’s way: it needs to find means of crowding in investment and entrepreneurship with
some positive inducements. In this view, economic growth is not the natural order of
things, and establishing a fair and level playing field may not be enough to spur
productive dynamism. The two views differ in the importance they attach to prevailing,
irremovable market imperfections and their optimism with regard to governments’ ability
to design and implement appropriate policy interventions.
(a) Government failures
A good example of the first view is provided by the strategy of development
articulated in Stern (2001). In a deliberate evocation of Hirschman’s The Strategy of
Economic Development (1958), Stern outlines an approach with two pillars: building an
appropriate “investment climate” and “empowering poor people.” The former is the
relevant part of his approach in this context. Stern defines “investment climate” quite
broadly, as “the policy, institutional, and behavioral environment, both present and
expected, that influences the returns and risks associated with investment” (2001, 14445). At the same time, he recognizes the need for priorities and the likelihood that these
priorities will be context specific. He emphasizes the favorable dynamics that are
unleashed once a few, small things are done right.
In terms of actual policy content, Stern’s illustrations make clear that he views the
most salient features of the investment climate to be government-imposed imperfections:
macroeconomic instability and high inflation, high government wages that distort the
functioning of labor markets, a large tax burden, arbitrary regulations, burdensome
licensing requirements, corruption, and so on. The strategy he recommends is to use
enterprise surveys and other techniques to uncover which of these problems bite the most,
and then to focus reforms on the corresponding margin. Similar perspectives can be
found in Johnson et al. (2000), Friedman et al. (2000), and Aslund and Johnson (2003).
Besley and Burgess (2002) provide evidence across Indian states on the productivity
depressing effects of labor market regulations. The title of Shleifer and Vishny’s (1998)
book aptly summarizes the nature of the relevant constraint in this view: The Grabbing
Hand: Government Pathologies and Their Cures.
(b) Market failures
The second approach focuses not on government-imposed constraints, but on
market imperfections inherent in low-income environments that block investment and
entrepreneurship in non-traditional activities. In this view, economies can get stuck in a
low-level equilibrium due to the nature of technology and markets, even when
government policy does not penalize entrepreneurship. There are many versions of this
latter approach, and some of the main arguments are summarized in the taxonomy
presented in Table 10. I distinguish here between stories that are based on learning
spillovers (a non-pecuniary externality) and those that are based on market-size

21
externalities induced by scale economies. See also the useful discussion of these issues
in Ocampo (2003), which takes a more overtly structuralist perspective.
As Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti (2002) point out, two types of learning are
relevant to economic growth: (a) adaptation of existing technologies; and (b) innovation
to create new technologies. Early in the development process, the kind of learning that
matters the most is of the first type. There are a number of reasons why such learning
can be subject to spillovers. There may be a threshold level of human capital beyond
which the private return to acquiring skills becomes strongly positive (as in Azariadis and
Drazen 1990). There may be learning-by-doing which is either external to individual
firms, or cannot be properly internalized due to imperfections in the market for credit (as
in Matsuyama 1992). Or there may be learning about a country’s own cost structure,
which spills over from the incumbents to later entrants (as in Hausmann and Rodrik
2002). In all these cases, the relevant learning is under-produced in a decentralized
equilibrium, with the consequence that the economy fails to diversify into non-traditional,
more advanced lines of activity.25 There then exist policy interventions that can improve
matters. With standard externalities, the first-best takes the form of a corrective subsidy
targeted at the relevant distorted margin. In practice, revenue, administrative or
informational constraints may make resort to second-best interventions inevitable.
For example, Hausmann and Rodrik (2002) suggest a carrot-and-stick strategy to
deal with the learning barrier to industrialization that they identify. In that model, costs
of production in non-traditional activities are uncertain, and they are revealed only after
an upfront investment by an incumbent. Once that initial investment is made, the cost
information becomes public knowledge. Entrepreneurs engaged in the cost discovery
process incur private costs, but provide social benefits that can vastly exceed their
anticipated profits. The first-best policy here, which is an entry subsidy, suffers from an
inextricable moral hazard problem. Subsidized entrants have little incentive to engage
subsequently in costly activities to discover costs. A second-best approach takes the form
of incentives contingent on good performance. Hausmann and Rodrik (2002) evaluate
East Asian and Latin American industrial policies from this perspective. They argue that
East Asian policies were superior in that they effectively combined incentives with
discipline. The former was provided through subsidies and protection, while the latter
was provided through government monitoring and the use of export performance as a
productivity yardstick. Latin American firms under import substituting industrialization
(ISI) received considerable incentives, but faced very little discipline. In the 1990s, these
same firms arguably faced lots of discipline (exerted through foreign competition), but
little incentives. This line of argument provides one potential clue to the disappointing
economic performance of Latin America in the 1990s despite a much improved
“investment climate” according to the standard criteria.
25

Imbs and Wacziarg (2003) demonstrate that sectoral diversification is a robust correlate of economic
growth at lower levels of income. This is in tension with standard models of trade and specialization under
constant returns to scale. Sectoral concentration starts to increase only after a relatively high level of
income is reached, with the turning point coming somewhere between $8,500 and $9,500 in 1985 U.S.
dollars.

22

The second main group of stories shown in Table 10 relates to the existence of
coordination failures induced by scale economies. The big-push theory of development,
articulated first by Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) and formalized by Murphy, Shleifer and
Vishny (1989), is based on the idea that moving out of a low-level steady state requires
coordinated and simultaneous investments in a number of different areas. A general
formulation of such models can provided as follows. Let the level of profits in a given
modern-sector activity depend on n, the proportion of the economy that is already
engaged in modern activities: πm(n), with dπm(n)/dn > 0 . Let profits in traditional
activities be denoted πt. Suppose modern activities are unprofitable for an individual
entrant if no other entrepreneur already operates in the modern sector, but highly
profitable if enough entrepreneurs do so: πm(0) < πt and πm(1) > πt . Then n = 0 and n = 1
are both possible equilibria, and industrialization may never take hold in an economy that
starts with n = 0. The precise mechanism that generates profit functions of this form
depends on the model in question. Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989) develop models
in which the complementarity arises from demand spillovers across final goods produced
under scale economies or from bulky infrastructure investments. Rodriguez-Clare
(1996), Rodrik (1996), and Trindade (2003) present models in which the effect operates
through vertical industry relationships and specialized intermediate inputs. Hoff and
Stiglitz (2001) discuss a large class of models with coordination failure characteristics.
The policy implications of such models can be quite unconventional, requiring the
crowding in of private investment through subsidization, jawboning, public enterprises
and the like. Despite the “big push” appellation, the requisite policies need not be wideranging. For example, socializing investment risk through implicit investment
guarantees, a policy followed in South Korea, is welfare enhancing in Rodrik’s (1996)
framework because it induces simultaneous entry into the modern sector. It is also
costless to the government, because the guarantees are never called on insofar as the
resulting investment boom pays for itself. Hence, when successful, such policies will
leave little trail on government finances or elsewhere.26
Both types of models listed in Table 10 suggest that the propagation of modern,
non-traditional activities is not a natural process and that it may require positive
inducements. One such inducement that has often worked in the past is a sizable and
sustained depreciation of the real exchange rate. For a small open economy, the real
exchange rate is defined as the relative price of tradables to non-tradables. In practice,
this price ratio tends to move in tandem with the nominal exchange rate, the price of
foreign currency in terms of home currency. Hence currency devaluations (supported by
appropriate monetary and fiscal policies) increase the profitably of tradable activities
across the board. From the current perspective, this has a number of distinct advantages.
Most of the gains from diversification into non-traditional activities are likely to lie
within manufactures and natural resource based products (i.e., tradables) rather than
26

On South Korea’s implicit investment guarantees, see Amsden (1989). During the Asian financial crisis,
these guarantees became an issue and they were portrayed as evidence of crony capitalism (MacLean
1999).

23
services and other non-tradables. Second, the magnitude of the inducement can be quite
large, since sustained real depreciations of 50 percent or more are quite common. Third,
since tradable activities face external competition, the activities that are encouraged tend
to be precisely the ones that face the greatest market discipline. Fourth, the manner in
which currency depreciation subsidizes tradable activities is completely market-friendly,
requiring no micromanagement on the part of bureaucrats. For all these reasons, a
credible, sustained real exchange rate depreciation may constitute the most effective
industrial policy there is.
Large real exchange rate changes have played a big role in some of the more
recent growth accelerations. Figure 4 shows two well-known cases: Chile and Uganda
since the mid-1980s. In both cases, a substantial swing in relative prices in favor of
tradables accompanied the growth take-off. In Chile, the more than doubling of the real
exchange rate following the crisis of 1982-83 (the deepest in Latin America at the time)
is commonly presumed to have played an instrumental role in promoting diversification
into non-traditional exports and stimulating economic growth. It is worth noting that
import tariffs were raised significantly as well (during 1982-85), giving importsubstituting activities an additional boost. As the bottom panel of Figure 3 shows, the
depreciation In Uganda was even larger. These depreciations are unlikely to have been
the result of growth, since growth typically generates an appreciation of the real exchange
rate through the Balassa-Samuelson effect. By contrast, large real depreciations did not
play a major role in early growth accelerations in East Asia during the 1960s (Rodrik
1997).27
(c) Where to start?
The two sets of views outlined above—the government failure and market failure
approaches—can help frame policy discussions and identify important ways of thinking
about policy priorities in the short run. The most effective point of leverage for
stimulating growth obviously depends on local circumstances. It is tempting to think that
the right first step is to remove government-imposed obstacles to entrepreneurial activity
before worrying about “crowding in” investments through positive inducements. But this
may not always be a better strategy. Certainly when inflation is in triple digits or the
regulatory framework is so cumbersome that it stifles any private initiative, removing
these distortions will be the most sensible initial step. But beyond that, it is difficult to
say in general where the most effective margin for change lies. Asking businessmen their
views on the priorities can be helpful, but not decisive. When learning spillovers and
coordination failures block economic take-off, enterprise surveys are unlikely to be
revealing unless the questions are very carefully crafted to elicit relevant responses.
One of the lessons of recent economic history is that creative interventions can be
remarkably effective even when the “investment climate,” judged by standard criteria, is
pretty lousy. South Korea’s early reforms took place against the background of a
27

Polterovich and Popov (2002) provide theory and evidence on the role of real exchange rate
undervaluations in generating economic growth.

24
political leadership that was initially quite hostile to the entrepreneurial class.28 China’s
TVEs have been stunningly successful despite the absence of private property rights and
an effective judiciary. Conversely, the Latin American experience of the 1990s indicates
that the standard criteria do not guarantee an appropriate investment climate.
Governments can certainly deter entrepreneurship when they try to do too much; but they
can also deter entrepreneurship when they do too little.
It is sometimes argued that heterodoxy requires greater institutional strength and
therefore lies out of reach of most developing countries. But the evidence does not
provide much support for this view. It is true that the selective interventions I have
discussed in the case of South Korea and Taiwan were successful in part due to unusual
and favorable circumstances. But elsewhere, heterodoxy served to make virtue out of
institutional weakness. This is the case with China’s TVEs, Mauritius’ export processing
zone, and India’s gradualism. In these countries, it was precisely institutional weakness
that rendered the standard remedies impractical. It is in part because the standard reform
agenda is institutionally so highly demanding—a fact now recognized through so-called
“second generation reforms”—that successful growth strategies are so often based on
unconventional elements (in their early stages at least).
It is nonetheless true that the implementation of the market failure approach
requires a reasonably competent and non-corrupt government. For every South Korea,
there are many Zaires where policy activism is an excuse for politicians to steal and
plunder. Finely-tuned policy interventions can hardly be expected to produce desirable
outcomes in setting such as the latter. And to the extent that Washington Consensus
policies are more conducive to honest behavior on the part of politicians, they may well
be preferable on this account. However, the evidence is ambiguous on this. Most
policies, including those of the Washington Consensus type, are corruptible if the
underlying political economy permits or encourages it. Consider for example Russia’s
experiment with mass privatization. It is widely accepted that this process was distorted
and de-legitimized by asset grabs on the part of politically well-connected insiders.
Washington Consensus policies themselves cannot legislate powerful rent-seekers out of
existence. Rank ordering different policy regimes requires a more fully specified model
of political economy than the reduced-form view that automatically associates
governmental restraint with less rent-seeking.29

28

One month after taking power in a military coup in 1961, President Park arrested some of the leading
businessmen in Korea under the newly passed Law for Dealing with Illicit Wealth Accumulation. These
businessmen were subsequently set free under the condition that they establish new industrial firms and
give up the shares to the government (Amsden 1989, 72).
29

In Rodrik (1995) I compared export subsidy regimes in six countries, and found that the regimes that
were least likely to be open to rent-seeking ex ante—those with clear-cut rules, uniform schedules, and no
arms’ length relationships between firms and bureaucrats—were in fact less effective ex post. Where
bureaucrats were professional and well-monitored, discretion was not harmful. Where they were not, the
rules did not help.

25
I close this section with the usual refrain: the range of strategies that have worked
in the past is quite diverse. Traditional import-substituting industrialization (ISI) model
was quite effective in stimulating growth in a large number of developing countries (e.g.,
Brazil, Mexico, Turkey). So was East Asian style outward orientation, which combined
heavy-handed interventionism at home with single-minded focus on exports (South
Korea, Taiwan). Chile’s post-1983 strategy was based on quite a different style of
outward orientation, relying on large real depreciation, absence of explicit industrial
policies (but quite a bit of support for non-traditional exports in agro-industry), saving
mobilization through pension privatization, and discouragement of short-term capital
inflows. The experience of countries such as China and Mauritius is best described as
two-track reform. India comes as close to genuine gradualism as one can imagine. Hong
Kong represents probably the only case where growth has taken place without an active
policy of crowding in private investment and entrepreneurship, but here too special and
favorable preconditions (mentioned earlier) limit its relevance to other settings. In view
of this diversity, any statement on what ignites growth has to be cast at a sufficiently high
level of generality.
2. An institution building strategy to sustain growth
In the long run, the main thing that ensures convergence with the living standards
of advanced countries is the acquisition of high-quality institutions. The growth-spurring
strategies described above have to be complemented over time with a cumulative process
of institution building to ensure that growth does not run out of steam and that the
economy remains resilient to shocks. This point has now been amply demonstrated both
by historical accounts (North and Thomas 1973, Engerman and Sokoloff 1994) and by
econometric studies (Hall and Jones 1999, Acemoglu et al. 2001, Rodrik et al., 2002,
Easterly and Levine, 2002). However, these studies tend to remain at a very aggregate
level of generality and do not provide much policy guidance (a point that is also made in
Besley and Burgess 2002b).
The empirical research on national institutions has generally focused on the
protection of property rights and the rule of law. But one should think of institutions
along a much wider spectrum. In its broadest definition, institutions are the prevailing
rules of the game in society (North 1990). High quality institutions are those that induce
socially desirable behavior on the part of economic agents. Such institutions can be both
informal (e.g., moral codes, self-enforcing agreements) and formal (legal rules enforced
through third parties). It is widely recognized that the relative importance of formal
institutions increases as the scope of market exchange broadens and deepens. One reason
is that setting up formal institutions requires high fixed costs but low marginal costs,
whereas informal institutions have high marginal costs (Li 1999; Dixit 2004, chap. 3). I
will focus here on formal institutions.
What kind of institutions matter and why? Table 11 provides a taxonomy of
market-sustaining institutions, associating each type of institutions with a particular need.
The starting point is the recognition that markets need not be self-creating, selfregulating, self-stabilizing, and self-legitimizing. Hence, the very existence of market

26
exchange presupposes property rights and some form of contract enforcement. This is
the aspect of institutions that has received the most scrutiny in empirical work. The
central dilemma here is that a political entity that is strong enough to establish property
rights and enforce contracts is also strong enough, by definition, to violate these same
rules for its own purpose (Djankov et al., 2003). The relevant institutions must strike the
right balance between disorder and dictatorship.
As Table 11 makes clear, there are other needs as well. Every advanced economy
has discovered that markets require extensive regulation to minimize abuse of market
power, internalize externalities, deal with information asymmetries, establish product and
safety standards, and so on. They also need monetary, fiscal, and other arrangements to
deal with the business cycle and the problems of unemployment/inflation that are at the
center of macroeconomists’ analyses since Keynes. Finally, market outcomes need to be
legitimized through social protection, social insurance, and democratic governance most
broadly (Rodrik 2000).
Institutional choices made in dealing with these challenges often have to strike a
balance between competing objectives. The regulatory regime governing the
employment relationship must trade off the gains from “flexibility” against the benefits of
stability and predictability. The corporate governance regime must delineate the interests
and prerogatives of shareholders and stakeholders. The financial system must be free to
take risks, but not so much so that it becomes an implicit public liability. There must be
enough competition to ensure static allocative efficiency, but also adequate prospect of
rents to spur innovation.
The last two centuries of economic history in today’s rich countries can be
interpreted as an ongoing process of learning how render capitalism more productive by
supplying the institutional ingredients of a self-sustaining market economy: meritocratic
public bureaucracies, independent judiciaries, central banking, stabilizing fiscal policy,
antitrust and regulation, financial supervision, social insurance, political democracy. Just
as it is silly to think of these as the prerequisites of economic growth in poor countries, it
is equally silly not to recognize that such institutions eventually become necessary to
achieve full economic convergence. In this connection, one may want to place special
emphasis on democratic institutions and civil liberties, not only because they are
important in and of themselves, but also because they can be viewed as meta-institutions
that help society make appropriate selections from the available menu of economic
institutions.
However, the earlier warning not to confuse institutional function and institutional
form becomes once again relevant here. Appropriate regulation, social insurance,
macroeoconomic stability and the like can be provided through diverse institutional
arrangements. While one can be sure that some types of arrangements are far worse than
others, it is also the case that many well-performing arrangements are functional
equivalents. Function does not map uniquely into form. It would be hard to explain
otherwise how social systems that are so different in their institutional details as those of
the United States, Japan, and Europe have managed to generate roughly similar levels of

27
wealth for their citizens. All these societies protect property rights, regulate product,
labor, and financial markets, have sound money, and provide for social insurance. But
the rules of the game that prevail in the American style of capitalism are very different
from those in the Japanese style of capitalism. Both differ from the European style. And
even within Europe, there are large differences between the institutional arrangements in,
say, Sweden and Germany. There has been only modest convergence among these
arrangements in recent years, with the greatest amount of convergence taking place
probably in financial market practices and the least in labor market institutions (Freeman
2000).
There are a number of reasons for institutional non-convergence. First,
differences in social preferences, say over the tradeoff between equity and opportunity,
may result in different institutional choices. If Europeans have a much greater preference
for stability and equity than Americans, their labor market and welfare-state
arrangements will reflect that preference. Second, complementarities among different
parts of the institutional landscape can generate hysteresis and path dependence. An
example of this would be the complementarity between corporate governance and
financial market practices of the Japanese “model,” as discussed previously. Third, the
institutional arrangements that are required to promote economic development can differ
significantly, both between rich and poor countries and among poor countries. This too
has been discussed previously.
There is increasing recognition in the economics literature that high-quality
institutions can take a multitude of forms and that economic convergence need not
necessarily entail convergence in institutional forms (North 1994, Freeman 2000, Pistor
2000, Mukand and Rodrik 2002, Berkowitz et al. 2003, Djankov et al. 2003, Dixit
2004).30 North (1994, 8) writes: “economies that adopt the formal rules of another
economy will have very different performance characteristics than the first economy
because of different informal norms and enforcement [with the implication that]
transferring the formal political and economic rules of successful Western economies to
third-world and Eastern European economies is not a sufficient condition for good
economic performance.” Freeman (2000) discusses the variety of labor market
institutions that prevail among the advanced countries and argues that differences in these
practices have first-order distributional effects, but only second-order efficiency effects.
Pistor (2000) provides a general treatment of the issue of legal transplantation, and shows
how importation of laws can backfire. In related work, Berkowitz et al. (2003) find that
countries that developed their formal legal orders internally, adapted imported codes to
local conditions, or had familiarity with foreign codes ended up with much better legal
institutions than those that simply transplanted formal legal orders from abroad. Djankov
et al. (2003) base their discussion on an “institutional possibility frontier” that describes
the tradeoff between private disorder and dictatorship, and argue that different
circumstances may call for different choices along this frontier. And Dixit (2004, 4)
30

Furthermore, as Roberto Unger (1998) has argued, there is no reason to suppose that today’s advanced
economies have already exhausted all the useful institutional variations that could underpin healthy and
vibrant economies.

28
summarizes the lessons for developing countries thus: “it is not always necessary to
create replicas of western style state legal institutions from scratch; it may be possible to
work with such alternative institutions as are available, and build on them.”
Mukand and Rodrik (2002) develop a formal model to examine the costs and
benefits of institutional “experimentation” versus “copycatting” when formulas that have
proved successful elsewhere may be unsuitable at home. A key idea is that institutional
arrangements that prove successful in one country create both positive and negative
spillovers for other countries. On the positive side, countries whose underlying
conditions are sufficiently similar to those of the successful “leaders” can imitate the
arrangements prevailing there and forego the costs of experimentation. This is one
interpretation of the relative success that transition economies in the immediate vicinity
of the European Union have experienced. Countries such as Poland, the Czech Republic
or the Baltic republics share a similar historical trajectory with the rest of Europe, have
previous experience with capitalist market institutions, and envisaged full EU
membership within a reasonable period (de Menil 2003). The wholesale adoption of
EU’s acquis communautaire may have been the appropriate institution-building strategy
for these countries. On the other hand, countries may be tempted or forced to imitate
institutional arrangements for political or other reasons, even when their underlying
conditions are too dissimilar for the strategy to make sense.31 Institutional copycatting
may have been useful for Poland, but it is much less clear that it was relevant or practical
for Ukraine or Kyrgyzstan. The negative gradient in the economic performance of
transition economies as one moves away from Western Europe provides some support for
this idea (see Mukand and Rodrik 2002).
Even though it is recent, this literature opens up a new and exciting way of
looking at institutional reform. In particular, it promises an approach that is less focused
on so-called best practices or the superiority of any particular model of capitalism, and
more cognizant of the context-specificity of desirable institutional arrangements. Dixit’s
(2004) monograph outlines a range of theoretical models that help structure our thinking
along these lines.
VI. Concluding remarks
Richard Feynman, the irreverent physicist who won the Nobel Prize in 1965 for
his work on quantum electrodynamics, relates the following story. Following the award
ceremony and the dinner in Stockholm, he wanders into a room where a Scandinavian
princess is holding court. The princess recognizes him as one of the awardees and asks
him what he got the prize for. When Feynman replies that his field is physics, the

31

In Mukand and Rodrik (2002) it is domestic politics that generates inefficient imitation. Political leaders
may want to signal their type (and increase the probability of remaining in power) by imitating standard
policies even when they know these will not work as well as alternative arrangements. But one can also
appeal to the role of IMF and World Bank conditionality in producing this kind of outcome.

29
princess says that this is too bad. Since no one at the table knows anything about physics,
she says, they cannot talk about it. Feynman disagrees:
“On the contrary,” I answered. “It’s because somebody knows something about
it that we can’t talk about physics. It’s the things that nobody knows anything
about that we can discuss. We can talk about the weather; we can talk about
social problems; we can talk about psychology; we can talk about international
finance … so it’s the subject that nobody knows anything about that we can all
talk about!” (Feynman 1985)
This is not the place to defend international finance (circa 1965) against the charge
Feynman levels at it. But suppose Feynman had picked on economic growth instead of
international finance. Would growth economists have a plausible riposte? Is the reason
we all talk so much about growth that we understand so little about it?
It is certainly the case that growth theory is now a much more powerful tool than
it was before Solow put pencil to paper. And cross-country regressions have surely
thrown out some useful correlations and stylized facts. But at least at the more practical
end of things—how do we make growth happen? —things have turned out to be
somewhat disappointing. By the mid-1980s, policy oriented economists had converged
on a new consensus regarding the policy framework for growth. We thought we knew a
lot about what governments needed to do. But as my Martian thought experiment at the
beginning of the paper underscores, reality has been unkind to our expectations. If Latin
America was booming today and China and India were stagnating, we would have an
easier time fitting the world to our policy framework. Instead, we are straining to explain
why unorthodox, two-track, gradualist reform paths have done so much better than surefire adoption of the standard package.
Very few policy analysts think that the answer is to go back to old-style ISI, even
though its record was certainly respectable for a very large number of countries.
Certainly no-one one believes that central planning is a credible alternative. But by the
same token, few are now convinced that liberalization, deregulation, and privatization on
their own hold the key to unleashing economic growth. Maybe the right approach is to
give up looking for “big ideas” altogether (as argued explicitly by Lindauer and Pritchett
2002, and implicitly by Easterly 2001). But that would be overshooting too. Economics
is full of big ideas on the importance of incentives, markets, budget constraints, and
property rights. It offers powerful ways of analyzing the allocative and distributional
consequences of proposed policy changes. The key is to realize that these principles do
not translate directly into specific policy recommendations. That translation requires the
analyst to supply many additional ingredients that are contingent on the economic and
political context, and cannot be done a priori. Local conditions matter not because
economic principles change from place to place, but because those principles come
institution free and filling them out requires local knowledge.
Therefore, the real lesson for the architects of growth strategies is to take
economics more seriously, not less seriously. But the relevant economics is that of the

30
seminar room, with its refusal to make unconditional generalizations and its careful
examination of the contingent relation between the economic environment and policy
implications. Rule-of-thumb economics, which has come to dominate thinking on
growth policies, can be safely discarded.

31
REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, "The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic Review,
91, 5, December 2001, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Distance to Frontier,
Selection, and Economic Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 9066, July 2002.
Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “The Unequal
Effects of Liberalization: Theory and Evidence from India,” Department of Economics,
London School of Economics, March 2003.
Amsden, Alice H., Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization, Oxford
University Press, New York and Oxford, 1989.
Anderson, James E., and J. Peter Neary, "Trade Reform with Quotas, Partial Rent
Retention, and Tariffs," Econometrica, Vol. 60, No. 1. (January 1992), pp. 57-76.
Aoki, Masahiko, “Unintended Fit: Organizational Evolution and Government Design of
Institutions in Japan,” in M. Aoki et al, eds., The Role of Government in East Asian
Economic Development: Comparative Institutional Analysis, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1997.
Aslund, Anders, Peter Boone, and Simon Johnson, “How to Stabilize: Lessons from PostCommunist Countries,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1996.
Aslund, Anders, and Simon Johnson, “Small Enterprises and Economic Policy,” Working
Paper, Sloan School, MIT, April 2003.
Azariadis C., and A. Drazen (1990) “Threshold Externalities in Economic Development”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 501–526.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard, ”Economic
Development, Legality, and the Transplant Effect,” European Economic Review, 47(1),
February 2003, 165-195.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic
Performance? Evidence from India,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3260, 2002.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, “Halving Global Poverty,” Department of
Economics, London School of Economics, August 2002. (2002b)
Birdsall, Nancy, and Augusto de la Torre, “Washington Contentious: Economic Policies
for Social Equity in Latin America.” Washington: Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace and Inter-American Dialogue, 2001.

32

Bosworth, Barry, and Susan M. Collins, “The Empirics of Growth: An Update,”
Brookings Institutions, unpublished paper, March 7, 2003.
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf, “Growth Empirics and Reality,” The World
Bank Economic Review, 15, No. 2, 2001, pp. 229-272.
Calvo, Guillermo, “Incredible Reforms,” in Calvo et al. eds., Debt, Stabilization and
Development, New York: Basil Blackwell, 1989.
Collins, Susan, and Barry Bosworth, “Economic Growth in East Asia: Accumulation
versus Assimilation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1996:2, 135-191.
DeLong, Brad, “India since Independence: An Analytic Growth Narrative,” in Dani
Rodrik, ed., In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives of Economic Growth, Princeton,
NJ, Princeton University Press, 2003.
De Menil, Georges, “History, Policy, and Performance in Two Transition Economies:
Poland and Romania,” in Dani Rodrik, ed., In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives
of Economic Growth, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 2003.
Dewatripont, Mathias, and Gerard Roland, “The Design of Reform Packages under
Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 85(5), 1995, 1207-23.
Dixit, Avinash, Lawlessness and Economics: Alternative Modes of Economic
Governance, Gorman Lectures (forthcoming, Princeton University Press, 2004).
Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Andrei Shleifer, “The New Comparative Economics,” Harvard University, January 2003.
Easterly, William, The Elusive Quest for Growth, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 2001.
Easterly, William, “National Policies and Economic Growth: A Reappraisal,” New York
University, Development Research Institute (DRI) Working Paper No. 1, March 2003.
Easterly, William, Michael Kremer, Lant Pritchett and Lawrence H. Summers, "Good
Policy or Good Luck? Country Growth Performance and Temporary Shocks," Journal of
Monetary Economics 32(3), 1993, 459-483.
Easterly, W., and R. Levine, “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence
Economic Development,” mimeo, Center for Global Development and Institute for
International Economics, 2002.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic

33
Historians of the United States,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. H0066, December 1994.
Feynman, Richard P., “Surely You’re Joking Mr. Feynman!”, New York, W.W. Norton,
1985.
Frankel, Jeffrey, “The Asian Model, the Miracle, the Crisis, and the Fund,” in P.
Krugman, ed., Currency Crises, The University of Chicago Press for the NBER, 2000.
Freeman, Richard B., “Single Peaked vs. Diversified Capitalism: The Relation Between
Economic Institutions and Outcomes,” NBER Working Paper No. W7556, February
2000.
Friedman, Eric, Simon Johnson, Daniel Kaufmann, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton, “Dodging
the Grabbing Hand: The Determinants of Unofficial Activity in 69 Countries,” Journal of
Public Economics, 76, 2000, pp. 459-493.
Gerschenkron, Alexander, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of
Essays, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1962.
Gilbert, Christopher L., and Panos Varangis, “Globalization and International
Commodity Trade with Specific Reference to West African Cocoa Producers,” NBER
Working Paper No. w9668, May 2003.
Goldstone, Jack A., The Happy Chance: The Rise of the West in Global Context, 15001850, book manuscript in preparation, U.C. Davis, forthcoming.
Haggard, Stephan, “Institutions and Growth in East Asia,” UCSD, unpublished
manuscript, 2003.
Haggard, Stephan, and Robert Kaufman, eds., The Politics of Economic Adjustment,
Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 1983.
Hall, Robert, and Chad I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 1, February
1999, 83-116.
Harberger, Arnold C., Economic Policy and Economic Growth, International Center for
Economic Growth, Institute for Contemporary Studies, San Francisco, CA, 1985.
Harberger, Arnold C., “Interview with Arnold Harberger: Sound Policies Can Free Up
Natural Forces of Growth,” IMF Survey, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC,
July 14, 2003, 213-216.

34
Harrison, Glenn W., Thomas F. Rutherford, and David G . Tarr, “Trade Reform in the
Partially Liberalized Economy of Turkey,” The World Bank Economic Review, May
1993, 7 (2), 191-218.
Hatta, Tatsuo, “A Recommendation for a Better Tariff Structure,” Econometrica,
November 1977, 45, pp. 1859-69.
Hausmann, Ricardo and Dani Rodrik, “Economic Development as Self-Discovery,”
NBER Discussion Paper No. w8952, May 2002.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Lant Pritchett, and Dani Rodrik, “Growth Transitions,” Kennedy
School of Government, Cambridge, MA, work in progress.
Helleiner, Gerald K., ed., Trade Policy and Industrialization in Turbulent Times,
UNU/WIDER, New York, Routledge, 1994.
Hellmann, Thomas, Kevin Murdock, and Joseph Stiglitz, “Financial Restraint: Toward a
New Paradigm,” in M. Aoki et al, eds., The Role of Government in East Asian Economic
Development: Comparative Institutional Analysis, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997.
Hirschman, Albert O., The Strategy of Economic Development, New Haven, Yale
University Press, 1958.
Hoff, Karla and Joseph Stiglitz, “Modern Economic Theory and Development,” in G.M.
Meier and J.E. Stiglitz, eds., Frontiers of Development Economics, New York, Oxford
University Press, 2001, 389-459.
Imbs, Jean, and Romain Wacziarg, “Stages of Diversification,” American Economic
Review, 93(1), March 2003, 63-86.
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Chris Woodruff, “Entrepreneurs and the Ordering
of Institutional Reform: Poland, Slovakia, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine Compared,”
Economics of Transition, 2000.
Kaufmann, Daniel, “Rethinking Governance,” World Bank Institute, World Bank,
Washington, D.C., December 2002.
Krueger, Anne O. , “Trade Policy and Development: How We Learn,” The American
Economic Review, March 1997.
Krugman, Paul, "Dutch Tulips and Emerging Markets", Foreign Affairs, July/August
1995.
Kuczynski, Pedro-Pablo, and John Williamson, eds., After the Washington
Consensus: Restarting Growth and Reform in Latin America, Institute for International
Economics, Washington, DC, 2003.

35

Lau, Lawrence, J., Yingyi Qian, and Gerard Roland, “Reform Without Losers: An
Interpretation of China's Dual-Track Approach to Transition,” The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 108, No. 1. (Feb., 2000), pp. 120-143.
Li, Shuhe, “The Benefits and Costs of Relation-Based Governance: An Explanation of
the East Asian Miracle and Crisis,” City University of Hong Kong, October 1999.
Lin, Justin Yifu, Fang Cai, and Zhou Li, The China Miracle: Development Strategy and
Economic Reform, The Chinese University Press, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong, 1996.
Lin, Justin Yifu, and Mingxing Liu, “Development Strategy, Viability and Challenges of
Development in Lagging Regions,” paper prepared for the 15th World Bank’s Annual
Bank Conference on Development Economics, Bangalore, India, May 2003.
Lindauer, David L., and Lant Pritchett, “What’s the Big Idea? The Third Generation of
Policies for Economic Growth,” Economia, Fall 2002, 1-40.
Lipton, David, and Jeffrey Sachs, “Creating a Market Economy in Eastern Europe: The
Case of Poland,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1990.
Loayza, Norman, Pablo Fajnzylber, and Cesar Calderon, “Economic Growth in Latin
America and the Caribbean” Stylized Facts, Explanations, and Forecasts,” World Bank,
Washington, D.C., June 2002.
Lopez, Ramon, "Environmental Externalities in Traditional Agriculture and the Impact of
Trade Liberalization: The Case of Ghana," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 53
(1), June 1997, p 17-39.
Lopez, Ramon, and Arvind Panagariya, “On the Theory of Piecemeal Tariff Reform: The
Case of Pure Imported Intermediate Inputs,” American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No.
3. (Jun., 1992), pp. 615-625.
Lora, Eduardo, “Structural Reforms in Latin America: What Has Been Reformed and
How to Measure It,” Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, D.C., December
2001a.
Lora, Eduardo, “El crecimiento económico en América Latina después de una década de
reformas estructurales”. Washington, DC, United States: Inter-American Development
Bank, Research Department. Mimeographed document. 2001b.
MacLean, Brian K., “The Rise and Fall of the ‘Crony Capitalism’ Hypothesis: Causes
and Consequences,” Department of Economics, Laurentian University, Ontario, March
1999.

36
Maddison, Angus, The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, OECD Development
Centre, Paris, OECD, 2001.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, "Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and
Economic Growth," Journal of Economic Theory, December 1992, 317-334.
Milanovic, Branko, “The Two Faces of Globalization: Against Globalization as we Know
It,” World Development, 31(4), 2003, 667-683.
Mukand, Sharun, and Dani Rodrik, “In Search of the Holy Grail: Policy Convergence,
Experimentation, and Economic Performance,” January 2002.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, "Industrialization and the
Big Push," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97 (5), 1989, pp. 1003-26.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “The Transition to a
Market Economy: Pitfalls of Partial Reform,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 107, No. 3. (Aug., 1992), pp. 889-906.
Naim, Moises, “Fads and Fashion in Economic Reforms: Washington Consensus or
Washington Confusion?” paper prepared for the IMF Conference on Second Generation
Reforms, Washington, D.C., October 1999.
North, Douglass C., Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, New
York, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
North, Douglass C., “Economic Performance Through Time,” The American
Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 3. (Jun., 1994), pp. 359-368.
North, Douglass C., and R. Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic
History, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1973.
Ocampo, José Antonio, “Rethinking the Development Agenda,” United Nations
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Santiago, Chile,
2002.
Ocampo, José Antionio, “Structural Dynamics and Economic Growth in Developing
Countries,” United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC), Santiago, Chile, 2003.
Pistor, Katharina, “The Standardization of Law and its Effect on Developing
Economies,” G-24 Discussion Paper No. 4, July 2000.
Polterovich, Victor, and Vladimir Popov, “Accumulation of Foreign Exchange Reserves
and Long Term Growth,” New Economic School, Moscow, Russia, unpublished paper,
December 2002.

37

Qian, Yingyi, “How Reform Worked in China,” in D. Rodrik, ed., In Search of
Prosperity: Analytic Narratives of Economic Growth, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University
Press, 2003.
Rodríguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik, "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
Skeptic's Guide to the Cross-National Evidence," Macroeconomics Annual 2000, eds.
Ben Bernanke and Kenneth S. Rogoff, MIT Press for NBER, Cambridge, MA, 2001.
Rodriguez-Clare, Andres, "The Division of Labor and Economic Development," Journal
of Development Economics, 49 (April), 3-32.
Rodrik, Dani, "Policy Uncertainty and Private Investment in Developing Countries,"
Journal of Development Economics 36, November 1991.
Rodrik, Dani, "Taking Trade Policy Seriously: Export Subsidization as a Case Study in
Policy Effectiveness," in A. Deardorff, J. Levinson, and R. Stern (eds.), New Directions
in Trade Theory, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1995.
Rodrik, Dani, "Coordination Failures and Government Policy: A Model with
Applications to East Asia and Eastern Europe," Journal of International Economics 40(12), February 1996, 1-22.
Rodrik, Dani “Understanding Economic Policy Reform,” Journal of Economic Literature,
XXXIV, March 1996, 9-41.
Rodrik, Dani, "Trade Strategy, Exports, and Investment: Another Look at East Asia,"
Pacific Economic Review, February 1997.
Rodrik, Dani, The New Global Economy and Developing Countries: Making Openness
Work, Washington, D.C., Overseas Development Council, 1999.
Rodrik, Dani, "Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict and
Growth Collapses," Journal of Economic Growth, December 1999. (1999b)
Rodrik, Dani, "Institutions for High-Quality Growth: What They Are and How to
Acquire Them," Studies in Comparative International Development, vol. 35, no.3, Fall
2000.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi, “Institutions Rule: The
Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development”
Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, October 2002.
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul, “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and Southeastern
Europe.” Economic Journal 53(210-211) June-September, 1943, 202-211.

38
Rostow, Walt W., The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York, 1965.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies
and Their Cures, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1998.
Soon, Cho, The Dynamics of Korean Development, Washington, DC, Institute for
International Economics, 1994.
Stern, Nicholas, “A Strategy for Development,” ABCDE Keynote Address, Washington,
DC, World Bank, May 2001.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., “More Instruments and Broader Goals Moving toward the PostWashington Consensus.” United Nations University/WIDER, Helsinki, 1998.
Subramanian, Arvind, and Devesh Roy, “Who Can Explain the Mauritian Miracle?
Meade, Romer, Sachs, or Rodrik?” in Dani Rodrik, ed., In Search of Prosperity: Analytic
Narratives of Economic Growth, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 2003.
Summers, Lawrence H., “Godkin Lectures,” John F. Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard University, April 2003.
Temple, Jonathan, “The New Growth Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37(1),
March 1999, 112-156.
Temple, Jonathan, “Growing into Trouble: Indonesia since 1966,” in Dani Rodrik, ed., In
Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives of Economic Growth, Princeton, NJ, Princeton
University Press, 2003.
Trindade, Vitor, “The Big Push, Industrialization, and International Trade: The Role of
Exports,” Maxwell School, Syracuse University, March 2003.
Unger, Roberto Mangabeira, Democracy Realized: The Progressive Alternative, Verso,
London and New York, 1998.
Vamvakidis, Athanasios, “How Robust is the Growth-Openness Connection? Historical
Evidence,” Journal of Economic Growth, 7(1), March 2002, 57-80.
Van Arkadie, Brian, and Raymond Mallon, Vietnam: A Transition Tiger?, Asia Pacific
Press at The Australian National University, Australia, 2003.
Wei, Shang-Jin, “Gradualism versus Big Bang: Speed and Sustainability of Reforms,”
Canadian Journal of Economics, 30(4B), 1997, 1234-47.
Wellisz, Stanislaw, and Philippe Lam Shin Saw, "Mauritius," in Ronald Findlay and
Stanislaw Wellisz, eds., The Political Economy of Poverty, Equity, and Growth: Five

39
Open Economies, Oxford University Press, New York, 1993.
Williamson, John, "What Washington Means by Policy Reform", in J. Williamson, ed.,
Latin American Adjustment: How Much Has Happened? Washington: Institute for
International Economics, 1990.
Williamson, John, and Roberto Zagha, “From Slow Growth to Slow Reform,” World
Bank, unpublished paper, July 2002.
World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policies,
Washington, D.C., World Bank, 1993.
World Bank, Beyond the Washington Consensus: Institutions Matter, Washington, D.C.,
World Bank, 1998.
Yanikkaya, Halit, “Trade Openness and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of Development Economics, 72, October 2003, 57-89.
Young, Alwyn, “A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in
Hong Kong and Singapore,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge, MA, MIT
Press for NBER, 1992.
Young, Alwyn, “The Razor’s Edge: Distortions and Incremental Reform in the People’s
Republic of China,” NBER Working Paper No. 7828, August 2000.

GDP per capita by country groupings (1995 US$)
100000

High income
Latin America & Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
East and Southeast Asia (excl. China)

1960-2000: 2.7%

China
10000

1980-1990: -0.8%

1990-2000: 1.6%

1960-1980: 2.9%

1000
1960-2000: 4.4%

1980-2000: -0.8%
1960-1975: 2.3%
1980-1990: 3.3%

1960-1980: 1.2%
1980-2000: 8.0%

Figure 1

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

1970

1968

1966

1964

1962

1960-1980: 2.0%
1960

100

Table 1. Sources of growth by regions, 1960-2000 (percent increase)
Output

Output per
worker

Physical capital

Contribution of:
Education

Productivity

World (84)
1960-70
1970-80
1980-90
1990-2000

5.1
3.9
3.5
3.3

3.5
1.9
1.8
1.9

1.2
1.1
0.8
0.9

0.3
0.5
0.3
0.3

1.9
0.3
0.8
0.8

Industrial
Countries (22)
1960-70
1970-80
1980-90
1990-2000

5.2
3.3
2.9
2.5

3.9
1.7
1.8
1.5

1.3
0.9
0.7
0.8

0.3
0.5
0.2
0.2

2.2
0.3
0.9
0.5

China (1)
1960-70
1970-80
1980-90
1990-2000

2.8
5.3
9.2
10.1

0.9
2.8
6.8
8.8

0.0
1.6
2.1
3.2

0.3
0.4
0.4
0.3

0.5
0.7
4.2
5.1

East Asia less
China (7)
1960-70
1970-80
1980-90
1990-2000

6.4
7.6
7.2
5.7

3.7
4.3
4.4
3.4

1.7
2.7
2.4
2.3

0.4
0.6
0.6
0.5

1.5
0.9
1.3
0.5

Latin America
(22)
1960-70
1970-80
1980-90
1990-2000

5.5
6.0
1.1
3.3

2.8
2.7
-1.8
0.9

0.8
1.2
0.0
0.2

0.3
0.3
0.5
0.3

1.6
1.1
-2.3
0.4

South Asia (4)
1960-70
1970-80
1980-90
1990-2000

4.2
3.0
5.8
5.3

2.2
0.7
3.7
2.8

1.2
0.6
1.0
1.2

0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4

0.7
-0.2
2.2
1.2

Africa (19)
1960-70
1970-80
1980-90
1990-2000

5.2
3.6
1.7
2.3

2.8
1.0
-1.1
-0.2

0.7
1.3
-0.1
-0.1

0.2
0.1
0.4
0.4

1.9
-0.3
-1.4
-0.5

Middle East (9)
1960-70
1970-80
1980-90
1990-2000

6.4
4.4
4.0
3.6

4.5
1.9
1.1
0.8

1.5
2.1
0.6
0.3

0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5

2.6
-0.6
0.1
0.0

Region/Period

Source: Bosworth and Collins (2003).

Table 2: Rules of good behavior for promoting economic growth

Original Washington Consensus:

“Augmented” Washington Consensus:
… the previous 10 items, plus:

1. Fiscal discipline

11. Corporate governance

2. Reorientation of public expenditures

12. Anti-corruption

3. Tax reform

13. Flexible labor markets

4. Interest rate liberalization

14. Adherence to WTO disciplines

5. Unified and competitive exchange
rates

15. Adherence to international financial codes and standards
16. “Prudent” capital-account opening

6. Trade liberalization
17. Non-intermediate exchange rate regimes
7. Openness to DFI
8. Privatization

18. Independent central banks/inflation
targeting

9. Deregulation

19. Social safety nets

10.Secure Property Rights

20. Targeted poverty reduction

Structural reform index for Latin American Countries
0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2
1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Argentina

Bolivia

Brazil

Chile

Colombia

Costa Rica

Dominican Rep.

Ecuador

El Salvador

Guatemala

Honduras

Jamaica

Mexico

Nicaragua

Peru

Uruguay

Venezuela

Regional average*

Figure 2
Source: Lora (2001a).

Table 3: East Asian anomalies
Institutional domain

Standard ideal

“East Asian” pattern

Property rights

Private, enforced by the rule of law

Private, but govt authority occasionally
overrides the law (esp. in Korea).

Corporate governance

Shareholder (“outsider”) control,
protection of shareholder rights

Insider control

Business-government relations

Arms’ length, rule based

Close interactions

Industrial organization

Decentralized, competitive markets, with
tough anti-trust enforcement

Horizontal and vertical integration in
production (chaebol); governmentmandated “cartels”

Financial system

Deregulated, securities based, with free
entry. Prudential supervision through
regulatory oversight.

Bank based, restricted entry, heavily
controlled by government, directed
lending, weak formal regulation.

Labor markets

Decentralized, de-institutionalized,
“flexible” labor markets

Lifetime employment in core enterprises
(Japan)

International capital flows

“prudently” free

Restricted (until the 1990s)

Public ownership

None in productive sectors

Plenty in upstream industries.

Table 4: The logic of the Washington Consensus and a Chinese counterfactual
Problem

Solution

Low agricultural productivity

Price liberalization

Production incentives

Land privatization

Loss of fiscal revenues

Tax reform

Urban wages

Corporatization

Monopoly

Trade liberalization

Enterprise restructuring

Financial sector reform

Unemployment

Social safety nets

… and so on

Table 5: How to understand/rationalize institutional anomalies: four illustrations
Objective

What is problem?

Institutional response

Prerequisites

Financial deepening
(saving mobilization and
efficient intermediation)

Asymmetric information
(investors know more
about their projects than
lenders do)
and limited liability

“Financial restraint”
(Hellmann et al. 1997):
controlled deposit rates
and restricted entry

Ability to maintain
restraint at moderate
levels;
Positive real interest
rates;
Macroeconomic
stability;
Avoid state capture by
financial interests.

—creation of rents to
induce better portfolio
risk management, better
monitoring of firms, and
increased deposit
mobilization by banks.

Institutional
complements
Finance: Highly
regulated financial
markets (absence of
security markets and
closed capital accounts
to prevent cherry
picking and rent
dissipation);
Politics: State
“autonomy” to prevent
capture and decay into
“crony capitalism.”

Table 5: How to understand/rationalize institutional anomalies: four illustrations (cont.)
Objective

What is problem?

Institutional response

Prerequisites

Spurring investment and
entrepreneurship in
non-traditional activities

Economies of scale
together with interindustry linkages
depress private return to
entrepreneurship/invest
ment below social
return.

“Industrial policy as a
coordination device”
(Rodrik 1995)

A high level of human
capital relative to
physical capital.
A relatively competent
bureaucracy to select
investment projects.

--credit subsidies
(Korea) and tax
incentives (Taiwan) for
selected sectors;
--protection of home
market coupled with
export subsidies;
--public enterprise
creation for upstream
products;
--arm-twisting and
cajoling by political
leadership;
--socialization of
investment risk through
implicit investment
guarantees.

Institutional
complements
Trade: Need to combine
import protection (in
selected sectors) with
exposure to competition
in export markets to
distinguish highproductivity firms from
low-productivity ones;
Business-government
relations: “Embedded
autonomy” (Evans) to
enable close interactions
and information
exchange while
preventing state capture
and decay into “crony
capitalism.”

Table 5: How to understand/rationalize institutional anomalies: four illustrations (cont.)
Objective

What is problem?

Institutional response

Prerequisites

Productive organization
of the workplace

Tradeoff between
information sharing
(working together) and
economies of
specialization
(specialized tasks)

“horizontal hierarchy”
(Aoki 1997)

(unintended) fit with
prewar arrangements of
military resource
mobilization in Japan

Institutional
complements
Corporate governance:
insider control to
provide incentive for
accumulating long-term
managerial skills;
Labor markets: lifetime
employment and
enterprise unionism to
generate long-term
collaborative teamwork;
Financial markets: main
bank system to
discipline firms and
reduce the moral hazard
consequences of insider
control;
Politics: “bureaupluralism” (regulation,
protection) to
redistribute benefits to
less productive,
traditional sectors.

Table 5: How to understand/rationalize institutional anomalies: four illustrations (cont.)
Objective

What is problem?

Institutional response

Prerequisites

Reduce anti-export bias

Import-competing
interests are politically
powerful and opposed to
trade liberalization

export processing zone
(Rodrik 1999)

saving boom; elastic
supply of foreign
investment; preferential
market access in EU

Institutional
complements
Dual labor markets:
segmentation between
male and female labor
force, so that increase
female employment in
the EPZ does not drive
wages up in the rest of
the economy.

Table 6: Sound economics and institutional counterparts: microeconomics
OBJECTIVE

UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLES

PLAUSIBLE DIVERSITY IN
INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS

Productive efficiency
(static and dynamic)

Property rights: Ensure potential and
current investors can retain the returns
to their investments

What type of property rights? Private,
public, cooperative?

Incentives: Align producer incentives
with social costs and benefits.
Rule of law: Provide a transparent,
stable and predictable set of rules.

What type of legal regime? Common
law? Civil law? Adopt or innovate?
What is the right balance between
decentralized market competition and
public intervention?
Which types of financial
institutions/corporate governance are
most appropriate for mobilizing
domestic savings?
Is there a public role to stimulate
technology absorption and generation?
(e.g. IPR “protection”)

Table 7: Sound economics and institutional counterparts: macroeconomics
OBJECTIVE

UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLES

PLAUSIBLE DIVERSITY IN
INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS

Macroeconomic and Financial Stability

Sound money: Do not generate liquidity
beyond the increase in nominal money
demand at reasonable inflation.

How independent should the central
bank be?

Fiscal sustainability: Ensure public debt
remains “reasonable” and stable in
relation to national aggregates.

What is the appropriate exchange-rate
regime? (dollarization, currency board,
adjustable peg, controlled float, pure
float)

Prudential regulation: Prevent financial
system from taking excessive risk.

Should fiscal policy be rule-bound, and
if so what are the appropriate rules?
Size of the public economy.
What is the appropriate regulatory
apparatus for the financial system?
What is the appropriate regulatory
treatment of capital account
transactions?

Table 8: Sound economics and institutional counterparts: social policy
OBJECTIVE

UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLES

PLAUSIBLE DIVERSITY IN
INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS

Distributive justice and poverty
alleviation

Targeting: Redistributive programs
should be targeted as closely as possible
to the intended beneficiaries.

How progressive should the tax system
be?

Incentive compatibility: Redistributive
programs should minimize incentive
distortions.

Should pension systems be public or
private?
What are the appropriate points of
intervention: educational system?
access to health? access to credit? labor
markets? tax system?
What is the role of “social funds”?
Redistribution of endowments? (land
reform, endowments-at-birth)
Organization of labor markets:
decentralized or institutionalized?
Modes of service delivery: NGOs,
participatory arrangements., etc.

Table 9: Growth transitions

Argentina
Brazil
Barbados
Barbados
Botswana
Chile
China
China
Cameroon
Congo, Rep
Congo, Rep
Cape Verde
Cyprus
Cyprus
Denmark
Dominican Rep
Dominican Rep
Ecuador
Egypt
Spain
Fiji
Ghana
Guinea-Bissau
Guinea-Bissau
Equatorial Guinea
Grenada
Guyana
Haiti
Indonesia
Ireland
Iran
Iceland
Israel
Israel
Jordan
Japan
St. Kitts and Nevis
South Korea
South Korea
St. Lucia
Lesotho
Luxembourg
Morocco

year of
growth growth magnitude of
acceleration before
after
acceleration
1989
-2.73
4.77
7.51
1966
2.00
7.05
5.05
1965
3.43
6.75
3.32
1982
1.36
4.36
3.00
1966
-1.00
9.85
10.85
1985
-2.51
5.40
7.91
1978
1.30
6.53
5.23
1989
3.67
7.36
3.69
1971
-0.13
4.30
4.43
1969
0.36
4.46
4.09
1977
2.44
6.71
4.27
1975
-3.21
8.76
11.97
1961
-1.46
5.89
7.34
1974
2.09
6.55
4.46
1955
1.65
4.89
3.24
1967
-1.28
5.19
6.47
1989
1.52
4.62
3.10
1968
1.54
7.11
5.57
1976
-3.36
4.10
7.47
1959
3.41
6.98
3.57
1965
0.42
4.85
4.44
1963
1.03
5.16
4.14
1969
-1.01
5.93
6.93
1986
-1.70
4.29
5.99
1989
-2.07
5.85
7.93
1982
1.45
5.11
3.66
1988
1.26
4.43
3.18
1987
-1.96
7.72
9.68
1967
-0.72
5.33
6.05
1985
1.58
4.67
3.09
1989
-3.31
4.52
7.83
1970
-0.72
4.48
5.21
1955
0.73
4.92
4.19
1967
0.90
4.57
3.67
1972
-5.10
7.53
12.63
1958
5.76
8.90
3.14
1989
3.03
6.61
3.58
1962
-0.16
6.93
7.09
1982
3.04
7.72
4.68
1985
2.47
6.34
3.88
1969
0.74
4.99
4.25
1983
0.76
5.40
4.64
1957
-2.18
5.89
8.06

Mauritius
Mauritius
Malaysia
Nicaragua
Pakistan
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Portugal
Romania
Singapore
Seychelles
Seychelles
Syria
Chad
Thailand
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Taiwan
Zimbabwe

1969
1982
1986
1959
1960
1977
1958
1959
1984
1980
1968
1968
1985
1969
1971
1955
1985
1971
1966
1961
1962

-2.96
0.36
1.03
0.05
-2.50
1.25
1.60
0.36
0.58
-4.60
1.92
1.29
-2.08
-0.37
0.05
-4.50
3.60
1.28
2.46
3.73
0.43

Source: Hausmann et al. (forthcoming).

5.37
4.97
5.64
4.18
4.32
4.28
5.20
4.08
4.20
7.95
7.92
6.20
4.04
4.06
4.10
5.33
7.60
4.82
6.14
7.27
6.97

8.33
4.62
4.61
4.14
6.82
3.04
3.60
3.72
3.62
12.55
6.01
4.91
6.12
4.43
4.05
9.84
4.00
3.54
3.68
3.54
6.53

Figure 3

Source: Penn World Tables 6.1
1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

1974

1973

1972

1971

1970

1969

35

1968

1967

1966

1965

1964

1963

1962

1961

1960

Investment as a share of GDP in East Asia

40
HKG

KOR

TWN

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Table 10: A taxonomy of “natural” barriers to industrialization
A. Learning externalities
1. Learning-by-doing (e.g., Matsuyama, 1992)
2. Human capital externalities (e.g., Azariadis and Drazen, 1990)
3. Learning about costs (e.g., Hausmann and Rodrik, 2002)
B. Coordination failures (market-size externalities induced by IRS)
1. Wage premium in manufacturing (e.g., Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1989)
2. Infrastructure (e.g., Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1989)
3. Specialized intermediate inputs (e.g., Rodrik 1994, 1995)
4. Spillovers associated with wealth distribution (e.g., Hoff and Stiglitz 2001)

Chile
real exchange rate and per-capita GDP growth
(growth is shown as 3-year moving average)
160.00

RER
growth

140.00

8.00
6.00

120.00

4.00

100.00

2.00

80.00
0.00

60.00

-2.00

40.00

-4.00

0.00

-6.00

19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97

20.00

Uganda
real exchange rate and per-capita GDP growth
(growth is shown as 3-year moving average)
160.00

RER
growth

7.00
6.00

140.00

5.00

120.00

4.00

100.00

3.00
2.00

80.00

1.00

60.00

0.00

40.00

-1.00
-2.00

20.00

-3.00
-4.00

0.00
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997

Figure 4: Real exchange rate and growth in Chile and Uganda

Table 11: A taxonomy of market-sustaining institutions
Market-creating institutions
o Property rights
o Contract enforcement
Market-regulating institutions
o Regulatory bodies
o Other mechanisms for correcting market failures
Market-stabilizing institutions
o Monetary and fiscal institutions
o Institutions of prudential regulation and supervision
Market-legitimizing institutions
o Democracy
o Social protection and social insurance

