                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GLOBALIZING ACTIVITIES AND THE RATE OF SURVIVAL:
                    PANEL DATA ANALYSIS ON JAPANESE FIRMS

                                            Fukunari Kimura
                                            Takamune Fujii

                                          Working Paper 10067
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10067


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




The authors would like to thank the participants in the Pre-conference and the Conference of TRIO 2002,
particularly Takeo Hoshi, Kyoji Fukao, and David Weinstein, for comments and suggestions. We also thank
an anonymous referee for comments that substantially contributed to the revision of the paper. The assistance
provided by Mitsuyo Ando is gratefully acknowledged. The MITI database was prepared and analyzed in
cooperation with the Applied Research Institute, Inc. and the Research and Statistics Department, the
Minister’s Secretariat, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (currently the Ministry of Economy,
Trade, and Industry), and the Government of Japan. The opinions expressed in this paper, though, are those
of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Fukunari Kimura and Takamune Fujii. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Globalizing Activities and the Rate of Survival: Panel Data Analysis on Japanese Firms
Fukunari Kimura and Takamune Fujii
NBER Working Paper No. 10067
October 2003
JEL No. F23, C41, L23, L25

                                           ABSTRACT


This paper conducts a Cox-type survival analysis of Japanese corporate firms using census-coverage

data collected by METI. A study of exiting firms confirmed several characteristics of Japanese firms

in the 1990s. First, excessive internalization in the corporate structure and activities is harmful to

corporate survival. Having too many establishments and affiliates weakens corporate performance.

Efficient concentration on core competences increases the probability of survival. Second, global

commitment helps Japanese firms be more competitive and more likely to survive. However, the

channels of a firm's global commitment must be carefully selected. Small firms can benefit from

exporting activities, though having foreign affiliates or conducting foreign outsourcing might

aggravate their performance. Large firms, on the other hand, can conduct foreign direct investment

and foreign outsourcing to possibly enhance the probability of their survival. Third, while corporate

performance affects the choice of exits for affiliate firms, it does not affect the survival/exit of

independent firms; suggesting the possible malfunctioning of the market mechanisms in the exits

of independent firms. Fourth, we do not find any statistically significant evidence that firms with

foreign shareholders are more likely to exit; there is little evidence of foot-loose behavior among

foreign companies.

Fukunari Kimura
Keio University
2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 1088345 Japan
fkimura@econ.keio.ac.jp

Takamune Fujii
Aichi University
370 Kurozasa, Miyoshi-cho, Nishikamo-gun, Aichi 4700296 Japan
tkfujii@aichi-u.ac.jp
1. Introduction


          For the Japanese economy, the 1990s have been called a lost decade.
Following a series of intensive debates among economists, we now share the view that
issues are not simply cyclical, determined by the business cycle, but are related to the
existence of serious structural problems that have driven the long-term recession.      The
financial sector and macroeconomic management have obviously had severe problems.
Japanese companies, once were praised as the core of the “Japanese economic system,”
also seem to suffer from structural impediments that prevented them from adjusting to
the new economic environment that arrived in the 1990s.
          Recent academic and other literature has reached a consensus that three
generalizations can be made about Japanese corporate firms in the 1990s.        First, in the
late 1980s, Japanese firms excessively expanded their boundaries and internalized.1 To
take advantage of the economies of scope and risk pooling, many firms entered new
fields and diversified their products.   In the course of diversification, they founded a
number of establishments and affiliates in both domestic and foreign locations to
facilitate new enterprises.   Furthermore, firms were active in developing tight intra-
firm-group networks and long-term inter-firm relationships.           The wide scope of
internalized activities within a firm as well as extended intra-firm-group/inter-firm
relationships was regarded as an essential component of long-term efficiency in the
context of the so-called Japanese economic system.
          However, once the Japanese economy slumped, as well as having to face
foreign competition in the 1990s, a drastic reversal began.    The excessive expansion of
corporate activities and inter-firm relationships suddenly became a source of
inefficiency; Japanese firms were forced to reduce the scope of their activities, to
reorganize their establishments and affiliates, and to critically review their old inter-firm
relationships.    The old type of corporate structure and inter-firm relationships seemed

1
  In this paper, the word “internalization” represents a fairly wide concept. It does not
simply mean the ratio of internalized value added out of total sales values. More
fundamentally, it consists of various “activities” internalized within the boundary of a
firm. It is not easy to capture the actual contents of internalized activities, but we can
indirectly observe the degree of internalization through corporate structure such as the



                                             3
to work against corporate performance during this period.
            Second, excessive adaptation to the period of rapid economic growth resulted
in a rigid industrial structure and low turnover ratios of firms. Cross-shareholding, the
subcontracting system, and other types of long-term inter-firm relationships made the
cost of firms’ exits extraordinary high. Cooperative labor relations as well as various
government regulations also became an obstacle to efficient turnovers. A very limited
number of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) were apparent; with very few firms
experiencing hostile takeovers.2 Scarcity of turnovers obviously delayed necessary
adjustments to the industrial structure and helped prolong the poor economic situation.
            Third, even in such a stagnant situation, the global commitment of firms
worked as a crucial element for enhancing efficiency.3 Good firms tended to develop
external activities.   At the same time, in the opposite direction of causality, various
types of global commitment such as exporting activities, foreign direct investment, and
foreign outsourcing seemed to improve corporate performance by accelerating the
efficient reformulation of corporate structure and inter-firm relationships.
            These generalizations have not been fully proved by formal economic
analysis.    In particular, in the absence of census-coverage statistics providing longer-
term stable data, no serious empirical study of the survival and exit of firms has hitherto
been done for the Japanese economy.4 However, with the presentation of METI’s
firm-level survey, taken in a series of fixed times, we can now conduct formal


number of establishments and affiliates in addition to using outsourcing contracts.
2
  Shimizu (2001, p. 88) reports that listed companies on the Tokyo Stock Exchange that
have conducted mergers account for only 71 out of all listed companies during the
period 1949-1998 (1273 in his sample). The Fair Trade Commission (FTC),
Government of Japan (2002, p. 220) has shown that the number of mergers reported to
FTC was only 151, 170, and 127 in 1999 F/Y, 2000 F/Y, and 2001 F/Y, respectively.
3
  The concept of “global commitment” is taken from Lewis and Richardson (2001), who
include various channels of firms’ engagement with external links such as exports,
imports, inward and outward investment, technology transfer, and so on. Lewis and
Richardson present various kinds of empirical evidence and also provide a literature
survey. They claim “globally engaged Americans seem economically healthier – more
productive, more stable, and materially better off – than other Americans (p. 13).”
4
  Honjo (2000) conducted survival analysis for the manufacturing firms located in
Tokyo with using the data bank of Tokyo Shoko Research (TSR). Shimizu (2001)
analyzed the corporate survival in terms of the listing at Tokyo Stock Exchange.
However, their data sets are much smaller than census-coverage statistics.

                                             4
survival/exit analyses.
          Because M&As are rare in Japan, we can primarily interpret the exit of a firm
as an indication of its poor performance. If this is the case, we want to confirm
whether over-internalization of the corporate structure makes a firm prone to exit, and
whether global commitment helps a firm survive.       In addition, if the cost of exiting
matters in the turnover of firms in Japan, we may find differences between the cases of
affiliates of other firms and those of independent firms when we investigate the
relationship between corporate performance and the probability of survival/exit.    This
paper focuses on the characteristics specific to Japanese firms in terms of corporate
structure, inter-firm relationships, and globalizing activities; and examines how these
factors affect the survival of firms. The empirical study is based on a survival analysis
using Cox’s proportional hazard model with panel data for Japanese firms for the period
between 1994 F/Y and 1999 F/Y.
          Cox’s proportional hazard model was originally developed in the field of
biology and medical science to analyze the survival in living animals, and was first
applied in economics for survival analysis of corporate firms and establishments in the
mid 1990s.    The first application of Cox’s model was the survival analysis of U.S.
firms and establishments.      The seminal works were by Audretsch (1995) and
Audretsch and Mahmood (1994, 1995), followed by Agarwal (1998), Klepper and
Simons (2000), Agarwal and Audretsch (2001) and others.           Similar studies were
conducted in Europe.      Mata and Portugal (1994) and Mata, Portugal and Guimaraes
(1995) on Portuguese firms were in the first cohort, and a number of studies were
subsequently conducted using the data of countries such as Germany (Harhoff, Stahl
and Woywode, 1998), Italy (Audretsch, Santerelli and Vivarelli, 1999), and Norway
(Tveteras and Eide, 2000).        These studies primarily found that the size and
technological level of a firm seemed to positively affect its survival.    However, the
relationship of corporate structure (including establishments and affiliates) with
survival/exit has not yet fully been explored. Further, few studies have analyzed the
connection between the global commitment of firms and their survival.5 In this regard,


5
  Li (1995) and McCloughan and Stone (1998) analyze the exit of foreign affiliates from
the viewpoint of host country. However, their studies do not directly examine the

                                           5
our study has a unique focus.
            The plan of the paper is as follows: the next section explains the statistical
data used, section 3 presents our analytical methodology, section 4 summarizes our
hypotheses, and section 5 reports our analytical results. The last section offers a
conclusion.




2. Data


            Our data set is constructed from the firm-level micro data of Kigyo Katsudo
Kihon Chosa (Basic Survey of Business Structure and Activity).        This survey was first
conducted in 1992 F/Y, then in 1995 F/Y, and annually thereafter.       The prime purpose
of the survey is to capture the overall structure of Japanese corporate firms in terms of
their diversification, internationalization, inter-firm linkages, and strategies on R&D and
information technology.      Financial information, however, is minimal.        The survey
covers all firms that have more than 50 workers, have a capital of more than 30 million
yen, and an establishment that is engaged in mining, manufacturing, the wholesale/retail
trade, or the restaurant business.    Domestic and foreign affiliates are defined as the
ones held by Japanese domestic firms for more-than-50% shares.            We constructed a
longitudinal data set by connecting annual firm-level data from 1994 F/Y to 1999 F/Y.
            The Basic Survey has several attractive features.   First, it provides firm-level
data.     Most of the world’s firm-related statistics are given on an establishment basis,
rather than on a firm basis, and thus most of the related empirical studies in the United
States, Canada, and other countries have used establishment-level longitudinal data.      In
the case of Japan, too, establishment-level microdata are available in the form of the
Kogyo Tokei Hyo (Census of Manufactures).         Establishment-level data are useful for
analyzing production activities but are not entirely appropriate for examining corporate
activities as a whole.     A corporate firm is an individual economic entity that makes
economic decisions.       When we wish to investigate the structure, performance, and
strategies of corporate firms, firm-level data have clear advantages.


global commitment of firms.

                                             6
            The second strength of the Basic Survey is its frequency.    Censuses tend to
be conducted only once in several years because of the huge amount of cost and labor
required in processing the statistics.6 However, in order to precisely identify the nature
of entry and exit of corporate firms, data are needed at more frequent intervals.      The
Basic Survey collects annual data, which provide far richer information on the survival
of firms.
            Third, relatively high ratios of effective questionnaire returns are also the
strength of the Basic Survey.      Statistics conducted by the Government of Japan are
legally classified into two categories: designated statistics (shitei tokei) and approved
statistics (shonin tokei). The Basic Survey belongs to the first type, firms in the survey
being required to complete and return the questionnaires under the Statistics Law.7
The actual ratios of effective questionnaire returns are not disclosed but are probably
between 90% and 95%. More importantly, the firm list itself is widely recognized as
being precise. Hence, we can be confident that the distortion due to a low effective
return rate is relatively small.
            Even with a data set of such quality, great care is needed in defining the exit
of firms. In particular, because the turnover ratios of Japanese firms are known to be
very low, data handling could be a fairly delicate matter.     A weak point of the Basic
Survey in the context of survival analysis is that it does not include a reconfirmation
process to check whether a firm genuinely exits from the market or not.      Therefore, to
identify whether a firm exits from the market or not must depend solely on the
information on whether or not the company concerned shows up in the data set.
            In general, there are various reasons why a firm can be omitted from the data
set.   Omissions can occur, for example, when a firm happens not to return the
questionnaire, or when a firm geographically relocates headquarters, or when a firm
switches the industry it belongs to, or when mergers and acquisitions (M&As) occur.
The permanent firm numbering system in the Basic Survey deals with most of industry



6
  For example, the seminal paper of the literature, Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson
(1989), uses the U.S. manufacturing censuses that are conducted once in five years.
7
 Collection of “Approved” statistics is not backed by strong legal enforcement so that
effective return ratios tend to be low.

                                             7
switching and geographical relocation.8 However, for example, when a firm changes
the nature of its activities and loses establishments covered by the survey, the firm drops
out of the data set.   Furthermore, some firms may leave the sample set because of
shrinkage in size; the Basic Survey has a cut-off line in size as mentioned above.
          To keep erroneous interpretation to a minimum, this paper treats firms
dropping from the survey in two sequent years as those that get out of the market.
Because data from 1994 F/Y to 1999 F/Y are available, so that we can identify whether
the firms survive or not, our data set consists of corporate firms that were in business in
1994 F/Y, 1995 F/Y, 1996 F/Y, and/or 1997 F/Y.           In addition, and considering the
possibility of relatively small firms dropping from the data set due to shrinkage in their
size, we conduct regressions with the sample set of firms employing 100 or more
workers, a matter that is discussed in detail in the Appendix.




3. Methodology: the proportional hazard model


          This section presents the proportional hazard model that we utilize in our
survival analysis of corporate firms.
          The analysis of survival and exit of corporate firms requires careful
consideration of methodology.      If we collect data only for firms exiting from the
market and conduct OLS regressions, serious sampling bias occurs.            Although it is
possible to treat survival and exit as discrete choices and conduct logit or probit analysis,
we cannot take into account changes over time with respect to each firm.       To overcome
these problems, we would have to observe all firms from entry to exit, which is virtually
impossible in most studies.    The sample period typically ends before most of the firms
get out of the market. This is a serious censored data problem that we must confront.
          The issue is how to utilize the information on firms that survive.    One way is
to conduct event history analysis using a model such as the proportional hazard model.
Event history analysis examines what happens over a time span before some event

8
 Kimura and Kiyota (2003) find that a substantial number of firms covered by the Basic
Survey switch industries over time. This suggests that the survey follows industry



                                             8
    occurs; in our case, “some event” is the exit of a firm.              It specifies the survival function
    that describes the probability of a firm’s survival until a certain time has elapsed. By
    using a hazard function, the probability of a firm’s exit at a certain time period is
    expressed.
              The survival function is specified as follows:
                        S(t) = Pr(T ≥ t) ,                                                       (1)
    where T is the duration of survival of a firm and t is a certain time point. The function
    presents the probability of a firm’s survival at time t as a function of t.                The hazard
    function describes the probability of the risk of some event occurring.                      When we
    denote the probability density function of event occurrence as f (t) , the hazard function
    can be written as
                                   f (t)
                          h(t) =         .                                                        (2)
                                   S(t)
              The hazard function is in general specified as follows:
                                           Pr(t £ T £ t + Dt | T ≥ t)
                          h(t) = lim                                  ,                           (3)
                                   Dt Æ0              Dt
    where T is the duration of a firm and t denotes time.                      This function presents the
    probability that the event (exit) occurs in a fraction of time Δt, conditional on no
    occurrence of the event until time t (i.e. the firm survives until time t). However, it is
    empirically difficult to specify the functional form of the hazard function in our case
    due to problems such as that of specifying probability distribution.9
              The extended version of the proportional hazard model (Cox (1972, 1975))
    analyzes the relationship between the probability of event occurrence and various
    covariates, based on the concept of hazard function.                    It imposes the condition of
    “hazard proportionality” and makes the analysis of covariates possible without
    specifying a hazard function itself. “Hazard proportionality” is the assumption that the
    proportion of two kinds of hazard is constant over time.                      The model treats each
    sample’s hazard rate hi(t) as a function of a number of covariates. It conceptually
†
    switching pretty well.
    9
      In the case of durable time analysis of machines, for example, we can specify the
    survival function or hazard function because we a priori know the distribution of
    durable time as the Weibull distribution. However this is not the case when we


                                                         9
defines the baseline hazard ( h0 (t) ) that is not influenced by any covariate and treats the
proportion of hi(t) and h0 (t) as constant based on the hazard proportionality
assumption. Hence, the proportion is interpreted as a function of covariates.
          If we denote the vector of covariates (explanatory variables) as xi, we can
write
                      hi(t) /h0 (t) = exp(bx i )                                   (4)
                      hi(t) = h0 (t)exp(bx i ) .                                   (5)
This is the proportional hazard model. By taking logarithm, we obtain
                      log hi (t) = log h0 (t) + bx i .                             (6)
          In this model, we investigate the factors that explain the height of hazard rates.
Thus, a negative coefficient means that the explanatory variable is associated with
higher survival probability, while a positive coefficient suggests that the explanatory
variable accelerate the exit of firms.
          Even though the baseline hazard, h0 (t) , is not obtained ex ante because the
distribution of the hazard is unknown, it can be estimated ex post.10 Figure 1 presents
the baseline survival function S0(t) calculated from the estimated baseline hazard h0(t).11
This function indicates the survival pattern of sample firms when any covariates do not
affect the survival of firms, which is specified as
                      S0 (t) = exp{-H 0 (t)} ,                                     (7)
where H0(t) is the cumulative function of baseline hazard, h0(t).           This curvature
suggests that the probability of exit is higher in an early period before covariates are
taken into account.     The deviation of actual hazard from the baseline hazard (h0(t)) is




conduct survival analysis of corporate firms.
10
   To estimate parameter β, we use the partial likelihood estimation method. When
we denote the set of firms that have not experienced the event (exit) at time t as R(t),
Risk Set, we estimate the parameter of covariates,β, by maximizing the partial
                            m
                                 exp (b x i )
likelihood estimator, L = ’                   . Then, we do not have to specify the
                           i=1  Â exp(bxk )
                                 k Œ R( t i )

baseline hazard function, h0 (t) . For further explanation, please refer to Cox (1972,
1975), Kiefer (1988), or Kalbfleisch and Prentice (2002).
11
   The baseline hazard h0(t) is obtained from a regression with all samples.

                                                   10
explained by covariates.12


                                         <Figure 1>




4. Explaining the probability of exits


          For various reasons the exit of a firm can take different forms. For example,
M&As are a typical form of a firm’s exit, where poor corporate performance is not
necessarily the trigger.13 However, in Japan during the 1990s, hostile takeovers were
quite rare; and thus the exit of a firm can largely be interpreted as a result of bad
performance. In what follows, we discuss the expected sign of the coefficient for each
explanatory variable based on such intuition.    In addition, there is a possibility that a
firm is an affiliate of another firm and exits as a part of corporate restructuring.   We
will take such cases into account by separating our data set into affiliates of other firms
and independent firms.
         The explanatory factors that possibly affect the survival and exit of firms are
divided into four categories: (i) variables related to individual corporate performance,
(ii) variables representing firms’ competitiveness and technology, (iii) variables
expressing internalization patterns and global commitment of firms, and (iv) industry
dummies at the 2-digit level of the Basic Survey.14       The list of variables with the

12
   Figure 1 shows the baseline survival function because it is convenient to interpret the
survival pattern of sample firms. However, the baseline hazard function h0(t) is used
for estimating the proportional hazard model. The relationship between h0(t) and S0(t)
is derived from equation (2) as follows;
                                 d(log(S(t))
                      h0 (t) = -              .
                                     dt
13
   McGuckin and Nguyen (1995), for example, found that, in the U.S. manufacturing
sector in 1977-1987, M&As were more likely to occur for establishments with higher
labor productivity, though the opposite applied for establishments with more than 250
workers.
14
   Note that the 2-digit industry classification of the Basic Survey covers 23
manufacturing sectors, which is a far more detailed break-down than the 2-digit level of
usual industrial classifications.

                                            11
expected signs (except industry dummies) is summarized in Table 1 (a).15       Table 1 (b)
and (c) present basic statistics of independent variables and the distribution of firm age
for the whole sample set.


                                        <Table 1>

         The variables related to individual corporate performance include the size and
the capital intensity of firms.     As previous studies have found, firm size, here
expressed by the natural logarithm of the number of regular workers, would have a
positive relationship with the firms’ survival.16      Capital-labor ratio represents the
quality of production equipment or efficiency in production, and thus a firm with a
higher ratio would have stronger competitiveness to survive.       Operating surplus ratio,
which is operating surplus divided by total sales, is also included.   The expected signs
for the coefficient of these variables are negative.   The expected sign of the coefficient
for the value added ratio after controlling operating surplus ratio is not certain.    The
expected sign of the coefficient for the wage ratio is positive; heavy personnel payments
would be a burden for firm survival.
          The variables presenting firms’ competitiveness and technological intensity
include R&D dummy and advertisement cost ratios. The former indicates whether or
not the firm has R&D expenditure, while the latter is the ratio of advertisement cost to
operating cost.17   As Audretsch and Mahmood (1994, 1995) have emphasized, R&D

15
   Note that all variables are for each corporate firm that includes its establishments but
does not include its affiliates.
16
   Jovanovic (1982) theoretically demonstrated a strong positive relationship between
firm size and firm performance, as opposed to the stochastic growth rate hypothesis
regardless of firm size along the intuition of Gibrat’s law. Many of the previous
empirical studies on the survival of firms, including Audretsch and Mahmood (1994,
1995), Mata and Portugal (1994), and Mata, Portugal and Guimaraes (1995), also found
a positive relationship between firm size and the survival of firms.
17
   Because roughly 60% of firms in the sample have no R&D expenditure, R&D dummy
(whether a firm conducts R&D or not) are applied as an explanatory variable in the
following analysis. The ratio of R&D expenditures to sales would be used instead, but
the statistical power of such strongly censored data may be doubted. In addition, some
important studies including Aw and Hwang (1995) emphasize that whether a firm
conducts R&D or not would be more important than the magnitude of R&D expenditure
in explaining corporate performance. In any case, we also applied the ratio of R&D

                                            12
intensity would have a positive effect on the firms’ survival.    Advertising cost ratio is
used as a proxy variable for product differentiation in the literature on industrial
organization.   In general, producers of differentiated goods would enjoy stronger
competitiveness than producers of standardized goods.         The expected signs for the
coefficients of these two variables are thus negative.
          The variables that we would like to highlight in our analysis are those
representing the internalization and global commitment of firms.         After controlling
with the relatively well-established variables noted above, let us check whether or not
internalization and global commitment affect the probability of a firm’s survival.    The
outsourcing dummy, the number of establishments, and the owning affiliates dummy are
intended to capture the degree of internalization. Outsourcing is in general a far more
foot-loose form of inter-firm relationship than the traditional long-term subcontracting
system.   The expected sign of the coefficient for the outsourcing dummy is negative
because outsourcing indicates parsimony in specifying internalized activities.        The
number of establishments, and having affiliates, show the extensiveness of internalized
activities, which means that the expected signs of the coefficients are positive.
          Multiple forms of global commitment are expressed as the foreign sales ratio,
the foreign procurement ratio, the foreign outsourcing dummy, and the owning foreign
affiliates dummy.18     The expected signs are negative, except for the foreign
procurement ratio, because global commitment is supposed to make a firm more likely
to survive.19 In the case of the foreign procurement ratio, we are not sure about the
sign of the coefficient because although purchasing commodities and selling them in a
domestic market certainly provides a competitive environment, a recession in the
domestic economy might adversely affect such firms.


expenditures to total sales and obtained basically the same results.
           As for advertisement activities, we apply the ratio of advertisement
expenditures to sales instead of an advertisement dummy as an explanatory variable
because only 19% of firms in the sample have zero advertisement expenditure.
18
   Precisely speaking, foreign sales and foreign procurement are slightly different from
exports and imports because they include sales and procurement of establishments
located abroad. It does not make much difference, however, since the number of
establishments located abroad is limited.
19
   Our expected signs are consistent with the U.S. case reviewed by Lewis and
Richardson (2001).

                                            13
             The foreign ownership ratio indicates whether or not firms are affiliates of
foreign firms and also shows the strength of foreign managerial control.20 Foreign
firms might make a decision on the exit of their affiliates in Japan more strictly and
more quickly than Japanese indigenous firms if the performance of their affiliates in
Japan deteriorates. We therefore expect a positive coefficient for foreign ownership.
             The affiliate firm dummy is introduced to check whether affiliate firms owned
by other firms, and independent firms, differ in their probability of survival.      If the
exiting cost is high, the exit of an affiliate would be easier than that of an independent
firm. We thus expect a positive sign for the coefficient of the affiliate firm dummy.
             Our regression equations are somewhat ad-hoc, just like the ones that have
appeared in previous empirical studies, in the sense that they are not derived from any
formal theoretical model. Due to the complicated nature of the micro behavior of
corporate firms, we are still not able to clearly express causal relationships among the
variables.     For example, some explanatory variables may have a causal relationship
with others, though it is usually very difficult to write down a system of simultaneous
equations or to find decent instrumental variables in the micro data set. In this sense,
our study is a preliminary one, and is merely trying to find statistical associations of
internalization and global commitment with a firm’s probability of survival, utilizing
fairly well-established controls such as firm size, and R&D intensity.




5. Results


             This section presents the results of our hazard model analysis and discusses
their implications.     Table 2 provides the results of analysis with respect to all firms
with 100 or more workers. To try to avoid obvious multicollinearity, some explanatory
variables are alternately dropped from regression equations.          We also show the
regression results with and without industry dummies.     The regression results are fairly
stable and mostly confirm our intuition.


20
  Note that the Basic Survey simply collects total foreign ownership ratios, and thus
“foreign ownership” includes both foreign direct investment and portfolio investment.

                                             14
                                           <Table 2>


             First, consistent with previous literature, firm size and R&D dummy have
negative coefficients, which means that larger firms and firms that conduct R&D are
more likely to survive. The coefficients for advertisement cost ratio unexpectedly have
positive signs. Signs of these three variables are fairly robust even when we change
the sample set in the following analysis.        Capital labor ratio, operating surplus ratio,
value added ratio, and wage ratio are sensitive to the sample set and will be discussed
later.
             Second, excessive internalization is proved to be a serious problem.        The
number of establishments has significantly positive signs while the outsourcing dummy
has a negative sign. After being controlled by other variables, the compact design of a
corporate structure concentrating on core competences is important for enhancing the
probability of survival.
             Third, global commitment seems to be important for survival though the
result is mixed for some variables. The foreign sales dummy has a negative coefficient,
which is consistent with our intuition that exporting activities are positively correlated
with the likelihood of survival.       However, the foreign outsourcing dummy and the
owning foreign affiliates dummy have positive coefficients in these regressions,
opposite to our prior expectations.      Actually, the size of firms matters for the signs of
these coefficients; this issue is discussed in more detail below.
             Fourth, the sign of the coefficient for the foreign ownership ratio is not
significantly different from zero.      This means that the widely-held belief that foreign
companies behave in a foot-loose way is not supported statistically.
             Fifth, the affiliate firm dummy has a strongly positive coefficient, which
means that affiliates of other firms are more likely to exit than independent firms. As
shown in Appendix Table A1, the “exit ratio” of affiliates firms is 6.4% while that of
independent firms is 5.6%.21 Even after controlling other factors, the probability of
exiting is different.

21
     As regards the definition of “exit ratio,” please refer to the Appendix.

                                               15
           Related to the last point, we separate our sample set into two, affiliate firms
and independent firms, and again conduct regressions. The results are shown in Tables
3 and 4.      Most notable is that the signs of the coefficients for the operating surplus
ratio, the value added ratio, and the wage ratio are negative, negative, and positive,
respectively, for affiliate firms; while the signs are insignificant for independent firms.
This means that whether or not an affiliate is closed down strongly depends on its
performance, while a similar mechanism of natural selection does not work for
independent firms.      The exit of affiliates can be part of corporate restructuring, and in
such cases the cost of exiting may be lower than usual exits, if the possible relocation of
released resources is taken into account.     In other words, the cost of exiting is high for
the independent firm, so that it cannot get out of the market even if its performance is
poor. Or, an alternative interpretation is that independent firms exit regardless of their
performance due to financial pressures and other factors external to the firms
themselves.


                                          <Table 3>
                                          <Table 4>


           Tables 5 and 6 present regression results when we separate our sample into
firms with affiliates and firms without.      As shown in Appendix Table A1, the “exit
ratio” of firms with affiliates (4.6%) is much lower than that of firms without (7.6%).
However, both firm groups share pretty much the same factors that affect the probability
of exiting.


                                          <Table 5>
                                          <Table 6>


           Because the question of over-internalization seems to strongly influence
survival and exit, we separated our sample into different employment size categories
and then conducted regressions.        As shown in Table 7, very clear-cut results are
obtained for global commitment variables.       The foreign sales dummy has a significant



                                              16
negative coefficient when firms are small, but the significance diminishes as firms
become larger.     On the other hand, the owning foreign affiliates dummy switches the
sign of its coefficient from positive to negative as the firm size goes up.      Exporting
activities seem to be a proper form of global commitment for small firms, while having
foreign affiliates costs them too much.    Large firms can afford to hold foreign affiliates
in order to take advantage of global commitment.         The foreign outsourcing dummy
also changes its sign from positive to negative (though not significantly different from
zero) as the firm size increases.   The foreign procurement dummy has a significantly
positive coefficient when firms are small but loses its significance as firm size increases.
We can thus conclude that global commitment improves the probability of survival if
the channel is properly chosen with particular consideration to the size of the firm.


                                          <Table 7>




6. Conclusion


         This paper conducts a survival analysis of Japanese corporate firms using
census data collected by METI in the mid-1990s.           Analyses, based on a study of
exiting firms, confirm our intuition as regards the three generalizations listed in the
introduction.    Our findings can be summarized as follows.
         First, excessive internalization in corporate structure and related activities seem
to be harmful for corporate survival.        This finding may depend on the historical
background and on the market conditions that Japanese firms were confronted with
during the mid-1990s. In the 1980s, the Japanese economic system was praised, and
one of the components thought to be essential to the system was the extensive
internalization of various activities within corporate firms as well as the construction of
concerted long-term inter-firm relationships.         In the 1990s, however, extensive
internalization became an obstacle to staying alive rather than an advantage in a
stagnant economic environment. In addition, we should point out that international



                                             17
competition became far more intense in the 1990s, even in sectors such as electronic
machinery in which Japanese firms previously enjoyed competitive strength.            Having
too many establishments and too many affiliates is no good for corporate survival.
Concentration on core competences by using outsourcing contracts seems to enhance
the probability of survival.   The challenge that confronts Japanese firms is whether or
not they can achieve efficient reorganization of corporate structure and inter-firm
relationships.
         Second, global commitment seems to help Japanese firms to be more
competitive and more likely to survive.        However, the channels or types of global
commitment must be carefully chosen according to the size of the firm.           Small firms
can benefit from exporting activities, but having foreign affiliates or conducting foreign
outsourcing may aggravate rather than assist performance. Large firms, on the other
hand, can utilize the channels of foreign direct investment and foreign outsourcing and
enhance the probability of their survival.    Kimura and Kiyota (2003) found that global
commitment accelerates corporate restructuring; but we add the caveat that an
appropriate degree of internalization must be established, even in the context of global
commitment.
         Third, we find that corporate performance matters in the choice of exits for
affiliate firms, but it does not matter in the survival/exit of independent firms.    Taking
into account the fact that M&As are not a common form of exit in Japan, we question
the possible malfunctioning of market mechanisms in exits of independent firms.          One
possibility is that the cost of exiting is too high for independent firms, so they stay in the
market for a lengthy period even when their performance is poor.         Or, the selection of
survival or exit is done regardless of each firm’s performance because of financial
constraints and incomplete information.      Considering the low level of turnover ratios
in Japan, there is a strong need for an economic environment conducive to easier and
more efficient corporate turnovers.
         Fourth, we do not find any statistically significant evidence that firms partially
or wholly owned by foreigners are more likely to exit.      There is an on-going debate on
whether or not accepting inward foreign direct investment is beneficial.               Some
observers have expressed concern about the foot-loose behavior of foreign companies.



                                             18
However, after controlling other factors, our regression results indicate that little
evidence exists for such a tendency.
        The analysis conducted in this paper utilizes only a small part of the
information carried by the micro-data, but has already very effectively investigated at
the micro level what happened during the long-lasting recession in Japan. Further
empirical studies using micro data sets should be encouraged.




                                          19
References

Agarwal, Rajshree, Small Firm Survival and Technological Activity, Small Business
     Economics 11.3, 1998, pp. 215-224
Agarwal, Rajshree and David B. Audretsch, Does Entry Size Matter?: The Impact of the
     Life Cycle and Technology on Firm Survival, Journal of Industrial Economics
     49.1, 2001, pp. 21-43
Audretsch, David B., Innovation, Growth and Survival, International Journal of
         Industrial Organization 13.4, 1995, pp. 441-57
Audretsch, David B. and Talat Mahmood, The Rate of Hazard Confronting Firms and
         Plants in U.S. Manufacturing, Review of Industrial Organization 9.1, 1994, pp.
         41-56
Audretsch, David B. and Talat Mahmood, New Firm Survival: New Results Using a
         Hazard Function, Review of Economics and Statistics 77.1, 1995, pp. 97-103
Audretsch, David B., Enrico Santarelli and Marco Vivarelli, Start-up Size and Industrial
         Dynamics: Some Evidence from Italian Manufacturing, International Journal
         of Industrial Organization 17.7, 1999, pp. 965-983
Aw, Bee-Yan and Amy R. Hwang, Productivity and the Export Market: A Firm Level
         Analysis, Journal of Development Economics 47.2, 1995, pp. 313-332
Cox, David R., Regression Models and Life Tables, Journal of the Royal Statistical
         Society Series B. 34.2, 1972, pp. 187-220
Cox, David R., Partial Likelihood, Biometrica 62.3, 1975, pp. 269-75
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts and Larry Samuelson, Plant Turnover and Gross
         Employment Flows in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector, Journal of Labor
         Economics 7.1, 1989, pp. 4-71
The Fair Trade Commission (FTC), Government of Japan, Heisei 13 nendo Kousei
         Torihiki Iinkai Nenji Houkoku (Annual Report of the Fair Trade Commission,
         2001 F/Y), Tokyo: Fair Trade Commission, 2002
Harhoff, Dietmar, Konrad Stahl and Michael Woywode, Legal Form, Growth and Exit
         of West German Firms: Empirical Results for Manufacturing, Construction,
         Trade and Service, Journal of Industrial Economics 46.4, 1998, pp. 453-488
Honjo, Yuji, Business Failure of New Firms: An Empirical Analysis Using a
         Multiplicative Hazards Model, International Journal of Industrial
         Organization 18.4, 2000, pp. 557-574
Jovanovic, Boyan, Selection and the Evolution of Industry, Econometrica 50.3, 1982,
         pp. 649-670
Kalbfleisch, John D. and Ross L. Prentice, The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data
         (2nd edition), New York; John Wiley and Sons, 2002
Kiefer, Nicholas M., Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions, Journal of
         Economic Literature 26.2, 1988, pp. 646-679
Kimura, Fukunari and Kozo Kiyota, Exports and Foreign Direct Investment Accelerate
         Corporate Reforms: Evidence from the Japanese Micro Data, in Robert M.
         Stern, ed., Japan’s Economic Recovery: Commercial Policy, Monetary Policy,
         and Corporate Governance, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2003,
         pp221-255
Klepper, Steven and Kenneth L. Simons, The Making of an Oligopoly: Firm Survival
         and Technological Change in the Evolution of the U.S. Tire Industry, Journal of


                                          20
         Political Economy 108.4, 2000, pp. 728-760
Lewis, III, Howard and J. David Richardson, Why Global Commitment Really Matters!
         Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 2001
Li, Jiatao, Foreign Entry and Survival: Effects of Strategic Choices on Performance in
         International Markets, Strategic Management Journal 16.5, 1995, pp333-351
Mata, Jose and Pedro Portugal, Life Duration of New Firms, Journal of Industrial
         Economics 42.3, 1994, pp. 227-245
Mata, Jose, Pedro Portugal and Paulo Guimaraes, The Survival of New Plants: Start-up
         Conditions and Post-Entry Evolution, International Journal of Industrial
         Organization 13.4, 1995, pp. 459-81
McCloughan, Patrick and Ian Stone, Life Duration of Foreign Manufacturing
         Subsidiaries: Evidence from UK Northern Manufacturing Industry 1970-93,
         International Journal of Industrial Organization 16.6, 1998, pp. 719-747
McGuckin, Robert H. and Sang V. Nguyen, On Productivity and Plant Ownership
         Change: New Evidence from the Longitudinal Research Database, RAND
         Journal of Economics 26.2, 1995, pp. 257-276
Shimizu, Takashi, Gappei Kodo to Kigyo no Jumyo: Kigyokodo e no Atarashii Apurochi
         (Mergers and Firm Longevity: A New Approach to Firm Behavior), Tokyo;
         Yuhikaku, 2001 (in Japanese)
Tveteras, Ragnar and Geir Egil Eide, Survival of New Plants in Different Industry
         Environments in Norwegian Manufacturing; A Semi-Proportional Cox Model
         Approach, Small Business Economics 14.1, 2000, pp. 65-82




                                         21
Appendix: “Exit” of a firm


          As discussed in section 2, the Basic Survey does not include a reconfirmation
process to check whether or not a firm genuinely exits from the market.           To avoid
erroneous interpretation as far as possible, our study treats the “exit” of a firm as the
omission of a firm from the survey in two sequent years.
          Table A1 counts the number of observations and exit firms in our data set for
regressions. If a firm survives, say, throughout the sample period of 1994 F/Y-1997
F/Y, it is counted as four observations. Hence, “exit ratio” shown in this table is much
higher than the proportion of exit firms in one year.


                                       <Table A1>


          Table A2 presents the number of firms that dropped from the sample and
“returned” later.    These tables show that a considerable number of firms did return to
the sample; about 30% of firms that disappeared from the sample returned the next
year.22 For example, among 1,552 firms that disappeared in the 1995 F/Y survey, 448
firms re-appeared in 1996 F/Y.        This suggests that to treat a two-year sequent
disappearance from the sample as a criterion of exit substantially reduces a possibly
erroneous determination of “exit.”23 In addition, if a firm returned to the sample in a
period of over two years, we treated the firm as “no exit.”


                                       <Table A2>




          It is obvious that the “return” of firms is mostly due to ineffective responses to
the questionnaire.     The cut-off line in size applied by the Basic Survey would be

22
   Notice that such a problem is not even detected in empirical studies using census data
in other countries because census data are not typically available every year. Our data
analysis suggests that results with other statistics must also be carefully interpreted,
even though a similar problem is explicitly presented.
23
   Applying a more-than-two-year sequent disappearance from the sample as a criterion



                                            22
another factor responsible for the “return” of firms, but we believe that the problem is
not very serious.    Table A3 shows descriptive statistics of annual changes in the
number of workers for the full sample, and Table A4 does the same, but for firms with
less than 300 workers.       Both tables are of course for firms that exist in the sample in
two sequent years, so we must be careful lest these figures are somewhat understated by
not including firms dropped from the sample. In the case of the full sample, the mean
is around 30, and the standard deviation is about 150 while the median is 7 to 8. When
looking at the sample for small and medium sized firms, the mean is 10 to 11, the
median is 5, and the standard deviation is about 25. These imply that while some large
firms alter the number of workers by a larger amount, smaller firms do not significantly
change the number of workers.        We can thus guess that the cut-off line in size does not
greatly distort our study.


                                         <Table A3>
                                         <Table A4>


            For reasons of caution, though, we have dropped firms with less than 100
workers from the sample when conducting the regressions reported in Tables 2 to 7.         It
is not very likely that a firm with 100 workers in one year reduces the number of
workers to less than 50 in the next year. That is because the mean and median changes
in employment for firms with less than 300 workers (survived firms only) are only 10-
11 and 5.    The standard deviation of 25 means that a change in the number of workers
by more than 50 corresponds to a change by more than two sigmas if the standard
deviation is assumed.    Therefore, by dropping firms with less than 100 workers, we do
not worry too much about the cut-off line issue in the sample.




of exit would be a choice if we had longer time series data set.

                                              23
Table 1: Expected signs and basic statistics

(a) The list of independent variables with expected signs of coefficients
Independent variables                Definition                                                                Expected sign
Firm size                            Number of total regular workers (natural logarithm)                             -
Capital labor ratio                  Tangible fixed assets / total regular workers                                   -
Operating surplus ratio              Operating surplus / total sales                                                 -
Value added ratio                    (Total sales-total procurement) / total sales                                   ?
Wage ratio                           Total wage / operating cost                                                     +
R&D dummy                            1 for firms with R&D expenditure; 0 for firms without                           -
Advertisement cost ratio             Advertisement cost / operating cost                                             -
Foreign sales dummy                  1 for firms with foreign sales; 0 for firms without                             -
Foreign procurement dummy            1 for firms with foreign procurement; 0 for firms without                       ?
Outsourcing dummy                    1 for firms with outsourcing; 0 for firms without                               -
Foreign outsourcing dummy            1 for firms with outsourcing to firms abroad; 0 for firms without               -
Foreign ownership ratio              Foreign ownership ratio                                                         +
Number of establishments             Number of establishments owned by each firm                                     +
Affiliate firm dummy                 1 for firms that are affiliates of other firms; 0 for independent firms         +
Owning affiliates dummy              1 for firms with affiliate(s); 0 for firms without                              +
Owning foreign affiliates dummy 1 for firms with foreign affiliate(s); 0 for firms without                           -


(b) Basic statistics of independent variables
                                         Mean             s.d.        Minimum        Maximum
Firm size                                 402            1079            50           53584
Firm size (in natural logarithm)         5.280           0.996         3.912          10.889
Capital labor ratio                      9.634          15.661         0.000         962.275
Operating surplus ratio                  0.020           0.450        -89.032          0.860
Value added ratio                        0.431           0.346        -30.427          1.000
Wage ratio                               0.169           0.107         0.001           1.000
R&D dummy                                0.393           0.488         0.000           1.000
Advertisement cost ratio                 0.006           0.018         0.000           0.626
Foreign sales ratio                      0.256           0.436         0.000           1.000
Foreign procurement ratio                0.242           0.428         0.000           1.000
Outsourcing dummy                        0.506           0.500         0.000           1.000
Foreign outsourcing dummy                0.030           0.170         0.000           1.000
Foreign ownership ratio                  0.013           0.095         0.000           1.000
Number of establishments                 9.109          27.544         0.000            997
Affiliate firm dummy                     0.345           0.475         0.000           1.000
Owning affiliates dummy                  0.565           0.496         0.000           1.000
Owing foreign affiliates dummy           0.175           0.380         0.000           1.000

Data source: The MITI database.
Note: the following observations are dropped from the sample;
(1) firms with more than 100 affiliates
(2) firms with more than 1000 establishments
(3) firms with outsourcing cost larger than operating cost
(4) firms with R&D expenditure larger than operating cost
(5) firms with advertisement cost larger than operating cost
(6) firms with total wage larger than operating cost




                                                               24
(c) Distribution of firm age (1994 F/Y survey)

                            Firm age (years)                  Number of firms
                            0-4                                                         81
                            5-9                                                        642
                            10-14                                                      766
                            15-19                                                      950
                            20-24                                                     1414
                            25-29                                                     1746
                            30-34                                                     1775
                            35-39                                                     1737
                            40-44                                                     1734
                            45-49                                                     3391
                            50-54                                                     2342
                            55 and more                                                171
                            total                                                    16749


                                      Distribution of firm age (1994 F/Y survey)

                    4000

                    3500

                    3000
  Number of firms




                    2500

                    2000

                    1500

                    1000

                     500

                       0
                           4

                                 9




                                                                                                         e
                                       4

                                               9

                                                    4

                                                             9

                                                                    4

                                                                          9

                                                                                4

                                                                                       9

                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                       or
                       0-

                               5-

                                      -1

                                            -1

                                                    -2

                                                          -2

                                                                    -3

                                                                          -3

                                                                                -4

                                                                                      -4

                                                                                              -5

                                                                                                     m
                                     10

                                           15

                                                   20

                                                         25

                                                                   30

                                                                         35

                                                                               40

                                                                                     45

                                                                                             50

                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                  an
                                                                                             55




                                                         Firm age (years)




                                                              25
Table 2: Results of Cox regressions: firms with 100 or more workers

                                  Model 1           Model 2           Model 3             Model 4
Independent variables

Firm size                         -0.340***         -0.376***         -0.375***           -0.410***
                                  0.035             0.035             0.036               0.036

Capital labor ratio               -0.002            -0.002            -0.00003            -0.0002
                                  0.002             0.002             0.002               0.002

Operating surplus ratio           0.011             0.031             0.006               0.012
                                  0.035             0.034             0.036               0.036

Value added ratio                 -0.102            -0.205*           -0.092              0.121
                                  0.126             0.124             0.133               0.133

Wage ratio                        1.145***          1.112***          0.661**             0.748***
                                  0.261             0.259             0.278               0.277

R&D dummy                         -0.215***         -0.282***         -0.138**            -0.171***
                                  0.056             0.054             0.060               0.059

Advertisement cost ratio          2.859***          3.322***          2.795**             2.864***
                                  1.035             0.981             1.108               1.102

Foreign sales dummy               -0.217***         -0.310***         -0.192***           -0.263***
                                  0.071             0.074             0.074               0.078

Foreign procurement dummy         0.260***          0.180**           0.252***            0.174**
                                  0.069             0.071             0.070               0.072

Outsourcing dummy                 -0.225***                           -0.145**
                                  0.052                               0.060

Foreign outsourcing dummy                           0.345**                               0.293**
                                                    0.136                                 0.138

Foreign ownership ratio           -0.005            0.105             0.137               0.220
                                  0.227             0.227             0.228               0.228

Number of establishments          0.003***          0.003***          0.002***            0.002***
                                  0.001             0.001             0.001               0.001

Affiliate firm dummy              0.961***          0.977***          0.937***            0.956***
                                  0.050             0.049             0.050               0.050

Owning affiliates dummy           -0.075                              -0.072
                                  0.052                               0.053

Owning foreign affiliates dummy                     0.216***                              0.218***
                                                    0.078                                 0.079

Industry dummies                  NO                NO                YES                 YES

Log-likelihood                    -16374.94         -16378.45         -16281.23           -16279.08
Chi-squared                       643.27***         636.25***         830.69***           834.99***
N                                 48209             48209             48209               48209

Note:   Standard errors are presented below the estimates of coefficients.
        ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                             26
Table 3: Results of Cox regressions: affiliate firms with 100 or more workers

                                  Model 5           Model 6           Model 7             Model 8
Independent variables

Firm size                         -0.187***         -0.241***         -0.196***           -0.261***
                                  0.055             0.055             0.058               0.057

Capital labor ratio               0.001             0.001             0.001               0.001
                                  0.002             0.002             0.002               0.002

Operating surplus ratio           -0.357***         -0.345***         -0.393***           -0.401***
                                  0.123             0.123             0.129               0.130

Value added ratio                 -0.602***         -0.660***         -0.557***           -0.557***
                                  0.195             0.193             0.210               0.210

Wage ratio                        1.820***          1.899***          1.469***            1.688***
                                  0.354             0.348             0.388               0.383

R&D dummy                         -0.131            -0.237***         -0.003              -0.062
                                  0.090             0.087             0.099               0.098

Advertisement cost ratio          5.134***          5.686***          4.666***            4.884***
                                  1.603             1.529             1.700               1.693

Foreign sales dummy               -0.188            -0.226*           -0.190              -0.212
                                  0.125             0.129             0.128               0.132

Foreign procurement dummy         0.332***          0.309***          0.323***            0.295**
                                  0.119             0.121             0.121               0.124

Outsourcing dummy                 -0.324***                           -0.166*
                                  0.083                               0.098

Foreign outsourcing dummy                           0.131                                 0.158
                                                    0.255                                 0.258

Foreign ownership ratio           -0.026            0.081             0.049               0.151
                                  0.245             0.247             0.248               0.250

Number of establishments          0.002             0.002*            0.001               0.001
                                  0.001             0.001             0.002               0.002

Owning affiliates dummy           -0.428***                           -0.464***
                                  0.084                               0.087

Owning foreign affiliates dummy                     -0.227                                -0.191
                                                    0.161                                 0.163

Industry dummies                  NO                NO                YES                 YES

Log-likelihood                    -5749.25          -5769.31          -5717.94            -5733.85
Chi-squared                       134.33***         94.21***          196.95***           165.14***
N                                 16700             16700             16700               16700

Note:   Standard errors are presented below the estimates of coefficients.
        ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                            27
Table 4: Results of Cox regressions: independent firms (not affiliate firms) with 100 or more workers

                                  Model 9           Model 10          Model 11            Model 12
Independent variables

Firm size                         -0.438***         -0.460***         -0.471***           -0.491***
                                  0.046             0.047             0.048               0.048

Capital labor ratio               -0.004            -0.004            -0.004              -0.003
                                  0.003             0.003             0.003               0.003

Operating surplus ratio           -0.031            -0.012            -0.030              -0.025
                                  0.054             0.053             0.054               0.054

Value added ratio                 0.221             0.110             0.176               0.143
                                  0.164             0.161             0.174               0.173

Wage ratio                        0.495             0.338             -0.012              -0.057
                                  0.374             0.373             0.398               0.397

R&D dummy                         -0.253***         -0.286***         -0.209***           -0.215***
                                  0.071             0.070             0.076               0.075

Advertisement cost ratio          1.540             2.033             1.806               1.861
                                  1.447             1.378             1.533               1.517

Foreign sales dummy               -0.216**          -0.343***         -0.202**            -0.314***
                                  0.087             0.091             0.092               0.096

Foreign procurement dummy         0.213**           0.103             0.203**             0.099
                                  0.084             0.089             0.086               0.090

Outsourcing dummy                 -0.171**                            -0.133*
                                  0.068                               0.076

Foreign outsourcing dummy                           0.420***                              0.356**
                                                    0.162                                 0.164

Foreign ownership ratio           -1.349            -1.440*           -1.230              -1.333
                                  0.853             0.867             0.850               0.864

Number of establishments          0.003***          0.003***          0.002***            0.002***
                                  0.001             0.001             0.001               0.001

Owning affiliates dummy           0.185***                            0.208***
                                  0.069                               0.070

Owning foreign affiliates dummy                     0.406***                              0.413***
                                                    0.092                                 0.092

Industry dummies                  NO                NO                YES                 YES

Log-likelihood                    -9454.27          -9447.18          -9376.87            -9369.89
Chi-squared                       197.98***         212.16***         352.78***           366.75***
N                                 31509             31509             31509               31509

Note:   Standard errors are presented below the estimates of coefficients.
        ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                         28
Table 5: Results of Cox regressions: parent firms with affiliate(s) with 100 or more workers

                                  Model 13          Model 14          Model 15            Model 16
Independent variables

Firm size                         -0.446***         -0.474***         -0.468***           -0.492***
                                  0.044             0.045             0.045               0.046

Capital labor ratio               -0.001            -0.001            -0.001              -0.001
                                  0.002             0.002             0.002               0.002

Operating surplus ratio           -0.012            0.007             0.003               0.011
                                  0.060             0.060             0.060               0.061

Value added ratio                 0.123             0.022             0.018               -0.026
                                  0.172             0.171             0.181               0.181

Wage ratio                        1.084***          0.940**           0.483               0.476
                                  0.408             0.409             0.442               0.443

R&D dummy                         -0.170**          -0.219***         -0.166**            -0.193**
                                  0.073             0.072             0.079               0.079

Advertisement cost ratio          0.962             1.611             1.466               1.532
                                  1.843             1.796             1.922               1.912

Foreign sales dummy               -0.062            -0.164*           -0.054              -0.136
                                  0.086             0.091             0.092               0.096

Foreign procurement dummy         0.177**           0.082             0.181**             0.091
                                  0.084             0.088             0.086               0.090

Outsourcing dummy                 -0.188***                           -0.199***
                                  0.071                               0.079

Foreign outsourcing dummy                           0.396**                               0.302*
                                                    0.156                                 0.158

Foreign ownership ratio           -0.486            -0.432            -0.396              -0.351
                                  0.437             0.440             0.436               0.439

Number of establishments          0.003***          0.003***          0.002***            0.002***
                                  0.001             0.001             0.001               0.001

Affiliate firm dummy              0.703***          0.714***          0.683***            0.693***
                                  0.074             0.074             0.075               0.075

Owning foreign affiliates dummy                     0.236***                              0.234***
                                                    0.087                                 0.088

Industry dummies                  NO                NO                YES                 YES

Log-likelihood                    -8244.26          -8240.52          -8186.51            -8184.03
Chi-squared                       255.74***         263.21***         371.24***           376.20***
N                                 30676             30676             30676               30676

Note:   Standard errors are presented below the estimates of coefficients.
        ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                     29
Table 6: Results of Cox regressions: firms without affiliates with 100 or more workers

                                  Model 17          Model 18          Model 19            Model 20
Independent variables

Firm size                         -0.170***         -0.169***         -0.201***           -0.202***
                                  0.061             0.061             0.063               0.063

Capital labor ratio               -0.001            -0.001            0.001               0.001
                                  0.003             0.003             0.002               0.002

Operating surplus ratio           -0.366***         -0.347***         -0.365***           -0.365***
                                  0.117             0.117             0.121               0.121

Value added ratio                 -0.406**          -0.514***         -0.291              -0.296
                                  0.184             0.180             0.199               0.198

Wage ratio                        1.308***          1.214***          0.915**             0.931***
                                  0.336             0.335             0.361               0.361

R&D dummy                         -0.285***         -0.345***         -0.154              -0.159*
                                  0.089             0.087             0.095               0.094

Advertisement cost ratio          3.927***          4.149***          4.021***            4.015***
                                  1.228             1.157             1.433               1.431

Foreign sales dummy               -0.507***         -0.536***         -0.474***           -0.478***
                                  0.136             0.135             0.139               0.139

Foreign procurement dummy         0.364***          0.347***          0.337***            0.317***
                                  0.118             0.120             0.119               0.121

Outsourcing dummy                 -0.269***                           -0.049
                                  0.078                               0.094

Foreign outsourcing dummy                           0.193                                 0.252
                                                    0.289                                 0.291

Foreign ownership ratio           0.171             0.237             0.244               0.261
                                  0.273             0.273             0.279               0.279

Number of establishments          0.003**           0.003***          0.002*              0.002*
                                  0.001             0.001             0.001               0.001

Affiliate firm dummy              1.177***          1.162***          1.166***            1.165***
                                  0.072             0.072             0.073               0.073

Industry dummies                  NO                NO                YES                 YES

Log-likelihood                    -6898.98          -6904.84          -6852.46            -6852.24
Chi-squared                       375.19***         363.47***         468.23***           468.66***
N                                 17533             17533             17533               17533

Note:   Standard errors are presented below the estimates of coefficients.
        ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                   30
Table 7 Results of Cox regressions: by firm size (number of regular workers)

                                  Model 21            Model 22            Model 23            Model 24            Model 25
                                  (Firm size:100-199) (Firm size:200-299) (Firm size:300-499) (Firm size:500-999) (Firm size:1000 or more)
Independent variables

Firm size                         -0.553***            -0.253                  0.286          0.528               -0.503**
                                  0.169                0.481                   0.415          0.388               0.213

Capital labor ratio               0.001                0.003                   -0.021**       -0.040***           -0.001
                                  0.002                0.002                   0.009          0.014               0.008

Operating surplus ratio           -0.153               0.051                   0.584          -0.109              -0.964
                                  0.121                0.089                   1.436          0.175               2.257

Value added ratio                 -0.263               -0.221                  0.613          -0.041              0.298
                                  0.173                0.321                   0.374          0.447               0.564

Wage ratio                        0.489                1.405**                 -0.294         1.789**             1.559
                                  0.380                0.649                   0.832          0.816               1.153

R&D dummy                         -0.169**             -0.332**                -0.338**       -0.362*             0.155
                                  0.083                0.136                   0.160          0.203               0.278

Advertisement cost ratio          3.541***             3.877                   4.623*         -14.919**           3.463
                                  1.371                2.953                   2.507          7.507               4.968

Foreign sales dummy               -0.299***            -0.364**                -0.215         -0.164              0.058
                                  0.109                0.181                   0.198          0.259               0.317

Foreign procurement dummy         0.191*               0.249                   0.228          -0.169              0.142
                                  0.104                0.169                   0.181          0.239               0.273

Foreign outsourcing dummy         0.236                0.449                   0.582*         0.522               -0.208
                                  0.218                0.326                   0.303          0.382               0.535

Foreign ownership ratio           0.321                0.337                   0.391          0.895               -0.870
                                  0.363                0.568                   0.492          0.689               0.721

Number of establishments          0.005                0.0002                  0.009**        0.004*              0.002**
                                  0.006                0.007                   0.004          0.002               0.001

Affiliate firm dummy              0.919***             0.909***                1.083***       1.226***            1.021***
                                  0.070                0.119                   0.129          0.166               0.223

Owning foreign affiliates dummy 0.576***               0.044                   0.218          -0.035              -0.657**
                                0.117                  0.186                   0.181          0.237               0.268

Industry dummies                  YES                  YES                     YES            YES                 YES

Log-likelihood                    -7717.71             -2399.95                -1879.50       -1140.37            -667.44
Chi-squared                       332.26***            133.01***               145.46***      157.88***           94.55***
N                                 20241                8871                    7789           6250                5058

Note:   Standard errors are presented below the estimates of coefficients.
        ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                       31
Figure 1: Survival probability and the age of firm
  Survival probability (S0(t))


            1




          0.5




            0
                                                                                                               Age of firm
                  1                       25                  50                         75              100



Note: survival probability (S0(t): baseline survival function) is obtained as follows:
                So (t) = exp{-H 0 ( t)}


 where H0(t) is the cumulative function of baseline hazard h0 (t), which is estimated by the proportional hazard model,
                hi(t) = h0 (t)exp(bx i ) .




                                                              32
Appendix Table A1: Number of exit firms

                           Total observations Exit firms          Exit ratio (%)

Independent firms                     44514                2485                5.58
Afffiliate firms                      23456                1511                6.44
Total                                 67970                3996                5.88
Firms with affiliates                 38424                1764                4.59
Firms without affiliates              29546                2232                7.55
Total                                 67970                3996                5.88
Firm size: 50-99                      19761                2175               11.01
Firm size: 100-149                    12345                 624                5.05
Firm size: 150-199                     7896                 319                4.04
Firm size: 200-249                     5133                 183                3.57
Firm size: 250-299                     3738                 147                3.93
Firm size: 300 or more                19097                 548                2.87
Total                                 67970                3996                5.88

Notes:
(1) "Exit firms" are defined in our analysis as those which dropped from the surverys in
two sequent years or more and also never returned to the survey once they dropped from
the sample.
(2) The figures for total observations show the number of firm samples showed up in
our panel dataset. Those that showed up in the sequent surveys from 1994 to 1997, for
instance, are counted as 4 observations. On the other hand, the figures for "exit firms"
show the number of exit firms as defined above. Thus, "exit ratio" is obtained by
dividing the number of "exit firm" by the number of total sample firms.




                                                    33
Appendix Table A2: Number of "returned" firms: firms that appeared in the 1994
F/Y Survey


                         Dropped in 1995        Dropped in 1996
Dropped Firm Total                  1552                   1070
Returned in 1996                     448
Returned in 1997                     115                   324
Returned firm total                  563                   324
Returned firm %                     36.3                  30.3


Note: Samples with missing data are included.



Appendix Table A3: Changes in firm size for the full sample (surviving firms only)
(Number of regular workers, absolute value)
                               1994-1995           1995-1996             1996-1997
Mean                                  31.6               30.7                 29.1
Median                                   8                   7                    7
s.d.                                145.5               157.3                131.8




Appendix Table A4: Changes in firm size for firms with less than 300 workers
(surviving firms only)
(Number of regular workers, absolute value)
                               1994-1995           1995-1996           1996-1997
Mean                                  11.2               10.4                10.7
Median                                   5                   5                  5
s.d.                                  26.6               24.7                26.5




                                                  34
