NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR MARKET DISCRIMINATION AND
RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN PREMARKET FACTORS
Pedro Carneiro
James J. Heckman
Dimitriy V. Masterov
Working Paper 10068
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10068
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

This research was supported by a grant from the American Bar Foundation and NIH R01-HD043411.
Carneiro was supported by Fundacao Ciencia e Tecnologia and Fundacao Calouste Gulbenkian. We thank
Derek Neal for comments and Maria Isabel Larenas, Maria Victoria Rodriguez and Xing Zhong for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Pedro Canreiro, James J. Heckman, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Market Discrimination and Racial Differences in Premarket Factors
Pedro Carneiro, James J. Heckman, and Dimitriy V. Masterov
NBER Working Paper No. 10068
October 2003
JEL No. J31
ABSTRACT
This paper examines minority-white wage gaps. Neal and Johnson (1996) show that
controlling for ability measured in the teenage years eliminates young adult wage gaps for all groups
except for black males, for whom they eliminate 70% of the gap. Their study has been faulted
because minority children and their parents may have pessimistic expectations about receiving fair
rewards for their skills and so they may invest less in skill formation. If this is the case,
discrimination may still affect wages, albeit indirectly, though it would appear that any racial
differences in wages are due to differences in acquired traits.
We find that gaps in ability across racial and ethnic groups open up at very early ages, long
before child expectations are likely to become established. These gaps widen with age and schooling
for Blacks, but not for Hispanics which indicates that poor schools and neighborhoods cannot be the
principal factors affecting the slow black test score growth rate.
Test scores depend on schooling attained at the time of the test. Adjusting for racial and
ethnic differences in schooling attainment at the age the test is taken reduces the power of measured
ability to shrink wage gaps for blacks, but not for other minorities.
The evidence from expectations data are mixed. Although all groups are quite optimistic
about future schooling outcomes, minority parents and children have more pessimistic expectations
about child schooling relative to white children and their parents when their children are young. At
later ages, expectations are more uniform across racial and ethnic groups. However, we also present
some evidence that expectations data are unreliable and ambiguous.
We also document the presence of disparities in noncognitive traits across racial and ethnic
groups. These characteristics have been shown elsewhere to be important for explaining the labor
market outcomes of adults.
This evidence points to the importance of early (preschool) family factors and environments
in explaining both cognitive and noncognitive ability differentials by ethnicity and race. Policies that
foster both types of ability are far more likely to be effective in promoting racial and ethnic equality
for most groups than are additional civil rights and affirmative action policies targeted at the
workplace.
Pedro Carneiro
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street
London WC1E 6BT
United Kingdom
klmcarn@lily.src.uchicago.edu

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Dimitriy V. Masterov
Irving B. Harris School
Center for Social Program Evaluation
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street, Room 038
Chicago, IL 60637
dvmaster@lily.src.uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

In spite of 40 years of civil rights and aﬃrmative action policy, substantial gaps remain in the
market wages of African-American males and females compared to white males and females. There
are sizable wage gaps for Hispanics as well.1 Columns I of table 1 report the mean hourly log wage
gaps for a cohort of black and Hispanic males and females. These gaps are for a cohort of young
persons age 26-28 in 1990 from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth of 1979, or NLSY79. We
follow the cohort for 10 years until it reaches age 36-38 in 2000. These gaps are not adjusted for
diﬀerences in schooling, ability, or other potential sources of racial and ethnic wage diﬀerentials.
Table 1 shows that, on average, black males earn 25% lower wages than white males in 1990.
Hispanic males earn 17.4% lower wages in the same year. Moreover, the gaps widen for males as
the cohort ages. The results for women reveal smaller gaps for blacks and virtually no gap at all
for Hispanic women.2 The gaps for women show no clear trend with age. Altonji and Blank (1999)
report similar patterns using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS).
These gaps are consistent with the claims of pervasive labor market discrimination against
many minorities, namely, that minority workers with the same ability and training as white workers
receive lower wages. However, there is another equally congruous explanation. Minorities may
bring less skill and ability to the market. Although there may be discrimination or disparity in
the development of these valuable skills, the skills may be rewarded equally across all demographic
groups in the labor market.
1

The literature on African-American economic progress over the 20th century is surveyed in Heckman and Todd
(2001).
2
However, the magnitude (but not the direction) of the female gaps is less reliable, at least for black women. Neal
(2003) shows that racial wage gaps for black women are underestimated by these types of regressions since they do
not control for selective labor force participation. This same line of reasoning is likely to hold for Hispanic women.

1

These two interpretations of market wage gaps have profoundly diﬀerent policy implications. If
persons of identical skill are treated diﬀerently on the basis of race or ethnicity, a more vigorous
enforcement of civil rights and aﬃrmative action in the marketplace may be warranted. If the gaps
are due to unmeasured abilities and skills that people bring to the labor market, then a redirection
of policy towards fostering skills should be emphasized as opposed to a policy of ferreting out
discrimination in the workplace.
An important paper by Derek Neal and William Johnson (1996) sheds light on the relative
empirical importance of market discrimination and skill disparity in accounting for wage gaps by
race. Controlling for a measure of scholastic ability measured in the middle teenage years, they
substantially reduce but do not fully eliminate wage gaps for black males in 1990-1991. They
more than eliminate the gaps for black females. Columns II of tables 1 show our version of the
Neal-Johnson study,3 expanded to cover additional years. For black males, controlling for an early
measure of ability cuts the wage gap in 1990 by 76 percent. For Hispanic males, controlling for
ability essentially eliminates it. For women the results are even more striking. Wage gaps are
actually reversed, and controlling for ability leads to higher wages for minority females.
Following Neal and Johnson, these adjustments do not control for racial and economic diﬀerences
in schooling, occupational choice, or work experience. Neal and Johnson argue that racial and ethnic
diﬀerences in these factors may reflect responses to labor market discrimination and should not be
controlled for in estimating the full eﬀect of race on wages since this may spuriously reduce estimated
wage gaps by introducing a proxy for discrimination into the control variables. They further argue
3

We use a sample very similar to the one used in their study. It includes individuals born only in 1962-1964.
This exclusion is designed to alleviate the eﬀects of diﬀerential schooling at the test date on test performance and
to ensure that the AF QT test is taken before the individuals enter the labor market (i.e., so that it is a premarket
factor).

2

that ability measured in the teenage years is a “premarket” factor, meaning that it is not aﬀected by
expectations or actual experiences of discrimination in the labor market. We consider this claim and
argue that there is considerable arbitrariness in proclaiming what is or is not a “premarket” factor,
and such determinations matter greatly for the size of the adjusted wage gaps. When adjustments
for schooling attainment at the date of the test are made, the adjusted wage gaps rise.
Gaps in measured ability by ethnicity and race are indeed substantial. In figures 1A and 1B
we have plotted the ability distribution as measured by age-corrected AFQT4 for men and women,
respectively. These diﬀerences are not small. As noted by Herrnstein and Murray (1994), the ability
gaps are a major factor in accounting for a variety of racial and ethnic disparities in socioeconomic
outcomes. For example, Cameron and Heckman (2001) show that controlling for ability, blacks and
Hispanics are more likely to enter college than are whites at a time when wage premia for education
are rising considerably.5
The evidence in columns II of table 1 suggests that the major source of minority-majority
diﬀerences in wages is the disparity in characteristics that minorities bring to the market rather
than discrimination in the workplace. At first glance, the evidence in the table suggests that there
is no racial or ethnic disparity in market payments for comparable levels of skill for all but black
males.
Though the facts displayed in table 1 and figures 1A-B are provocative, they are controversial
4

Age-corrected AFQT is the standardized residual from the regression of the AFQT score on age at the time of the
test dummy variables. AFQT is a subset of 4 out of 10 ASVAB tests used by the military for enlistment screening
and job assignment. It is the summed score from the word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, mathematics
knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning ASVAB tests.
5
Urzua (2003) shows that this eﬀect arises from greater minority enrollment in two-year colleges. Controlling for
ability, whites are more likely to attend and graduate from four year colleges. Using the Current Population Survey,
Black and Sufi (2002) find that equating the family background of blacks and whites eliminates the black-white gap
in schooling only at the bottom of the family background distribution. Furthermore, the gaps are eliminated in the
1980s, but not in the 1990s.

3

for a number of reasons. The major points of contention are as follows.

1. The gaps in ability evident in figures 1A-B may stem from lowered academic eﬀort in anticipation of future discrimination in the labor market. If skills are not rewarded fairly, the
incentive to acquire them is diminished for those subject to prejudicial treatment. Discrimination in the labor market might not only sap the incentives of children and young adults
to acquire skills and abilities, but it may also influence the eﬀorts they exert in raising their
own oﬀspring. This means that measured ability may not be a true premarket factor. Neal
and Johnson (1996) mention this qualification in their original paper and their critics have
subsequently reiterated it.
2. The gaps in ability may also be a consequence of adverse environments, and thus the appropriate policy for eliminating ability gaps is not apparent from table 1. Should policies focus
on early ages through enriched Head Start programs or on improving schooling quality and
reducing school dropout and repetition rates that plague minority children at later ages?

This paper provides answers to these questions. We show that:

(a) The evidence from data on parents’ and children’s expectations tells a mixed story. If the
rewards to schooling are lower for minorities, the return to schooling is lower and minority
expectations of schooling attainment should be lower. Minority child and parent expectations
measured when the children are 16 and 17 about the children’s schooling prospects are as
optimistic as white expectations, although actual schooling outcomes of whites and minorities
are dramatically diﬀerent. Diﬀerential expectations at these ages cannot explain the gaps in
ability evident in figures 1A and 1B.
4

For children ages 14 and below, parent and child expectations about schooling are much
lower for blacks than for whites, though only slightly lower for Hispanics than for whites. All
groups are still rather optimistic in light of actual subsequent schooling attendance. At these
ages, diﬀerences in expectations across groups may lead to diﬀerential investments in skill
formation. Still, though lower expectations may be a consequence of perceived labor market
discrimination, they may also reflect child and parental perception of the lower endowments
possessed by minorities.
The fact that reported expectations are so inaccurate casts some doubt about the usefulness of
expectations elicited by questionnaires for testing the actual expectations governing behavior.
This is compounded by ambiguity of the source of the relatively pessimistic expectations.
(b) Ability gaps open up early, often by age 1 or 2, and as a result minorities enter school with
substantially lower measured ability than whites. The black-white ability gap widens as the
children get older and obtain more schooling, but the contribution of formal education to the
widening of the gap is small when compared to the size of the initial gap. There is a much
smaller widening of the Hispanic-white gap.
This evidence implies that school-based policies are unlikely to have substantial eﬀects on
eliminating minority ability gaps. Factors that operate early in the life cycle of the child
are likely to have the greatest impact on ability. Although ability gaps between blacks and
whites widen with schooling, the eﬀect of formal schooling on ability is much smaller for
blacks than for whites, and about the same for Hispanics and whites. The early emergence
of ability gaps indicates that child expectations can play only a limited role in accounting for
ability gaps since very young children are unlikely to have formed expectations about labor
5

market discrimination or to take decisions based on those expectations. However, parental
expectations of future discrimination may still play a role.
The early emergence of measured ability diﬀerentials also casts doubt on the empirical importance of the “stereotype threat” (see Steele and Aronson, 1998) as a major factor contributing
to black-white test score diﬀerentials. The literature on this topic finds that black college students at selective colleges perform worse on tests when they are told that the outcomes will
be used in some way to measure black-white ability diﬀerences, i.e., that the test may be
used to confirm stereotypes about black-white ability diﬀerentials. However, the children in
our data are tested at a young age and are unlikely to be aware of stereotypes about minority
inferiority or be aﬀected by the stereotype threat which has only been established for students
at elite college. In addition, large gaps in tests are also evident for Hispanics, a group for
whom the stereotype threat has not been documented.
(c) We find that diﬀerences in levels of schooling at the date the test is taken play a sizable role
in accounting for ability diﬀerentials. Adjusting for the schooling attainment of minorities at
the time that they take the test provides a potential qualification to the Neal and Johnson
finding. Part of the ability gap demonstrated by Neal and Johnson is due to diﬀerential
schooling attainment. An extra year of schooling has a greater impact on test scores for
whites and Hispanics than for blacks. Adjusting the test score for schooling disparity at the
date of the test raises the estimated wage gap and leaves more room for an interpretation of
labor market discrimination.
This finding does not necessarily overturn the conclusion of the Neal-Johnson analysis. At
issue is the source of the gap in schooling attainment at the date of the test. Our analysis
6

reveals that the amount of the wage gap that is explained by discrepancies in scholastic ability
depends on the age and grade completed at the date of measurement of ability. Tests adjusted
for schooling explain less of the black-white wage gap compared to the unadjusted tests. The
Neal-Johnson “pre-market” factors are a composite of ability and schooling, and are likely to
reflect both the life cycle experiences and the expectations of the child. To the extent that they
reflect expectations of discrimination as embodied in schooling that aﬀects test scores, test
scores are contaminated by market discrimination and are not truly premarket factors. An
open question is how much of the gap in schooling is due to expectations about discrimination.
For black males premarket factors account for half of the black-white wage gap for males. We
argue that our adjustment is overly conservative because much of the gap in schooling and
ability opens up at an early age, before expectations of labor market discrimination can be a
plausible explanation. The adjustments for the eﬀect of schooling on the test score have much
weaker eﬀects for other demographic groups.
(d) A focus on cognitive skill gaps, while traditional (see, e.g., Jencks and Phillips, 1998), misses
important non-cognitive components of social and economic success. We show that noncognitive (i.e., behavioral) gaps also open up early. Previous work shows that they play
an important role in accounting for market wages. Policies that focus solely on improving
cognitive skills miss an important and promising determinant of socioeconomic success and
disparity that can be aﬀected by policy (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003).

Section 2 presents evidence on the evolution of test score gaps over the lifecycle of the child.
Section 3 presents our evidence on how adjusting for schooling at the date of the test aﬀects the
Neal-Johnson analysis, and how schooling aﬀects test scores diﬀerentially for minorities. Section 4
7

discusses data on expectations. Section 5 presents evidence on noncognitive skills that parallels the
analysis of Section 2. Section 6 concludes.

2

Minority-White Diﬀerences in Early Test Scores and Early
Environments

The evidence presented in Section 1 suggests that a large fraction of the minority-white disparity
in labor market outcomes that is frequently attributed to discrimination may be due instead to
minority-white disparities in skill endowments. These skill endowments may be innate or acquired
during the lifetime of an individual. In this section we summarize evidence from the literature and
present original empirical work that demonstrates that minority-white cognitive skill gaps emerge
early and persist through childhood and the adolescent years.
Jencks and Phillips (1998) and Duncan and Brooks-Gunn (1997), among others, document
that the black-white test score gap is large for 3 and 4 year old children. Using the Children
of the NLSY79 (CNLSY) survey, a variety of studies show that even after controlling for many
variables like individual, family and neighborhood characteristics, the black-white test score gap
is still sizable. Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey (ECLS), Fryer and Levitt (2002)
eliminate the black-white test score gap in math and reading for children at the time they are
entering kindergarten, although not in subsequent years. However, the raw test score gaps at
ages 3 and 4 are much smaller in ECLS than in CNLSY and other data sets that have been
used to study this issue. These studies also document that there are large black-white diﬀerences
in family environments. Ferguson (2002a) summarizes this literature and presents evidence that

8

black children in the ECLS come from much poorer and less educated families than white children,
and they are also more likely to grow up in single parent households. Studies summarized in
Ferguson (2002b) find that the achievement gap is high even for blacks and whites attending high
quality suburban schools.6 The common finding across these studies is that the black-white gap
in test scores is large and that it persists even after one controls for family background variables.
Children of diﬀerent racial and ethnic groups grow up in strikingly diﬀerent environments. Even
after accounting for these environmental factors in a correlational sense, test score gaps tend to
persist. Furthermore, they tend to widen with age and schooling: black children show lower ability
growth with schooling or age than white children.
In this paper we present some evidence from CNLSY.7 We have also examined the ECLS and
the Children of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (CPSID) and found similar patterns. We
broaden previous analyses to include Hispanic-white diﬀerentials. Figures 2A-B shows the average
percentile PIAT Math8 scores for males and females in diﬀerent age groups by race. Racial and
ethnic gaps are found as early as ages 5 and 6 (the earliest ages at which we can measure math
scores in CNLSY data).9 On average, black 5- and 6-year old boys are almost 18 percentile points
below white 5- and 6-year old boys (i.e., if the average white is at the 50th percentile of the test
score distribution, the average black is at the 32nd percentile of this distribution). The gap is a bit
smaller—16 percent—but still substantial for Hispanics. The finding is similar for black and Hispanic
women who exhibit gaps of about 14 percent relative to whites. These findings are duplicated for
6

This is commonly referred to as the “Shaker Heights study,” although it analyzed many other similar
neighborhoods.
7
For a description of CNLSY and NLSY79 see BLS (2001).
8
The PIAT Math is the abbreviation for Peabody Individual Achievement Test in Mathematics. This test measures
the child’s attainment in mathematics as taught in mainstream education. It consists of 84 multiple choice questions
of increasing diﬃculty, beginning with recognizing numerals and progressing to geometry and trigonometry.
9
Instead of using raw scores or standardized scores we choose to use ranks, or percentiles, since test score scales
have no intrinsic meaning. Our results are not sensitive to this procedure.

9

many other test scores and in other data sets, and are not altered if we use median test scores
instead of means. Furthermore, as shown in figures 3A-B, even when we use a test taken at earlier
ages, racial gaps in test scores can be found at ages 1 and 2, though not always for women.10 In
general, we find that the test score gaps emerge early and persist through adulthood.
For simplicity, we will focus on means and medians in this paper. However, figures 1A-B and
4A-B illustrate that there is considerable overlap in the distribution of test scores across groups in
recent generations. Many black and Hispanic children at ages 5 and 6 score higher on a math test
score than the average white child. Statements that we make about medians or means do not apply
to all persons in the distributions.
Figures 2A-B also shows that the black-white percentile PIAT Math score gap widens with age.
By ages 13 to 14, the average black is ranked more than 22 percentiles below the average white.
In fact, it is well documented that these gaps persist until adulthood and beyond. At 13 to 14
Hispanic boys are still almost 16 points below the average white. For black and Hispanic girls, the
gap widens to 21% and 16%, respectively.
In summary, when blacks and Hispanics enter the labor market, on average, they have a much
poorer set of skills than whites. Thus it is not surprising that their average labor market outcomes
are so much worse. Furthermore, these skill gaps emerge very early in the life-cycle, persist, and if
anything, widen for some groups. Initial conditions (i.e., early test scores) are very important as
skill begets skill.
Even after controlling for numerous environmental and family background factors, the racial
and ethnic test score gaps remain for many of these tests at ages 3 and 4, and for virtually all the
10

Parts of the Body Test attempts to measure the young child’s receptive vocabulary knowledge of orally presented
words as a means of estimating intellectual development. The interviewer names each of ten body parts and asks
the child to point to that part of the body.

10

tests at later ages. Figures 5A-B show that, even after adjusting for measures of family background,
such as family long-term or “permanent” income and mother’s education, the mother’s cognitive
ability (as measured by age-corrected AFQT), and a measure of home environment called the home
score,11 the black-white gap in percentile PIAT Math scores at ages 5-6 is almost 8%, and at ages
13-14 is close to 11% for boys. Hispanic-white diﬀerentials are reduced more by such adjustments,
falling to 7% at ages 5-6 and to 4% at ages 13-14 for boys. For other tests, diﬀerentials frequently
become positive or statistically insignificant. For girls, the gaps in PIAT Math are reduced to about
5% at ages 5-6 by the same adjustment, though the Hispanic gap falls to 4% while the black gap
rises to 6% by age 13-14. Appendix tables 1A-1B report that even after controlling for diﬀerent
measures of home environments and child stimulation, the black-white test score gap persists even
though it drops considerably.12 Measured home and family environments play an important role in
the formation of these skills, although they are not the whole story.13 For females, both raw and
adjusted test score gaps are smaller than for males, but the overall story is the same.14
The evidence for Hispanics tells a diﬀerent story.15 Early test scores for blacks and Hispanics
are similar, although Hispanics often perform slightly better. Figure 2A shows that for the PIAT
11
The home score is the primary measure of the quality of a child’s home environment included in CNLSY. It
is composed of various measures of age-specific cognitive and emotional stimulation based on dichotomized and
summed responses from the mother’s self-report and interviewer observation. Some items included in the home
score are number of books, magazines, toys and musical recordings, how often mother reads to child, frequency of
family activities (eating, outings), methods of discipline and parenting, learning at home, television watching habits
and parental expectations for the child (chores, time use), home cleanliness and safety and types of mother-child
interactions.
12
Results for other tests and other samples can be found in http://lily.src.uchicago.edu/~dvmaster/Stanford.html.
Even though for some test scores early black-white test score gaps can be eliminated once we control for a large
number of characteristics, it is harder to eliminate them at later ages. In the analysis presented here the most
important variable in reducing the test score gap is mother’s cognitive ability, as measured by the AFQT.
13
However the Home Score includes variables such as the number of books, which are clearly choice variables and
likely to cause problems in this regression. The variables with the largest eﬀect on the minority-white test score gap
are maternal AFQT and raw home score.
14
See http://lily.src.uchicago.edu/~dvmaster/Stanford.html.
15
We already saw that wage gaps are completely eliminated for Hispanics when we control for AFQT, while they
persist for blacks.

11

Math score the Hispanic-black gap is about 2 percentile points.16 This is much smaller than either
the black-white or the Hispanic-white gap. For the PIAT Math test, the black-white gap widens
dramatically, especially at later ages, but the Hispanic-white gap does not change substantially
with age. For other tests, even when there is some widening of the Hispanic-white gap with age,
it tends to be smaller than the widening in the black-white gap in test scores. In particular, when
we look at the AFQT scores displayed in figures 1A-B, and which are measured using individuals
at ages 16-23, Hispanics clearly have higher scores than blacks. In contrast, figures 4A-B show a
strong similarity between the math scores of blacks and Hispanics at ages 5 and 6, although there
are other tests where, even at these early ages, Hispanics perform significantly better than blacks.
When we control for the eﬀects of home and family environments on test scores, the Hispanic-white
test score gap either decreases or is constant over time while the black-white test score tends to
widen with age.
Racial ability gaps open up very early. Home and family environments at early ages, and even
the mother’s behavior during pregnancy, are likely to play crucial roles in the child’s development,
and black children grow up in significantly more disadvantaged environments than white children.
Figure 6 shows the distributions of long-term or “permanent” family income for blacks, whites and
Hispanics. Minority children are much more likely to grow up in low income families than are white
children. Figure 7 shows the distribution of maternal education across race and ethnic groups.
Even though the overlap in the distributions is large, white children have more educated mothers
than do minority children. The distribution of maternal AFQT scores, shown in figure 8, is again
very diﬀerent for minority and white children. Maternal AFQT is a major predictor of children’s
16

The test score is measured in percentile rank The black-white gap is slightly below 18 while the Hispanic-white
gap is slightly below 16. This means that the black-Hispanic gap should be around 2.

12

test scores.17 Figure 9 document that white mothers are much more likely to read to their children
at young ages than are minority mothers, and we obtain similar results at young ages.18 Using
this reading variable and other variables in CNLSY such as number of books, magazines, toys
and musical recordings, family activities (eating, outings), methods of discipline and parenting,
learning at home, TV watching habits, parental expectations for the child (chores, time use), and
home cleanliness and safety, we can construct an index of cognitive and emotional stimulation—the
home score. Figure 10 shows that this index is always higher for whites than for minorities.19
Figure 11 shows that blacks are the most likely to grow up in broken homes. Hispanics are less
likely than blacks to grow up in a broken home, although they are much more likely to do so
than are whites. The research surveyed in Carneiro and Heckman (2003) suggests that enhanced
cognitive stimulation at early ages is likely to produce some achievement test gains in children from
disadvantaged environments, although long lasting eﬀects of such interventions on IQ are not found.
The fact that racial and ethnic test score gaps open up early casts doubt on the empirical
importance of the stereotype threat. It is now fashionable in some circles to attribute gaps in black
test scores to racial consciousness on the part of black test takers stemming from the way test scores
are used in public discourse to describe minorities. Stereotype threats could not have been important
when blacks took the first IQ tests at the beginning of the twentieth century which documented
the racial diﬀerentials that gave rise to the stereotype. Yet racial IQ gaps are comparable across
time.20 Young children, like the ones studied in this paper, are unlikely to have the heightened racial
17

For example, the correlation between percentile PIAT math score and age-corrected maternal AFQT is 0.4.
See the results for all ages in http://lily.src.uchicago.edu/~dvmaster/Stanford.html.
19
In http://lily.src.uchicago.edu/~dvmaster/Stanford.html, we document that both cognitive and emotional stimulation indexes are always higher for whites than for blacks at all ages.
20
Murray (1999) reviews the evidence on the evolution of the black-white IQ gap. In the 1920s—a time when such
tests were much more unrealiable and black educational attainment much lower—the mean black-white diﬀerence
was 0.86 standard deviations. The largest black-white diﬀerence appears in the 1960s, with a mean black-white
diﬀerence of 1.28 standard deviations. The diﬀerence ranges from a low of 0.82 standard deviations in the 1930s to
18

13

consciousness about tests and their social significance of the sort found by Steele and Aronson (1998)
in college students at a few elite universities. Moreover, sizable gaps are found for young Hispanic
males—a group for which the “stereotype” threat remains to be investigated.

3

The Diﬀerential Eﬀect of Schooling on Test Scores

The previous section shows that cognitive test scores are correlated with home and family environments. We referenced research that suggests that test score gaps increase with age and schooling,
and presented fresh evidence on this issue. The research of Hansen, Heckman and Mullen (2003)
shows that the AFQT test scores used by Neal and Johnson are aﬀected by schooling attainment
of individuals at the time they take the test. Therefore, one reason for the divergence of black and
white test scores over time may be diﬀerential schooling attainments. Figure 12 shows the schooling
completed at the test date for the six demographic groups used in the Neal and Johnson sample.
Blacks have slightly less completed schooling at test date than whites, but substantially more than
Hispanics. There are substantial schooling deficits for minorities.
Table 2 presents the eﬀect of schooling at test date on AFQT scores for individuals in diﬀerent
demographic groups in the NLSY, using a version of the nonparametric method developed in Hansen,
Heckman and Mullen (2003). Their method isolates the causal eﬀect of schooling attained at the test
date on test scores controlling for unobserved factors that lead to selective diﬀerences in schooling
attainment. This table shows clearly that the eﬀect of schooling on test scores is much higher for
whites and Hispanics than it is for blacks over most ranges of schooling. As a result, even though
Hispanics have fewer years of completed schooling at the time they take the AFQT test than blacks
1.12 standard deviations in the 1970s. However, none of the samples prior to 1960 are nationally representative, and
the samples were often chosen so as to eﬀectively bias the black mean upward.

14

(see figure 12), on average Hispanics score better on the AFQT than do blacks.
There are diﬀerent explanations for these facts. Carneiro and Heckman (2003) suggest that
one important feature of the learning process may be complementarity between endowment human
capital and learning.21 Higher levels of human capital raise the productivity of learning.22 If
minorities and whites start school with very diﬀerent initial conditions (as documented in the
previous section), their learning paths can diverge dramatically over time. Another explanation
may be that blacks and non-blacks learn at diﬀerent rates because blacks attend lower quality
schools than whites.
Currie and Thomas (2000) show that test score gains of participants in the Head Start program
tend to fade completely for blacks but not for whites. Their paper suggests that one reason may
be that blacks attend worse schools than whites, and therefore blacks are not able to maintain
initial test score gains. Both early advantages and disadvantages as well as school quality are
likely to be important factors in the human capital accumulation process. Therefore, diﬀerential
initial conditions and diﬀerential school quality may also be important determinants of the adult
black-white skill gap.
In light of the greater growth in test scores of Hispanics that are parallel to those of whites,
these explanations are not completely compelling. Hispanics start from similar initial disadvantages
in family environments and face school and neighborhood environments similar to those faced by
blacks.23 They also have early levels of test scores similar to those found in the black population.
What are the consequences of correcting for diﬀerent levels of schooling at the test date? To
answer this question, we reanalyze Neal and Johnson’s 1996 study using AFQT scores corrected for
21

For example, see the Ben-Porath (1967) model.
See the evidence in the paper by Heckman, Lochner and Taber (1998).
23
The evidence for CNLSY is presented on lily.src.uchicago.edu/~dvmaster/Stanford.html.
22

15

the race- or ethnicity-specific eﬀect of schooling while equalizing the years of schooling attained at
the date of the test across all racial/ethnic groups. The results of this adjustment are given in table
3. This adjustment is equivalent to replacing each individual’s AFQT score by the score we would
measure if he or she would have stopped his or her formal education after eighth grade. (However,
the score is itself already aﬀected by attendance in kindergarten, eight further years of schooling,
and any school quality diﬀerentials in those years.) In other words, we use “eighth grade” AFQT
scores for everyone. Since the eﬀect of schooling on test scores is higher for whites than for blacks,
and whites have more schooling than blacks at the date of the test, this adjustment reduces the
test scores of whites much more. Although the black-white male wage gap is still cut in half when
we use this new measure of skill, the eﬀect of AFQT on reducing the wage gap is weaker than in
the original Neal and Johnson (1996) study. The adjustment has little eﬀect on the Hispanic-white
wage gap but a wage gap for black women emerges when using the schooling adusted measure.
This finding does not necessarily invalidate the Neal-Johnson study. It shows that schooling
can partially reduce the ability gap. It raises the larger question of what a “pre-market” factor
is. Neal and Johnson do not condition on schooling in explaining black-white wage gaps, arguing
that schooling is aﬀected by expectations of adverse market opportunities facing minorities and
conditioning on such a contaminated variable would spuriously reduce the estimated wage gap. We
present direct evidence on this claim below.
Their line of argument is not entirely coherent. If expectations of discrimination aﬀect schooling,
the very logic of their “pre-market” argument suggests that they should control for the impact of
schooling on test scores when using test scores to properly account for premarket factors. As we
have seen, when this is done, the wage gap (conditional on ability adjusted by schooling) widens
substantially for blacks. There is still little evidence of discrimination for Hispanic females, but the
16

evidence for Hispanic males comes close to demonstrating discrimination.
Implicitly, Neal and Johnson assume that schooling at the date of the test is not aﬀected by
expectations of discrimination in the market while later schooling is. This distinction is arbitrary.
A deeper investigation of the expectation formation process and feedback is required. One practical
conclusion with important implications for the interpretation of the evidence is that the magnitude
of the wage gap one can eliminate by performing a Neal-Johnson analysis may depend on the age
at which the test is measured. The earlier the test is measured, the smaller the test score gap, and
the larger the fraction of the wage gap that is unexplained by the residual. Figures 13A-D show
how adjusting measured ability for schooling at the test at diﬀerent levels aﬀects the adjusted wage
gap for black males. For example, the log wage gap corresponding to grade of AFQT correction
equal to 11 is the log wage gap we obtain when use “eleventh grade” test scores. The later the
grade to which we adjust the test score, the lower the estimated gap because the greater the gap in
measured ability.
Finally we show that adjusting for expectations-contaminated completed schooling does not
operate in the fashion conjectured by Neal and Johnson. Table 4 shows that when we adjust wage
diﬀerences for completed schooling as well as schooling-adjusted AFQT, wage gaps widen. This runs
contrary to the simple intuition that schooling embodies expectations of market discrimination, so
that conditioning on it will eliminate wage gaps.24
Ours is a worst-case analysis for the Neal-Johnson study. If we assign all racial and ethnic
schooling diﬀerences to expectations of discrimination in the labor market, their results for blacks are
24

The simple intuition, however, can easily be shown to be wrong so the evidence in these tables is not decisive on
the presence of discrimination in the labor market. The basic idea is that if both schooling and the test score are
correlated with an unmeasured discrimination component in the error term, the bias for the race dummy may be
either positive or negative depending on the strength of the correlation among the contaminated variables and their
correlation with the error term.

17

less sharp. Yet the evidence presented in Section 2 about the early emergence of ability diﬀerentials
is reinforced by the early emergence of diﬀerential grade repetition gaps by minorities (documented
by Cameron and Heckman, 2001). Most of the schooling gap at the date of the test emerges in the
early years, which child expectations are unlikely to be operative. Of course, one can always argue
that these early schooling and ability gaps are due to parental expectations of poor labor markets
for minority children. We examine data on parental expectations next.

4

The Role of Expectations

The argument that minorities perform worse on tests because they expect to be less well rewarded
in the labor market than whites for the same test score or schooling level is implausible because
expectations of labor market rewards are unlikely to aﬀect the behavior of children as early as
ages 3 or 4 when test score gaps are substantial. The argument that minorities invest less in skills
because both minority children and minority parents have low expectations about their performance
in school and in the labor market has mixed empirical backing.
Data on expectations are hard to find, and when they are available they are diﬃcult to interpret.
For example, in the NLSY97, black 17- and 18-year old report that the probability of dying next
year is 22% while for whites it is 16%. Both numbers are absurdly high. Minorities usually report
higher expectations than whites of committing a crime, being incarcerated and being dead next
year, and these adverse expectations may reduce their investment in human capital. Expectations
reported by parents and children for the child adolescent years for a variety of outcomes are given
in Table 5. Some estimates are plausible, while many others are not.
Schooling expectations measured in the late teenage years are very similar for minorities and

18

whites. They are slightly lower for Hispanics. Table 6A reports the mean expected probability
of being enrolled in school next year, for black, white and Hispanic 17- to 18-year old males.
Among those individuals enrolled in 1997, on average whites expect to be enrolled next year with
95.7% probability. Blacks expect that they will be enrolled next year with a 93.6% probability.
Hispanics expect to be enrolled with a 91.5% probability. If expectations about the labor market
were adverse for minorities, they should translate into adverse expectations for the child’s education.
Yet these data do not reveal this. Moreover, all groups substantially overestimate actual enrollment
probabilities. The diﬀerence in expectations between blacks and whites is very small, and is less
than half the diﬀerence in actual (realized) enrollment probabilities (81.9% for whites versus 76.4%
for blacks). The gap is wider for Hispanics. Table 6B reports parental schooling expectations for
white, black and Hispanic males for the same individuals used to present the numbers in Table 6A. It
shows that, conditional on being enrolled in 1997 (the year the expectation question is asked), black
parents expect their sons to be enrolled next year with a 90.9% probability, while for whites this
expectation is 95.4%. For Hispanics this number is lower (88.5%). Parents overestimate enrollment
probabilities for their sons, but black parents have lower expectations than white parents. For
females the racial and ethnic diﬀerences in parental expectations are smaller than those for males.25
For expectations measured at earlier ages the story is dramatically diﬀerent. Figures 14A-B show
that, for the CNLSY, both black and Hispanic children and their parents have more pessimistic
expectations about schooling than white children, and more pessimistic expectations may lead to
lower investments in skills, less eﬀort in schooling and lower ability. These patterns are also found
in the CPSID and ECLS.26 It is curious that for CNLSY teenagers expectations seem to converge
25
26

See http://lily.src.uchicago.edu/~dvmaster/Stanford.html.
See http://lily.src.uchicago.edu/~dvmaster/Stanford.html.

19

at later ages (see figure 14C).
If the more pessimistic expectations of minorities are a result of market discrimination, then lower
investments in children that translate into lower levels of ability and skill at later ages are a result
of market discrimination. Ability would not be a premarket factor. However, lower expectations
for minorities may not be a result of discrimination but just a rational response to the fact that
minorities do not do as well in school as whites. This may be due to environmental factors unrelated
to expectations of discrimination in the labor market. Whether this phenomenon itself is a result
of discrimination is an open question. Expectation formation models are very complex and often
lead to multiple equilibria, and therefore they are diﬃcult to test empirically.
Expectations are likely to play a very important role in the skill investment behavior of both
parents and children. Nevertheless, they are hard to measure, and data on them are often unreliable
or diﬃcult to interpret. Across demographic groups, schooling expectations are in general unrealistically optimistic although the degree of optimism varies by age. This is true at diﬀerent ages, and
whether one measures expectations of parents or of their children. Since minorities perform much
more poorly than whites in terms of their schooling outcomes, relative expectations (expectation
minus actual probability of the event) tend to be much higher for minorities than for whites.

5

The Evidence on Non-Cognitive Skills

Controlling for scholastic ability in accounting for minority-majority wage gaps captures only part
of the endowment diﬀerences between groups but receives most of the emphasis in the literature on
black-white gaps (see Jencks and Phillips, 1998). An emerging body of evidence, summarized in
Bowles, Gintis and Osborne (2001) and Carneiro and Heckman (2003), documents that noncognitive

20

skills—motivation, self control, time preference, social skills—are important in explaining socioeconomic success and diﬀerentials in socioeconomic success.
Some of the best evidence for the importance of noncognitive skills in the labor market is from
the GED (General Education Development) program. This program examines high school dropouts
to certify that they are equivalent to high school graduates. In its own terms, the GED program
is successful. Heckman and Rubinstein (2001) show that GED recipients and ordinary high school
graduates who do not go on to college have the same distribution of AFQT scores (the same test
that is graphed in figure 1). They are psychometrically equated. Yet GED recipients earn the wages
of high school dropouts with the same number of years of completed schooling. They are more likely
to quit their jobs, engage in fighting or petty crime, or to be discharged from the military, than
are high school graduates who do not go on to college or other high school dropouts (see Heckman
and Rubinstein, 2001). Intelligence alone is not suﬃcient for socioeconomic success. Minority-white
gaps in noncognitive skills open up early and widen over the lifecycle.
The CNLSY has lifecycle measures of noncognitive skills. Mothers are asked age specific questions about the anti-social behavior of their children such as aggressiveness or violent behavior,
cheating or lying, disobedience, peer conflicts and social withdrawal. The answers to these questions are grouped in diﬀerent indices.27 Figures 15A-B shows that there are important racial and
ethnic gaps in anti-social behavior index that emerge in early childhood. By ages 5 and 6, the
average black is roughly 10 percentile points above the average white in the distribution of this
27

The children’s mothers were asked 28 age-specific questions about frequency, range and type of specific behavior
problems that children age four and over may have exhibited in the previous three months. Factor analysis was used
to determine six clusters of questions. The responses for each cluster were then dichotomized and summed. The
Antisocial Behavior index we use in this paper consists of measures of cheating and telling lies, bullying and cruelty
to others, not feeling sorry for misbehaving, breaking things deliberately (if age is less than 12), disobedience at
school (if age is grater than 5), and trouble getting along with teachers (if age is greater than 5).

21

score (the higher the score, the worse the behavior).28 The results shown in Figures 16A-B— where
we adjust the gaps by permanent family income, mother’s education and age-corrected AFQT and
home score—also show large reductions.29
In Section 2 we documented that minority and white children face sharp diﬀerences in family
and home environments while growing up. The evidence presented in this section shows that these
early environmental diﬀerences can account (in a correlational sense) for most of the minority-white
gap in noncognitive skills, as measured in CNLSY.
Carneiro and Heckman (2003) document that noncognitive skills are more malleable than cognitive skills. In their paper they report that noncognitive skill gaps can be eliminated by equalization
of family and home environments, while cognitive skill gaps cannot, even though they can be sharply
reduced. The largest eﬀects of interventions in childhood and adolescence are on noncognitive skills.
Improvements in these skills produce better labor market outcomes, less engagement in criminal
activities and other risky behavior. This is an avenue for policy that warrants much greater attention.

6

Summary and Conclusion

This paper discusses the sources of wage gaps between minorities and whites. For all minorities but
black males, adjusting for the ability that minorities bring to the market eliminates wage gaps. The
major source of economic disparity by race and ethnicity in U.S. labor markets is in endowments,
not in payments to endowments.
28

In http://lily.src.uchicago.edu, we show that these diﬀerences are statistically strong. Once we control for family
and home environments, gaps in most behavioral indices disappear.
29
See Appendix Tables 2A-2B for the eﬀect of adjusting for other environmental characteristics on the anti-social
behavior score.

22

This evidence suggests that strengthened civil rights and aﬃrmative action policies targeted at
the labor market are unlikely to have much eﬀect on racial and ethnic wage gaps, except possibly for
those specifically targeted toward black males. Policies that foster endowments have much greater
promise. On the other hand, this paper does not provide any empirical evidence on whether or not
the existing edifice of civil rights and aﬃrmative action legislation should be abolished. All of our
evidence on wages is for an environment where aﬃrmative action laws and regulations are in place.
Minority deficits in cognitive and noncognitive skills emerge early and widen. Unequal schooling, neighborhoods and peers may account for this diﬀerential growth in skills, but the main story
in the data is not about growth rates but rather about the size of early deficits. Hispanic children
start with cognitive and noncognitive deficits similar to those of black children. They also grow up
in similar disadvantaged environments, and are likely to attend schools of similar quality. Hispanics
have substantially less schooling than blacks. Nevertheless, the ability growth by years of schooling
is much higher for Hispanics than blacks. By the time they reach adulthood, Hispanics have significantly higher test scores than blacks. Conditional on test scores, there is no Hispanic-white wage
gap. Our analysis of the Hispanic data illuminates the traditional study of black-white diﬀerences
and casts doubt on many conventional explanations of these diﬀerences since they do not apply to
Hispanics who also suﬀer from many of the same disadvantages. The failure of the Hispanic-white
gap to widen with schooling or age casts doubt on poor schools and bad neighborhoods as the
reasons for the slow growth rate in black test scores, since Hispanics experience the same kinds of
poor schools and bad neighborhoods experienced by blacks. Deficits in noncognitive skills can be
explained (in a statistical sense) by adverse early environments; deficits in cognitive skills are less
easily eliminated by the same factors.
Neal and Johnson (1996) were the first to document that endowments acquired before people
23

enter the market explain most of the minority-majority wage gap. They use an ability test taken
in the teenage years as a measure of endowment unaﬀected by discrimination. In this paper,
we note that the distinction between “premarket” factors unaﬀected by expectations of market
discrimination and “market” factors so aﬀected is an arbitrary one. Occupational choice is likely
aﬀected by discrimination. The proper treatment of schooling is less clear-cut. Neal and Johnson
purposely omit schooling in adjusting for racial and ethnic wage gaps, arguing that schooling choices
are potentially contaminated by expectations of labor market discrimination. Yet they do not
adjust their measure of ability by the schooling attained at the date of the test, which would be the
appropriate correction if their argument were correct. The literature establishes that their measure
of ability is aﬀected by this measure of schooling.
Adjusting wage gaps by completed schooling and the adjusted test widens wage gaps for all
groups, but has especially strong eﬀects for blacks. At issue is how much of the diﬀerence in
schooling at the date of the test is due to expectations of labor market discrimination and how much
is due to adverse early environments. While this paper does not settle this question definitively, test
score gaps emerge early and are more plausibly linked to adverse early environments. The lion’s
share of the ability gaps at the date of the test emerge very early, before children can have clear
expectations about their labor market prospects.
The emergence of test score gaps in young children casts serious doubt on the importance of
“stereotype threats” in accounting for poorer black test scores. It is implausible that young minority
test takers have the social consciousness assumed in the stereotype literature.
Moreover, gaps in test scores of the magnitude found in recent studies were found in the earliest
tests before the results of testing were disseminated. Eﬀective social policy designed to eliminate
racial and ethnic inequality for most minorities should focus on eliminating skill gaps, not on
24

discrimination in the workplace of the early Twenty-First Century. Interventions targeted at adults
are much less eﬀective and do not compensate for early deficits. Early interventions aimed at young
children hold much greater promise than strengthened legal activism in the workplace.30

30

See Carneiro and Heckman (2003) for the evidence on early interventions and later remedial interventions.

25

References
[1] Altonji, Joseph and Rebecca Blank, (1999). “Gender and Race in the Labor Market,” in O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card, Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3C. (New York, NY: Elsevier
Science Press).
[2] Ben-Porath, Yoram (1967). “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle Earnings,”
Journal of Political Economy, 75(4, part 1): 352-365.
[3] Black, Sandra E. and Amir Sufi (2002). “Who Goes to College? Diﬀerential Enrollment by
Race and Family Background,” NBER Working Paper no. w9310.
[4] Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) (2001). NLS Handbook 2001. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor.
[5] Cameron, Steve and James J. Heckman, (2001).“The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for
Blacks, Whites and Hispanics,” Journal of Political Economy 109(3) (2001), 455-499.
[6] Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman, (2003). “Human Capital Policy,” Forthcoming in J.
Heckman and A. Krueger (eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policy?
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
[7] Cawley, John, James J. Heckman and Edward Vytlacil, (1999). “On Policies to Reward the
Value Added by Educators,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4): 720-728.
[8] Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas. (2000). “School Quality and the Longer-Term Eﬀects of
Head Start,” Journal of Human Resources, 35(4): 755-74.

26

[9] Duncan, Greg, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. (1997). Consequences of Growing Up Poor. (New
York: Russell Sage).
[10] Ferguson, Ronald (2002a), “Why America’s Black-White School Achievement Gap Persists,”
Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University, 2002.
[11] Ferguson, Ronald (2002b), “What Doesn’t Meet the Eye: Understanding and Addressing
Racial Disparities in High Achieving Suburban Schools,” Special Edition, Policy Issues Report, (Naperville, IL: North Central Regional Educational Laboratory).
[12] Fryer, Roland, and Steven Levitt. (2002). “Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in
the First Two Years of School,” NBER working paper no. 8975.
[13] Hansen, Karsten, James J. Heckman and Kathleen Mullen, (2003). “The Eﬀect of Schooling
and Ability on Achievement Test Scores,” Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.
[14] Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner and Christopher Taber, (1998). “Explaining Rising Wage
Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with
Heterogeneous Agents,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1(1): 1-58.
[15] Heckman, James J. and Yona Rubinstein, (2001). “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills:
Lessons from the GED Testing Program,” American Economic Review, 91(2): 145-49.
[16] Heckman, J., J. Hsee and Y. Rubinstein (2003). “The GED is a ‘Mixed Signal’: The Eﬀect of
Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills on Human Capital and Labor Market Outcomes,” working
paper, University of Chicago.

27

[17] Heckman, James J. and Petra Todd, (2001). “Understanding the Contribution of Legislation,
Social Activism, Markets and Choice to the Economic Progress of African Americans in the
Twentieth Century,” Unpublished manuscript, American Bar Foundation, Chicago, IL.
[18] Herrnstein, Richard and Charles Murray, (1994). The Bell Curve : Intelligence and class structure in American life. (New York: Free Press).
[19] Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips (1998),The Black-White Test Score Gap. (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution).
[20] Murray, Charles (1999). “The Secular Increase in IQ and Longitudinal Changes in the Magnitude of the Black-White Diﬀerence: Evidence from the NLSY,” paper presented to the Behavior
Genetics Association Meeting.
[21] Neal, Derek (2003), “The Measured Black-White Wage Gap among Women is Too Small,”
working paper, University of Chicago.
[22] Neal, Derek and William Johnson (1996), “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
Wage Diﬀerences,” Journal of Political Economy 104(5): 869-95.
[23] Steele, Claude and Joshua Aronson (1998), “Stereotype Threat and the Test Performance of
Academically Successful African Americans,” in C. Jencks and M. Phillips, eds., The BlackWhite Test Score Gap, (Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution), pp. 401-427..
[24] Urzua, Sergio (2003), “The Educational White-Black Gap: Evidence on Years of Schooling”,
Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

28

Table 1
Change in the Black-White Log Wage Gap Induced by Controlling for Age-Corrected AFQT in 1990-2000
Panel A. NLSY Men Born After 1961
Year
Black
Hispanic
Age
AFQT
AFQT2
Intercept
N

1990
I
-0.250
(0.028)
-0.174
(0.032)
2.375
(0.017)
1538

II
-0.060
(0.030)
-0.035
(0.032)
0.050
(0.014)
0.183
(0.013)
-0.022
(0.011)
0.957
(0.385)
1505

1991
I
-0.251
(0.028)
-0.113
(0.032)
2.372
(0.017)
1553

II
-0.082
(0.030)
0.020
(0.033)
0.030
(0.014)
0.161
(0.013)
-0.007
(0.011)
1.463
(0.406)
1514

1992
I
-0.302
(0.029)
-0.146
(0.033)
2.404
(0.017)
1536

II
-0.113
(0.030)
-0.014
(0.032)
0.038
(0.014)
0.179
(0.013)
-0.001
(0.011)
1.202
(0.422)
1503

1993
I
II
-0.282
-0.104
(0.028)
(0.030)
-0.159
-0.027
(0.032)
(0.032)
0.030
(0.014)
0.172
(0.013)
0.002
(0.011)
2.423
1.431
(0.017)
(0.432)
1542
1504

1994
I
II
-0.286
-0.093
(0.031)
(0.033)
-0.143
0.005
(0.036)
(0.036)
0.023
(0.016)
0.188
(0.014)
0.014
(0.012)
2.458
1.652
(0.018)
(0.488)
1522
1485

1996
I
II
-0.373
-0.149
(0.032)
(0.034)
-0.186
-0.031
(0.038)
(0.038)
0.020
(0.016)
0.216
(0.015)
0.021
(0.013)
2.533
1.756
(0.019)
(0.540)
1554
1519

1998
I
II
-0.333
-0.069
(0.034)
(0.035)
-0.195
-0.006
(0.040)
(0.038)
0.014
(0.017)
0.254
(0.015)
0.032
(0.013)
2.589
1.960
(0.020)
(0.594)
1494
1462

2000
I
II
-0.325
-0.089
(0.035)
(0.035)
-0.215
-0.053
(0.040)
(0.038)
0.008
(0.017)
0.241
(0.015)
0.023
(0.013)
2.629
2.224
(0.020)
(0.621)
1438
1404

1996
I
II
-0.147
0.132
(0.035)
(0.036)
-0.006
0.193
(0.041)
(0.039)
-0.009
(0.018)
0.283
(0.018)
0.005
(0.015)
2.246
2.412
(0.022)
(0.582)
1381
1344

1998
I
II
-0.201
0.071
(0.034)
(0.036)
-0.069
0.151
(0.039)
(0.039)
0.013
(0.017)
0.274
(0.018)
0.000
(0.015)
2.311
1.724
(0.021)
(0.603)
1370
1329

2000
I
II
-0.200
0.069
(0.036)
(0.038)
-0.064
0.149
(0.041)
(0.041)
-0.018
(0.018)
0.273
(0.018)
-0.008
(0.015)
2.339
2.867
(0.022)
(0.663)
1316
1276

Panel B. NLSY Women Born After 1961
Year:
Black
Hispanic
Age
AFQT
AFQT2
Intercept
N

1990
I
-0.172
(0.031)
-0.003
(0.035)
2.141
(0.019)
1356

II
0.041
(0.033)
0.154
(0.035)
0.010
(0.015)
0.217
(0.016)
0.005
(0.014)
1.750
(0.420)
1325

1991
I
-0.200
(0.032)
-0.017
(0.037)
2.175
(0.020)
1335

II
0.030
(0.035)
0.153
(0.038)
0.038
(0.017)
0.234
(0.018)
0.000
(0.014)
0.982
(0.467)
1299

1992
I
-0.201
(0.031)
-0.059
(0.036)
2.193
(0.019)
1317

II
0.010
(0.033)
0.114
(0.035)
0.016
(0.016)
0.229
(0.017)
-0.001
(0.014)
1.615
(0.458)
1278

1993
I
II
-0.167
0.093
(0.035)
(0.037)
0.009
0.198
(0.039)
(0.039)
0.016
(0.017)
0.271
(0.018)
-0.012
(0.015)
2.174
1.558
(0.021)
(0.520)
1319
1281

1994
I
II
-0.148
0.099
(0.035)
(0.037)
-0.018
0.170
(0.040)
(0.040)
0.008
(0.018)
0.267
(0.019)
-0.024
(0.016)
2.218
1.858
(0.022)
(0.555)
1318
1288

Age-corrected AFQT is the standardized residual from the regression of the AFQT score on age at the time of the test dummy variables. AFQT is a subset of 4 out of 10 ASVAB tests used
by the military for enlistment screening and job assignment. It is the summed score from the word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, mathematics knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning
ASVAB tests. All wages are in 1993 dollars. The coefficients on the AFQT variables represent the effect of a one standard deviation increase in the score on the log hourly wage. Since the
wage is measured in log points, the gaps for blacks and hispanics correspond approximately to percentage point differences relative to the white mean; that is, the black-white gap of -.25 in
1990 corresponds to 25% lower wages for blacks in that year.

Figure 1A
Density of Age−Corrected AFQT

0

.1

Density

.2

.3

NLSY79 Males Born After 1961

−4

−3

−2
White

−1
0
1
Standardized Score
Black

2

3

Hispanic

Age−corrected AFQT is the standardized residual from the regression of the AFQT score on age at the
time of the test dummy variables. AFQT is a subset of 4 out of 10 ASVAB tests used by the military
for enlistment screening and job assignment. It is the summed score from the word knowledge, paragraph
comprehension, mathematics knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning ASVAB tests.

4

Figure 1B
Density of Age−Corrected AFQT

0

.1

Density

.2

.3

NLSY79 Females Born After 1961

−4

−3

−2
White

−1
0
1
Standardized Score
Black

2

3

Hispanic

Age−corrected AFQT is the standardized residual from the regression of the AFQT score on age at the
time of the test dummy variables. AFQT is a subset of 4 out of 10 ASVAB tests used by the military
for enlistment screening and job assignment. It is the summed score from the word knowledge, paragraph
comprehension, mathematics knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning ASVAB tests.

4

Figure 2A
Percentile PIAT Math Score By Race and Age Group
Children of NLSY79 Males
Average Percentile Score

60
55
50
45
40
5−6

7−8
Hispanic

9−10
Child’s Age
Black

11−12

13−14
White

This test measures the child’s attainment in mathematics as taught in mainstream education. It consists of 84
multiple−choice questions of increasing difficulty, beginning with recognizing numerals and progressing to
geometry and trigonometry. The percentile score was calculated separately for each sex at each age.
span

Figure 2B
Percentile PIAT Math Score By Race and Age Group
Children of NLSY79 Females
Average Percentile Score

60
55
50
45
40
5−6

7−8
Hispanic

9−10
Child’s Age
Black

11−12

13−14
White

This test measures the child’s attainment in mathematics as taught in mainstream education. It consists of 84
multiple−choice questions of increasing difficulty, beginning with recognizing numerals and progressing to
geometry and trigonometry. The percentile score was calculated separately for each sex at each age.
span

Figure 3A
Average Percentile Parts of the Body Score By Race and Age
Children of NLSY79 Males
Average Percentile Score

50
45
40
35
30
1

2
Child’s Age
Hispanic

Black

3
White

This test attempts to measure the young child’s receptive vocabulary knowledge of orally presented words as a means
of estimating intellectual development. The interviewer names each of ten body parts and asks the child to point to that
part of the body. The score is computed by summing the number of correct responses. The percentile score was calculated
separately for each sex at each age.

Figure 3B
Average Percentile Parts of the Body Score By Race and Age
Children of NLSY79 Females
Average Percentile Score

60
50
40
30
20
1

2
Child’s Age
Hispanic

Black

3
White

This test attempts to measure the young child’s receptive vocabulary knowledge of orally presented words as a means
of estimating intellectual development. The interviewer names each of ten body parts and asks the child to point to that
part of the body. The score is computed by summing the number of correct responses. The percentile score was calculated
separately for each sex at each age.

Figure 4A
Density of Percentile PIAT Math Scores at Ages 5−6

0

Density
.005
.01

.015

CNLSY 79 Males

0

10

20

30

White

40
50
60
Percentile Score
Black

70

80

90

100

Hispanic

This test measures the child’s attainment in mathematics as taught in mainstream education. It consists of 84
multiple−choice questions of increasing difficulty, beginning with recognizing numerals and progressing to
geometry and trigonometry. The percentile score was calculated separately for each sex at each age.

Figure 4B
Density of Percentile PIAT Math Scores at Ages 5−6
Density
.002 .004 .006 .008 .01 .012

CNLSY 79 Females

0

10

20

30

White

40
50
60
Percentile Score
Black

70

80

90

100

Hispanic

This test measures the child’s attainment in mathematics as taught in mainstream education. It consists of 84
multiple−choice questions of increasing difficulty, beginning with recognizing numerals and progressing to
geometry and trigonometry. The percentile score was calculated separately for each sex at each age.

Figure 5A
Adjusted Percentile PIAT Math Score By Race and Age Group
Average Percentile Score

Children of NLSY79 Males
55
50
45
40
5−6

7−8
Hispanic

9−10
Child’s Age
Black

11−12

13−14
White

Adjusted by permanent family income, mother’s education and age−corrected AFQT, and home score.
Adjusted indicates that we equalized the family background characteristics across all race groups by setting them at
the mean to purge the effect of family environment disparities. Permanent income is constructed by taking the average
of annual family income discounted to child’s age 0 using a 10% discount rate. Age−corrected AFQT is the standardized
residual from the regression of the AFQT score on age at the time of the test dummy variables. Home score is an
index of quality of the child’s home environment.

Figure 5B
Adjusted Percentile PIAT Math Score By Race and Age Group
Average Percentile Score

Children of NLSY79 Females
54
52
50
48
46
44
5−6

7−8
Hispanic

9−10
Child’s Age
Black

11−12

13−14
White

Adjusted by permanent family income, mother’s education and age−corrected AFQT, and home score.
Adjusted indicates that we equalized the family background characteristics across all race groups by setting them at
the mean to purge the effect of family environment disparities. Permanent income is constructed by taking the average
of annual family income discounted to child’s age 0 using a 10% discount rate. Age−corrected AFQT is the standardized
residual from the regression of the AFQT score on age at the time of the test dummy variables. Home score is an
index of quality of the child’s home environment.

Figure 6
Density of Log Permanent Income

0

.1

Density
.2
.3

.4

.5

CNLSY 79 Males and Females

0

5
White

10
Log of Permanent Income
Black

Permanent income is constructed by taking the average of annual family
income discounted to child’s age 0 using a 10% discount rate.

15
Hispanic

Figure 7
Density of Mother’s Highest Grade Completed

0

.05

Density

.1

.15

CNLSY79 Males and Females

0

5

10
Highest Grade Completed

Hispanic

Black

15

20
White

Figure 8
Density of Mother’s Age−Corrected AFQT

0

.1

Density
.2
.3

.4

.5

CNLSY79 Males and Females

−4

−2
Hispanic

0
Standardized Score
Black

2

4
White

Age−corrected AFQT is the standardized residual from the regression of the AFQT score on age at the
time of the test dummy variables. AFQT is a subset of 4 out of 10 ASVAB tests used by the military
for enlistment screening and job assignment. It is the summed score from the word knowledge, paragraph
comprehension, mathematics knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning ASVAB tests.

Figure 9
How Often Mother Reads to Child at Age 2
by Race and Sex
CNLSY79
Male

Female

Hispanic

Hispanic

Black

Black

White

White
0

.2

.4

.6

0

.2

.4

.6

Fraction
Never
Several Times a Month
About 3 Times a Week

Several Times a Year
Once A Week
Every Day

The height of the bar is produced by dividing the number of people who report falling in a particular reading frequency cell
by the total number of people in their race−sex group

Figure 10
Density of Home Score

0

Density
.002 .004 .006 .008

.01

CNLSY79 Males and Females

0

100
Hispanic

Raw Home Score

200

Black

Home Score is an index of the quality of a child’s home environment included in CNLSY79.
It consists of various measures of age−specific cognitive and emotional stimulation based
on dichotomized and summed responses to mother’s self−report and interviewer observation.

300
White

Figure 11
Fraction of Children Who Live in a Broken Home by Age and Race
CNLSY79 Males and Females
Fraction With Broken Home

.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

Hispanic Children

5

6
7
8
Child’s Age

9

Black Children

10

11

12

13

14

White Children

Note: We define a child living in a broken home as a child not living in a household with two biological parents,
or living with the mother and her common law partner

Figure 12
Highest Category of Schooling Completed at Test Date
by Race, Sex and Age
NLSY79 Born After 1961
Male

Female

White

White

Black

Black

Hispanic

Hispanic
0

.1

.2

.3

.4

0

.1

.2

.3

Fraction
Less Than or Equal To 9 Years
11 Years
13−14 Years

10 Years
12 Years

The height of the bar is produced by dividing the number of people who report falling in a particular education cell
by the total number of people in their race−sex group

.4

Table 2
AFQT and Schooling
NLSY79
a

Panel A. Effect of Schooling on Raw AFQT
White
Black
Hispanic
Schooling At Test Date
Male Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
9
12.68
14.66
5.21
5.95
9.80
11.22
Std. Err.
(1.51)
(1.70)
(1.58)
(1.74)
(1.90)
(1.79)
N
378
343
234
234
167
179
10
16.94
16.12
9.22
5.65
16.33
14.99
Std. Err.
(1.52)
(1.68)
(1.53)
(1.73)
(1.94)
(1.85)
N
377
368
282
237
161
169
11
22.02
18.55
8.87
10.62
18.67
16.83
Std. Err.
(1.54)
(1.72)
(1.58)
(1.75)
(2.11)
(2.01)
N
366
327
247
243
120
122
12
23.12
21.05
11.96
11.12
21.29
16.46
Std. Err.
(1.49)
(1.64)
(1.58)
(1.70)
(2.08)
(1.95)
N
630
758
322
393
171
198
13-15
26.60
24.37
15.37
14.23
23.96
18.92
Std. Err.
(1.73)
(1.83)
(2.23)
(2.00)
(2.82)
(2.55)
N
266
326
98
180
72
81
16 or More
29.02
25.71
28.43
22.66
33.11
31.18
Std. Err.
(2.13)
(2.24)
(3.56)
(2.99)
(4.70)
(4.03)
N
108
103
27
34
17
22
Panel B. Mean Schooling-Corrected AFQT For Those With 8 Years of Schooling
Mean
52.50
51.95
36.79
37.44
38.45
36.87
Std. Dev
(19.11) (17.81)
(17.76)
(16.15)
(19.17)
(17.80)
N
165
110
172
98
154
137
a
Baseline is less than or equal to 8 years of schooling. N corresponds to the number of
observations in each race-gender-schooling at test date cell.

Table 3
Change in the Black-White Log Wage Gap Induced by Controlling for Schooling-Corrected AFQT for 1990-2000
NLSY Men born after 1961
Year
Black
Hispanic
Age
AFQT
AFQT2
Constant
N

1990
I
-0.250
(0.028)
-0.174
(0.032)
2.375
(0.017)
1538

II
-0.133
(0.029)
-0.070
(0.032)
0.065
(0.014)
0.153
(0.013)
0.001
(0.010)
0.540
(0.392)
1505

1991
I
-0.251
(0.028)
-0.113
(0.032)
2.372
(0.017)
1553

II
-0.149
(0.029)
-0.013
(0.032)
0.043
(0.015)
0.131
(0.013)
0.009
(0.010)
1.085
(0.412)
1514

1992
I
-0.302
(0.029)
-0.146
(0.033)
2.404
(0.017)
1536

II
-0.180
(0.029)
-0.044
(0.032)
0.055
(0.015)
0.155
(0.013)
0.015
(0.010)
0.732
(0.426)
1503

1993
I
II
-0.282 -0.171
(0.028) (0.029)
-0.159 -0.058
(0.032) (0.032)
0.045
(0.015)
0.144
(0.013)
0.017
(0.010)
2.423 0.982
(0.017) (0.437)
1542 1504

1994
I
II
-0.286 -0.165
(0.031) (0.031)
-0.143 -0.029
(0.036) (0.036)
0.040
(0.016)
0.159
(0.014)
0.028
(0.011)
2.458 1.119
(0.018) (0.493)
1522 1485

2000

1996
I
II
-0.373 -0.230
(0.032) (0.032)
-0.186 -0.067
(0.038) (0.038)
0.039
(0.017)
0.184
(0.015)
0.031
(0.012)
2.533 1.140
(0.019) (0.547)
1554 1519

1998
I
II
-0.333 -0.160
(0.034) (0.034)
-0.195 -0.047
(0.040) (0.038)
0.036
(0.017)
0.221
(0.015)
0.040
(0.012)
2.589 1.172
(0.020) (0.603)
1494 1462

I
-0.325
(0.035)
-0.215
(0.040)
2.629
(0.020)
1438

1996
I
II
-0.147 0.025
(0.035) (0.034)
-0.006 0.149
(0.041) (0.039)
-0.003
(0.018)
0.245
(0.018)
0.022
(0.015)
2.246 2.228
(0.022) (0.588)
1381 1343

1998
I
II
-0.201 -0.043
(0.034) (0.034)
-0.069 0.098
(0.039) (0.038)
0.019
(0.017)
0.228
(0.017)
0.017
(0.015)
2.311 1.550
(0.021) (0.612)
1370 1328
y

I
-0.200
(0.036)
-0.064
(0.041)
2.339
(0.022)
1316

II
-0.172
(0.033)
-0.088
(0.038)
0.029
(0.017)
0.211
(0.015)
0.036
(0.012)
1.425
(0.628)
1404

NLSY Women born after 1961
Year
Black
Hispanic
Age
AFQT
AFQT2
Constant
N

1990
I
-0.172
(0.031)
-0.003
(0.035)
2.141
(0.019)
1356Q

II
-0.045
(0.031)
0.116
(0.035)
0.015
(0.016)
0.188
(0.016)
0.010
(0.013)
1.633
(0.424)
1325

1991
I
-0.200
(0.032)
-0.017
(0.037)
2.175
(0.020)
1335

II
-0.066
(0.033)
0.107
(0.037)
0.042
(0.017)
0.197
(0.017)
0.009
(0.014)
0.893
(0.472)
1299

1992
I
-0.201
(0.031)
-0.059
(0.036)
2.193
(0.019)
1317

II
-0.083
(0.031)
0.069
(0.035)
0.021
(0.016)
0.187
(0.016)
0.010
(0.013)
1.488
(0.465)
1278g

1994
1993
I
II
I
II
-0.167 -0.020 -0.148 -0.014
(0.035) (0.035) (0.035) (0.035)
0.009 0.145 -0.018 0.119
(0.039) (0.039) (0.040) (0.040)
0.024
0.015
(0.018)
(0.018)
0.221
0.221
(0.018)
(0.018)
0.006
-0.008
(0.015)
(0.015)
2.174 1.337 2.218 1.662
(0.021) (0.530) (0.022) (0.565)
1319 1281 Q 1318 1287
g

2000
II
-0.041
(0.035)
0.096
(0.040)
-0.010
(0.018)
0.235
(0.018)
0.005
(0.015)
2.608
(0.671)
1276

g
schooling completed during lifetime. AFQT is a subset of 4 out of 10 ASVAB tests used by the military for enlistment screening and job assignment. It is the
summed score from the word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, mathematics knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning ASVAB tests. All wages are in 1993
dollars.

Figure 13A
Residual Black-White Log Wage Gap in 1991 By Grade
At Which We Evaluate The School-Corrected AFQT
NLSY79 Males Born After 1961
0.00

-0.10
-0.15
-0.20
-0.25

O

s

s

11
Ye
ar

12
Ye
ar

Ye
ar

s
10
Ye
ar

Adjusted

13
-1
5

s
Ye
ar
9

rL
es

sY
ea

rs

-0.30

8

Log Wage Gap

-0.05

Unadjusted

Grade At Which We Evaluate the Schooling-Corrected AFQT
Note: We have omitted the results for the "16 or More" category because the low number of minorities in that cell make the
correction of the test scores to that schooling level much less reliable than the correction to the other schooling levels. The
"unadjusted" line refers to the black-white log wage gap we observe if we do not control for AFQT scores (column I in table 1).
Therefore it is a horizontal line since it does not depend on the grade to which we are correcting the test score. The "adjusted"
line refers to the black-white log wage gap we observe after we adjust for the AFQT scores corrected to different grades.

Figure 13B
Residual Hispanic-White Log Wage Gap in 1991 By Grade
At Which We Evaluate The School-Corrected AFQT
NLSY79 Males Born After 1961
0.02
0.00

Log Wage Gap

-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
-0.10

8

O

s

s

11
Ye
ar

12
Ye
ar

Ye
ar

s
10
Ye
ar

Adjusted

13
-1
5

s
Ye
ar
9

rL
es

sY
ea

rs

-0.12

Unadjusted

Grade At Which We Evaluate the Schooling-Corrected AFQT
Note: We have omitted the results for the "16 or More" category because the low number of minorities in that cell make the correction
of the test scores to that schooling level much less reliable than the correction to the other schooling levels. The "unadjusted" line
refers to the Hispanic-white log wage gap we observe if we do not control for AFQT scores (column I in table 1). Therefore it is a
horizontal line since it does not depend on the grade to which we are correcting the test score. The "adjusted" line refers to the
Hispanic-white log wage gap we observe after we adjust for the AFQT scores corrected to different grades.

Figure 13C
Residual Black-White Log Wage Gap For 1991 By Grade
At Which We Evaluate The School-Corrected AFQT
NLSY79 Females Born After 1961
0.10
0.05

Log Wage Gap

0.00
-0.05
-0.10
-0.15
-0.20

8

O

s

s

11
Ye
ar

12
Ye
ar

Ye
ar

s
10
Ye
ar

Adjusted

13
-1
5

s
Ye
ar
9

rL
es

sY
ea

rs

-0.25

Unadjusted

Grade At Which We Evaluate the Schooling-Corrected AFQT
Note: We have omitted the results for the "16 or More" category because the low number of minorities in that cell make the correction
of the test scores to that schooling level much less reliable than the correction to the other schooling levels. The "unadjusted" line
refers to the Hispanic-white log wage gap we observe if we do not control for AFQT scores (column I in table 1). Therefore it is a
horizontal line since it does not depend on the grade to which we are correcting the test score. The "adjusted" line refers to the
Hispanic-white log wage gap we observe after we adjust for the AFQT scores corrected to different grades.

Figure 13D
Residual Hispanic-White Log Wage Gap in 1991 By Grade
At Which We Evaluate The School-Corrected AFQT
NLSY79 Females Born After 1961
0.18
0.16
0.14

Log Wage Gap

0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.02

s
12
Ye
ar

Ye
ar

s
11
Ye
ar

13
-1
5

s
10
Ye
ar

s
Ye
ar
9

8

O

rL
es

sY
ea

rs

-0.04

Grade At Which We Evaluate the Schooling-Corrected AFQT

Adjusted

Unadjusted

Note: We have omitted the results for the "16 or More" category because the low number of minorities in that cell make the correction
of the test scores to that schooling level much less reliable than the correction to the other schooling levels. The "unadjusted" line
refers to the Hispanic-white log wage gap we observe if we do not control for AFQT scores (column I in table 1). Therefore it is a
horizontal line since it does not depend on the grade to which we are correcting the test score. The "adjusted" line refers to the
Hispanic-white log wage gap we observe after we adjust for the AFQT scores corrected to different grades.

Table 4
Change in the Black-White Log Wage Gap Induced by Controlling for Schooling-Corrected AFQT and Highest Grade Completed in 1990-2000
NLSY Men born after 1961
Year:

1990

Black
Hispanic
Age
AFQT
2

AFQT
HGC

Constant
N

I
-0.250
(0.028)
-0.174
(0.032)
2.375
(0.017)
1538

1991
II
-0.144
(0.028)
-0.056
(0.032)
0.062
(0.014)
0.096
(0.015)
-0.015
(0.010)
0.044
(0.006)
0.113
(0.390)
1504

I
-0.251
(0.028)
-0.113
(0.032)
2.372
(0.017)
1553

1992
II
-0.158
(0.028)
0.005
(0.032)
0.041
(0.014)
0.079
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.010)
0.040
(0.006)
0.668
(0.410)
1513

I
-0.302
(0.029)
-0.146
(0.033)
2.404
(0.017)
1536

1993
II
-0.189
(0.028)
-0.032
(0.032)
0.052
(0.014)
0.097
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.010)
0.043
(0.006)
0.281
(0.422)
1503

I
-0.282
(0.028)
-0.159
(0.032)
2.423
(0.017)
1542

II
-0.182
(0.028)
-0.044
(0.032)
0.042
(0.014)
0.082
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.010)
0.047
(0.006)
0.501
(0.431)
1504

1994
I
-0.286
(0.031)
-0.143
(0.036)
2.458
(0.018)
1522

II
-0.175
(0.031)
-0.018
(0.035)
0.036
(0.016)
0.098
(0.016)
0.010
(0.011)
0.046
(0.006)
0.679
(0.488)
1485

1996
I
-0.373
(0.032)
-0.186
(0.038)
2.533
(0.019)
1554

II
-0.241
(0.031)
-0.056
(0.036)
0.033
(0.016)
0.093
(0.017)
0.005
(0.012)
0.065
(0.006)
0.540
(0.531)
1519

1998
I
-0.333
(0.034)
-0.195
(0.040)
2.589
(0.020)
1494

II
-0.175
(0.032)
-0.040
(0.037)
0.031
(0.017)
0.130
(0.017)
0.013
(0.012)
0.066
(0.007)
0.549
(0.586)
1462

2000
I
-0.325
(0.035)
-0.215
(0.040)
2.629
(0.020)
1438

II
-0.194
(0.032)
-0.070
(0.037)
0.024
(0.016)
0.119
(0.017)
0.008
(0.012)
0.066
(0.006)
0.802
(0.608)
1404

NLSY Women born after 1961
1990

Year:
Black
Hispanic
Age
AFQT
2

AFQT
HGC

Constant
N

I
-0.172
(0.031)
-0.003
(0.035)
2.141
(0.019)
1356

1991
II
-0.081
(0.030)
0.120
(0.033)
0.013
(0.015)
0.106
(0.017)
-0.001
(0.013)
0.063
(0.006)
0.913
(0.413)
1325

I
-0.200
(0.032)
-0.017
(0.037)
2.175
(0.020)
1335

1992
II
-0.101
(0.032)
0.111
(0.036)
0.036
(0.016)
0.113
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.014)
0.064
(0.006)
0.270
(0.460)
1299

I
-0.201
(0.031)
-0.059
(0.036)
2.193
(0.019)
1317

1993
II
-0.131
(0.030)
0.073
(0.033)
0.013
(0.015)
0.094
(0.017)
-0.007
(0.013)
0.075
(0.006)
0.784
(0.443)
1278

I
-0.167
(0.035)
0.009
(0.039)
2.174
(0.021)
1319

II
-0.073
(0.033)
0.139
(0.037)
0.014
(0.017)
0.121
(0.019)
-0.009
(0.014)
0.075
(0.007)
0.720
(0.508)

1994
I
-0.148
(0.035)
-0.018
(0.040)
2.218
(0.022)
1318

II
-0.069
(0.034)
0.118
(0.038)
0.006
(0.017)
0.111
(0.020)
-0.026
(0.015)
0.081
(0.007)
0.932
(0.538)
1286

1998

1996
I
-0.147
(0.035)
-0.006
(0.041)
2.246
(0.022)
1381

II
-0.035
(0.033)
0.137
(0.037)
-0.009
(0.017)
0.130
(0.019)
0.003
(0.014)
0.081
(0.006)
1.397
(0.558)
1343

I
-0.201
(0.034)
-0.069
(0.039)
2.311
(0.021)
1370

II
-0.088
(0.032)
0.091
(0.036)
0.013
(0.017)
0.119
(0.019)
0.004
(0.014)
0.076
(0.006)
0.802
(0.583)
1328

2000
I
-0.200
(0.036)
-0.064
(0.041)
2.339
(0.022)
1316

II
-0.086
(0.034)
0.096
(0.038)
-0.017
(0.017)
0.127
(0.020)
-0.007
(0.014)
0.073
(0.006)
1.928
(0.643)
1276

Schooling-corrected AFQT is the standardized residual from the regression of the AFQT score on age at the time of the test dummy variables and final level of schooling completed during lifetime. AFQT is a
subset of 4 out of 10 ASVAB tests used by the military for enlistment screening and job assignment. It is the summed score from the word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, mathematics knowledge, and
arithmetic reasoning ASVAB tests. All wages are in 1993 dollars. HGC is the highest observed level of schooling completed during the individual's lifetime.

TABLE 5 - MEANS AND ST DEV OF EXPECTATIONS
BY RACE AND SEX
NLSY97 ROUND1
BLACKS
*E1: Enrolled in School
E1: Working for pay > 20hs wk and enrolled
E1: Working for pay > 20hs wk and not enrolled
E1: Got pregnant
E1: Got someone pregnant
E1: Seriously drunk at least once
E1: Victim of violent crime
E1: Arrested
E1: Dead from any cause
**E2: Received a high school diploma
E2: Served time in jail or prison
E2: Mothered or Fathered a baby
E2: Dead from any cause
***E3: Earned a 4-yr college degree
E3: Working for pay > 20hs wk 97
P1: Enrolled in School
P1: Working for pay > 20hs wk and enrolled
P2: Received a high school diploma
P2: Served time in jail or prison
P2: Mothered or Fathered a baby
P3: Earned a 4-yr college degree
P3: Working for pay > 20hs wk 97

91.75
(22.79)
62.77
(32.44)
77.01
(31.44)
7.99
(20.43)
13.52
(21.75)
11.64
(23.77)
16.16
(22.99)
12.14
(20.55)
22.53
(25.35)
92.99
(19.45)
5.03
(13.00)
21.20
(29.34)
22.27
(24.73)
74.22
(31.44)
90.48
(20.05)
90.68
(23.70)
51.42
(34.84)
91.51
(21.14)
4.77
(14.35)
17.55
(28.84)
68.29
(33.44)
93.22
(16.17)

HISPANICS WHITES MALES FEMALES
88.35
(26.33)
60.00
(31.02)
76.39
(30.18)
7.78
(17.64)
12.33
(20.65)
20.37
(29.78)
16.11
(21.92)
11.43
(19.49)
19.02
(23.00)
88.92
(23.64)
7.53
(16.35)
21.00
(27.69)
21.48
(23.60)
66.93
(31.59)
89.72
(19.23)
89.39
(25.08)
50.52
(37.10)
91.94
(19.97)
3.87
(12.99)
19.32
(27.81)
67.15
(32.35)
92.89
(17.82)

93.72
(21.31)
59.11
(33.43)
83.11
(27.58)
4.68
(12.99)
6.27
(14.77)
24.12
(33.81)
13.36
(18.89)
8.74
(16.08)
16.56
(20.36)
95.44
(15.57)
4.54
(11.76)
14.86
(23.14)
19.01
(20.72)
73.75
(31.50)
94.39
(13.71)
94.03
(20.07)
42.65
(38.16)
96.19
(15.10)
2.62
(9.39)
12.58
(21.55)
69.85
(32.29)
94.95
(13.30)

91.67
(23.32)
60.84
(32.00)
80.09
(28.88)
0.00
0.00
9.46
(18.39)
21.55
(32.06)
15.40
(21.44)
13.73
(20.69)
17.55
(21.92)
92.33
(19.63)
7.18
(15.20)
19.22
(25.63)
19.60
(22.20)
68.75
(32.02)
92.81
(16.05)
90.80
(23.80)
47.14
(37.05)
93.12
(19.43)
4.84
(13.93)
15.54
(24.66)
65.68
(34.03)
95.87
(12.93)

92.55
(22.30)
58.86
(33.65)
79.78
(29.95)
6.32
(16.53)
0.00
0.00
18.00
(29.44)
13.97
(20.04)
6.65
(14.33)
19.75
(23.03)
94.57
(17.58)
3.40
(10.41)
16.28
(26.30)
21.08
(22.75)
76.90
(30.37)
91.85
(17.93)
93.64
(20.48)
45.09
(37.54)
95.13
(16.31)
2.06
(8.76)
14.94
(25.68)
72.77
(30.63)
92.18
(16.96)

* E1 means expectations a year from interview date. P1 means expectations of youth's parent a year from interview date.
** E2 means expectations by youth's 20th birthday. P2 means expectations of youth's parent by youth's 20th birthday.
*** E3 means expectations by youth's 30th birthday. P3 means expectations from youth's parent by youth's 30th birthday.
1
In round 1, respondents who were born in 1980 or 1981 were surveyed on their beliefs about the future. Asked to assess the probability
that certain events would occur in a specified time period, the respondents were instructed to use a scale from 0 (impossible) to 100

Table 6A
Table of Means for Males By Race
Expectation1 Of Being Enrolled Next Year
NLSY97 Round 1
All individuals
Individuals Enrolled in 1997

BLACKS

ACTUAL

HISPANICS

ACTUAL

WHITES

ACTUAL

0.912
(0.232)
0.936
(0.188)

0.734
(0.442)
0.764
(0.425)

0.881
(0.265)
0.915
(0.217)

0.717
(0.451)
0.758
(0.429)

0.934
(0.219)
0.957
(0.173)

0.790
(0.407)
0.819
(0.385)

1

In round 1, respondents who were born in 1980 or 1981 were surveyed on their beliefs about the future. Asked to assess the probability that
certain events would occur in a specified time period, the respondents were instructed to use a scale from 0 (impossible) to 100 (certain).

Table 6B
Table of Means For Males by Race
Parental Expectation1 of Youth Being Enrolled Next Year
NLSY97 Round1
All individuals
Individuals Enrolled in 1997
1

BLACKS

ACTUAL

HISPANICS

ACTUAL

WHITES

ACTUAL

0.885
(0.255)
0.909
(0.221)

0.734
(0.442)
0.764
(0.425)

0.880
(0.259)
0.911
(0.220)

0.717
(0.451)
0.758
(0.429)

0.930
(0.217)
0.954
(0.169)

0.790
(0.407)
0.819
(0.385)

In round 1, respondents who were born in 1980 or 1981 were surveyed on their beliefs about the future. Asked to assess the probability that
certain events would occur in a specified time period, the respondents were instructed to use a scale from 0 (impossible) to 100 (certain).

Figure 14A
Child’s Own Expected Educational Level at Age 10
by Race and Sex
Children of NLSY79

Fraction

.6
.4
.2
0

Hispanic

Black

White

Male

Hispanic

Black

White

Female

Drop Out

High School Graduate

Some College or 4−Year College Graduate

More than 4−Year College

The height of the bar is produced by dividing the number of people who report falling in a particular
educational expectation cell by the total number of people in their race-sex group.

Figure 14B
Mother’s Expected Educational Level For the Child at Age 6
by Race and Sex
Children of NLSY79

Fraction

.8
.6
.4
.2
0

Hispanic

Black

White

Male

Hispanic

Black

White

Female

Drop Out

High School Graduate

Some College or 4−Year College Graduate

More than 4−Year College

The height of the bar is produced by dividing the number of people who report falling in a particular
educational expectation cell by the total number of people in their race−sex group.

Figure 14C
Young Adult’s Own Expected Educational Level at Age 17
by Race and Sex
Children of NLSY79
.5

Fraction

.4
.3
.2
.1
0

Hispanic

Black

White

Male

Hispanic

Black

White

Female

Drop Out

High School Graduate

Some College or 4−Year College Graduate

More than 4−Year College

The height of the bar is produced by dividing the number of people who report falling in a particular
educational expectaion cell by the total number of people in their race−sex group.

Figure 15A
Percentile Antisocial Behavior Score By Race and Age Group
Children of NLSY79 Males
Average Percentile Score

50

45

40

35
4−5

6−7

8−9
Hispanic

10−11
Child’s Age
Black

12−13

14

White

Mothers were asked 28 age−specific questions about frequency, range and type of specific behavior problems that
children age four and over may have exhibited in the previous three months. Factor analysis was used to determine
six clusters of questions. This test is one such cluster. The responses for each cluster were dichotomized and summed
to produce a raw score. The percentile score was then calculated separately for each sex at each age from the raw score
A higher percentile score indicates a higher incidence of problems.

Figure 15B
Percentile Antisocial Behavior Score By Race and Age Group
Children of NLSY79 Females
Average Percentile Score

50
45
40
35
30
4−5

6−7

8−9
Hispanic

10−11
Child’s Age
Black

12−13

14

White

Mothers were asked 28 age−specific questions about frequency, range and type of specific behavior problems that
children age four and over may have exhibited in the previous three months. Factor analysis was used to determine
six clusters of questions. This test is one such cluster. The responses for each cluster were dichotomized and summed
to produce a raw score. The percentile score was then calculated separately for each sex at each age from the raw score
A higher percentile score indicates a higher incidence of problems.

Figure 16A
Adjusted Percentile Antisocial Behavior Score By Race and Age Group
Children of NLSY79 Males
Average Percentile Score

46
44
42
40
38
4−5

6−7

8−9
Hispanic

10−11
Child’s Age
Black

12−13

14

White

Adjusted by permanent family income, mother’s education and age−corrected AFQT, and home score.
Adjusted indicates that we equalized the family background characteristics across all race groups by setting them at
the mean to purge the effect of family environment disparities. Permanent income is constructed by taking the average
of annual family income discounted to child’s age 0 using a 10% discount rate. Age−corrected AFQT is the standardized
residual from the regression of the raw AFQT score on age at the time of the test dummy variables. Home score is an
index of quality of the child’s home environment.

Figure 16B
Adjusted Percentile Antisocial Behavior Score By Race and Age Group
Children of NLSY79 Females
Average Percentile Score

45
40
35
30
4−5

6−7

8−9
Hispanic

10−11
Child’s Age
Black

12−13

14

White

Adjusted by permanent family income, mother’s education and age−corrected AFQT, and home score.
Adjusted indicates that we equalized the family background characteristics across all race groups by setting them at
the mean to purge the effect of family environment disparities. Permanent income is constructed by taking the average
of annual family income discounted to child’s age 0 using a 10% discount rate. Age−corrected AFQT is the standardized
residual from the regression of the raw AFQT score on age at the time of the test dummy variables. Home score is an
index of quality of the child’s home environment.

