                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          BENEFIT PLAN DESIGN AND PRESCRIPTION
                          DRUG UTILIZATION AMONG ASTHMATICS:
                            DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?

                                            William H. Crown
                                              Ernst R. Berndt
                                                Onur Baser
                                            Stan N. Finkelstein
                                             Whitney P. Witt
                                            Jonathan Maguire
                                             Kenan E. Haver

                                          Working Paper 10062
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10062


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2003




Research support from the Ad Hoc Committee on the Economics of the Pharmaceutical Industry to Medstat
and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Program on the Pharmaceutical Industry is gratefully
acknowledged. The opinions and views expressed in this paper are those only of the authors, and do not
necessarily reflect those of the research sponsors or of the institutions with whom the authors are affiliated.
The authors would like to thank Mark Pauly for his thoughtful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by William H. Crown, Ernst R. Berndt, Onur Baser, Stan N. Finkelstein, Whitney P. Witt,
Jonathan Maguire, and Kenan E. Haver. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Benefit Plan Design and Prescription Drug Utilization Among Asthmatics:
Do Patient Copyaments Matter?
William H. Crown, Ernst R. Berndt, Onur Baser, Stan N. Finkelstein, Whitney P. Witt,
Jonathan Maguire, and Kenan E. Haver
NBER Working Paper No. 10062
October 2003
JEL No. D12, I11, G22

                                             ABSTRACT
Objective: The ratio of controller to reliever medication use has been proposed as a measure of
treatment quality for asthma patients. In this study we examine the effects of plan level mean out-of-
pocket asthma medication patient copayments and other features of benefit plan design on the use
of controller medications alone, controller and reliever medications (combination therapy), and
reliever medications alone.

Methods: 1995-2000 MarketScan™ claims data were used to construct plan-level out-of-pocket
copayment and physician/practice prescriber preference variables for asthma medications. Separate
multinomial logit models were estimated for patients in fee-for-service (FFS) and non-FFS plans
relating benefit plan design features, physician/practice prescribing preferences, patient
demographics, patient comorbidities and county-level income variables to patient-level asthma
treatment patterns.
Results: We find that the controller reliever ratio rose steadily over 1995-2000, along with out-of-
pocket payments for asthma medications, which rose more for controllers than for relievers.
However, after controlling for other variables, plan level mean out-of-pocket copayments were not
found to have a statistically significant influence upon patient-level asthma treatment patterns. On
the other hand, physician practice prescribing patterns strongly influenced patient level treatment
patterns.
Conclusions: There is no strong statistical evidence that higher levels of out-of-pocket copayments
for prescription drugs influence asthma treatment patterns. However, physician/practice prescribing
preferences influence patient treatment.

William H. Crown                                      Stan N. Finkelstein
Medstat                                               MIT, Sloan School of Managment

Ernst R. Berndt                                       Whitney P. Witt
Sloan School of Management                            Northwestern University
MIT, E52-452                                          School of Medicine
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142                                   Jonathan Maguire
and NBER                                              Medstat
eberndt@mit.edu
                                                      Kenan E. Haver
Onur Baser                                            Department of Pulmonary Medicine
Medstat                                               Massachusetts General Hospital
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 1 -




     BENEFIT PLAN DESIGN AND PRESCRIPTION DRUG UTILIZATION AMONG
             ASTHMATICS: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?*

      William H. Crown, Ernst R. Berndt, Onur Baser, Stan N. Finkelstein, Whitney P. Witt,
                               Jon Maguire and Kenan E. Haver


I.      INTRODUCTION

        It has long been known that tradeoffs exist between the gains from pooling across

individuals to insure against catastrophic medical expenditures, and the efficiency losses from

the moral hazard effects that arise due to the implicit marginal subsidies to health services

utilization that occur under conventional medical insurance plans.1 The existence of this tradeoff
suggests that, given preferences and costs, there may be an optimal amount of coinsurance.

Using data from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment in the 1980s, Manning and Marquis

[1996] have estimated that with an $8000 cap on total expenditures, the optimal coinsurance rate

would have been about 50%.2

        Although coinsurance rates for office visits, emergency room, inpatient hospitalization

and prescription drug services were set to be equal in the design of the RAND Health Insurance

Experiment, in practice currently in the U.S. coinsurance and, more commonly, patient

copayment amounts differ considerably among the different categories of health care services.3

        Within the last decade considerable controversy has arisen involving the design of

prescription drug benefits in health insurance plans. This controversy reflects in part the fact that

prescription drugs have become an increasingly important component of health care costs, rising

sharply from 5.6% in 1980 to 9.7% in 2000.4 Continuing a recent pattern, in 2001 total

prescription drug expenditures in the U.S. increased by about 17%.5 In levels, the $172.8 billion

implied an average of about $600 per capita, although the underlying distribution is highly

skewed.

        Managed care organizations, and the employers with whom they contract, have attempted

to control rising prescription drug costs by changing cost sharing provisions, seeking to steer use
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                 - PAGE 2 -


to preferred drugs on the insurer's list of approved medications ("formularies").6 Already in the

early and mid-1990s, plans began experimenting with two-tier copayment schemes, in which a

low patient copay (say, $5) was assessed for a generic (first tier) drug, and a somewhat higher

but still modest copay (say, $10) was assessed for (second tier) branded drugs; in some rare

cases, physicians needed prior authorization from the payer before being granted permission to

prescribe particularly costly medications.

       After seeing continued increases in their prescription drug costs, in the mid and late

1990s some plans began implementing less generous three-tier copay schemes. A typical three-

tier plan design of several years ago consisted of a $5 copay for a first tier generic drug, a $10

copay for a "preferred" branded drug within a given therapeutic class (the second tier); and a

heftier $25 copay for the "non-preferred" branded third tier drugs within the therapeutic class.

Many plans also had a second, more generous three-tier system for mail order pharmacy

prescriptions.

       Use of the three-tier copayment designs created incentives not only for insurees to shift

toward increased use of the less costly medications, but it also gave insurance plans and payers

increased bargaining power with pharmaceutical companies by allowing them to threaten to

banish their branded products to the third tier, unless drug manufacturers offered the payer

substantial discounts or rebates.7
       Frustrated again by continued increases in prescription drug spending, more recently

many plans have increased the levels of prescription drug copayments at all three tiers, with the

third tier copayment as high as $40 or $50 per prescription, while other plans have turned to

coinsurance rather than copayment designs. According to one source, in 2000 the average

patient retail copayment for a generic first tier drug was $7.17, that for preferred brands in the

second tier was $14.14, while that for all other nonpreferred brands on the third tier was $27.35.8

       The increased use of multi-tier copayment design mechanisms for prescription drugs

raises at least two sets of important issues: (i) do variations in copay structures alter the level

and composition of prescription drug utilization? Are they effective instruments in controlling
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                   - PAGE 3 -


prescription drug costs?9 Or instead do persistent physician prescribing patterns dominate, with

copayment variations having only a negligible impact? And (ii), to the extent three-tier copays

affect the level and composition of drug utilization, what are the associated health outcomes?

Can copayment design mechanisms be used not only to control costs, but also to steer utilization

to more medically appropriate uses of prescription drugs?10 In this paper, we examine the first

question in detail, and although we discuss possibilities concerning the second, we leave it

largely for future research. We also examine variation over time and among plans involving

copayments for other medical services, such as physician office visits, emergency room

treatments, and inpatient hospitalizations.

        We address these issues using the therapeutic class of asthma medications as a case

study. As described in further detail below, asthma drugs can be envisaged as being primarily

"reliever" medications (used to relieve symptoms in an acute asthmatic exacerbation -- an asthma

"attack"), or as being primarily "controller" medications (used to control pulmonary

inflammation and prevent an "attack"). For some time now, health care officials have argued

that the appropriate use of controller medications can result in reduced outpatient office visits,

emergency room treatments and inpatient hospitalizations.11 While the optimal ratio of asthma

controller to reliever drug utilization is difficult to quantify precisely (and likely is patient

idiosyncratic), it is widely believed that in most cases increases in the controller/reliever ratio are
beneficial, both in terms of economic and medical considerations.12 Interestingly, a recent
historical overview of trends in asthma pharmacotherapy between 1978 and 2002 by Stafford et

al. [2002] suggests that particularly in the last decade, the controller/reliever ratio has increased

while the number of asthma-related office visits has stabilized or declined.

        Before proceeding with a discussion of hypotheses to be tested, underlying data and

econometric methods, we first digress and provide some medical background on asthma and its

treatment.
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                               - PAGE 4 -


II.     BACKGROUND ON ASTHMA AND ITS TREATMENT


       Asthma is a chronic disease characterized by inflammation of the airways and constricted

bronchial tubes. Asthma affects about six percent of the population and is the third most

common chronic condition among children. Although death from asthma is fairly unusual,

morbidity from the condition is common. Since 1991, when consensus guidelines on the

treatment of asthma were first released by the National Asthma Education Program [1991],

clinicians have encouraged the use of maintenance therapy, typically using inhaled

corticosteriods to “control” inflammation and to reverse chronic airway obstruction and hyper-

reactivity. Other medications, particularly the short-acting beta-two agonist class of

bronchodilators, are recommended to be reserved for “relief” of acute episodes of

bronchospasm.13

       A number of published articles have examined the benefits that have accrued as the

preference of “controller” to “reliever” medications as maintenance therapy for asthma has

gained acceptance.14 Some of these articles have attempted to correlate a particular metric,

commonly called the “C/B ratio” (ratio of inhaled corticosteroids to bronchodilators) with

population-wide changes in survival and medical services utilization.15 Greater use of inhaled

corticosteriods relative to bronchodilators has been reported to be associated with lower

mortality rates and less frequent use of emergency room, inpatient and outpatient services in the

care of patients with asthma.16


III.   HYPOTHESIS TO BE TESTED/ASSESSED EMPIRICALLY

        We empirically assess the effects of several benefit plan design features on asthma

treatment patterns. In particular, we test the hypothesis that higher controller/reliever copay

ratios will be associated with reduced use of controller medications, other things being equal, and
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 5 -


whether any effects differ by plan type: fee-for-service (“FFS”) versus non-FFS plans. Finally,

we examine whether physician practice prescribing patterns influence patient-level asthma

treatment patterns and, if so, whether these effects differ between FFS and non-FFS plans.



IV.       DATA SOURCES AND CONSTRUCTION OF VARIABLES


          The MarketScan™ private insurance database for 1995–2000 was used in this study.

MarketScan™ is the largest database of its kind, containing detailed descriptions of inpatient,

outpatient medical, and outpatient prescription drug services for approximately three million

persons in 2000 who were covered by corporate-sponsored healthcare plans. These individuals’

healthcare was provided under a variety of fee-for-service (FFS), fully capitated, and partially

capitated health plans, including exclusive provider organizations, preferred provider

organizations, point of service plans, indemnity plans, and health maintenance organizations.

          Race, ethnicity, and income information were extracted from a different data set, the

Bureau of Health Professions Area Resource File (ARF), a compendium of county-level

information produced annually. The ARF data were then merged with the MEDSTAT analytic

file by county.

Identification of asthma patients

      Patients with evidence of asthma were selected from the intersection of the claims,

encounter, enrollment, and pharmaceutical data files. Evidence of asthma was provided by

searching the claims data during 1995–2000 for individuals meeting any of the following

criteria:

      •   At least two outpatient claims with primary or secondary diagnoses of asthma; or

      •   At least one emergency room claim with primary diagnosis of asthma, and a drug
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 6 -

   transaction for an asthma drug 90 days prior or 7 days following emergency room claim; or

   at least one inpatient claim with a primary diagnosis of asthma; or
   •   A secondary diagnosis of asthma and a primary diagnosis of respiratory infection in an

    outpatient or inpatient claim; or at least one drug transaction for a(n): anti-inflammatory

   agent; oral anti-leukotrienes; long-acting bronchodilators; inhaled or oral short-acting beta-

   agonists.

Patients with a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), who had one or

more diagnosis or procedure codes indicating pregnancy or delivery, or who were not

continuously enrolled for 24 months, were excluded from our study group.

Measures

       Socio-demographic characteristics. The sociodemographic characteristics included the:

age of the head of the household; percent female; geographic region (Northeast, North Central,

South, West, and unknown); member type, and year of entry into the study. In addition, several

socio-demographic variables defined at the county level were merged with the patient-level data.

These variables included racial composition (%white, %black, %other), and income strata.

       Plan Type. Fee-for service plans were defined as plans that did not have an incentive for

patients to use a particular list of providers, including basic, major medical, and comprehensive

health insurance coverage. The remaining plans, called non-FFS, were defined as plans that

either required patients to choose from a list of providers or provided financial incentives to use a

specific list of providers. Non-FFS plans included: exclusive provider organizations, health

maintenance organizations, non-capitated point-of-service plans, preferred provider

organizations, or capitated or partially-capitated point-of-service plans.
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                               - PAGE 7 -

       Copayments.      Copayments for outpatient pharmaceuticals were calculated by first

stratifying all prescription drug claims by year, then by plan within year. Next, we calculated the

average out-of-pocket patient copayments for asthma drugs by therapeutic class for each plan, as

well as the ratio of mean controller copayments to mean reliever copayments. These plan level

ratios were then attached to each patient’s record within a given plan.

       We also constructed variables for the average out of pocket copayments paid for

outpatient physician visits, emergency room visits, and hospital stays. The average copayment

captured the actual dollar amount that the patients paid out of pocket. Note that we use the term

“copayment” to refer to any out-of-pocket payment by individuals for health care. This includes

both traditional copayments (e.g., $5 per office visit) as well as coinsurance (e.g., patient pays

20% of the bill).

       Comorbidities. A number of asthma-related comorbidities were examined. These

included allergic rhinitis, anxiety, depression, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and

migraine. The number of unique three-digit ICD-9 codes (International Classification of

Diseases, Ninth Revision) was used as a proxy for extent of overall medical and mental health

comorbidities.

       Charlson Index scores were generated to capture the level and burden of comorbidity.

This index draws upon diagnostic information from ICD-9 codes and procedure codes, resulting

in nineteen conditions that are weighted based on the adjusted risk of one-year mortality. The

index score is the sum of the weights for all of a patient’s conditions and ranges from one to six,

with higher numbers indicating increased levels of comorbidity.17 The Charlson Index has been

highly effective in predicting clinical outcomes and costs.18 Of particular importance for our

research, a recent study by Sin and Tu [2001] found that high levels of co-morbidity, as
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 8 -

measured by the Charlson Index, were strongly associated with the underuse of inhaled steroid

therapy in elderly patients with asthma.

       Utilization. Utilization of healthcare services or prescription drugs was captured through

claims and encounters over the study period. For individuals, we examined the mean annualized

number of emergency room visits, hospitalizations, hospital days, outpatient visits, and

allergy/asthma specialist visits. Prescription drugs for treatment of persons with asthma were

categorized as either “controller” or “reliever” medications. Controllers included: inhaled anti-

inflammatory agents, oral corticosteroids, oral anti-leukotrienes, and long-acting

bronchodilators; relievers were defined as drugs categorized as anticholinergics or inhaled short-

acting beta-agonists. Based on this dichotomy, a ratio of controller to relievers was constructed

and interpreted as a measure of adequate management of asthma.

       Costs. The analytic file contains patients with fee-for-service health plans and those with

partially- or fully-capitated plans. However data on costs were not available for the capitated

plans. Therefore the value of patients’ service utilization under the capitated plan was priced and

imputed using average payments from the MarketScan™ FFS inpatient and outpatient services

by region, year, and procedure.

V.     ECONOMETRIC METHODS

       Our econometric analysis proceeds in two steps, using a variant of the Lee [1983]

multinomial logit selection model, as proposed by Bourguignon, Fournier and Gurgand [2001]:

(i) we first model choice among three alternative drug treatments – only controller, only reliever,

and combination controller-reliever, all on an annual basis. We employ as identifying

instruments (variables affecting choice of drug treatment, but not total expenditures) plan

copayment variables, and physician/provider prescribing composition. Then in (ii) we employ in
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                 - PAGE 9 -

least squares regressions of log total expenditures for each treatment arm, in addition to a usual

set of covariates, the three “lambda selection terms” (conditional expectations of residuals from

the three arms of the treatment selection model).

       More specifically, to reduce the potential for endogeneity between plan level copayment

variables and plan level controller/reliever ratios in the multivariate analyses, we utilize a

discrete counterpart to the plan-level controller/reliever ratio examined in the descriptive

analyses. In particular, we construct an annual patient-level dependent variable with three

mutually exclusive categories: controller drug alone (n=3903), a combination of a controller

drug and a reliever drug (n=11,427), and a reliever drug alone (n=11,049). A likelihood ratio

test was carried out to examine whether separate models were required for the FFS and non-FFS

samples. Based upon the results of this test, we estimated separate multinomial logit models for

the FFS and non-FFS subsamples. County-level income variables were appended to patient

records to augment the medical claims. Robust standard errors were used to adjust for potential

intra-county covariance among patients living in the same counties that may have been

introduced by these variables. Hausman tests were then conducted to compare selectivity-

corrected models with standard OLS models.

       In terms of instruments, we construct two sets of identifying variables. Our first set is

plan copayments. For each year and plan, we calculate mean copayment values for each class of

drug, and then take the ratio of controller mean to reliever mean copayment. This plan-specific

variable is utilized as a regressor in the multinomial drug treatment choice equations for each

person year. A second set involves calculating, for each physician/provider tax identification

number in the claims data, the proportion of patients obtaining controller only, reliever only, and

combination treatment. In many cases this taxation ID covers a multi-physician medical
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 10 -

practice, but in some cases it is unique to a single physician. Since the sum of these three

percentages is 100% for each physician/provider practice, we delete one of the three percentages,

but include two of them as regressors in the multinomial drug treatment model. We recognize

that this still leaves room for some selectivity in the form of patients’ choice of physician and

choice of plan, but nonetheless believe that this method provides a reasonable first step in

mitigating the effects of such selectivity. We also note that, in this paper we do not examine the

implications of treatment patterns on components of subsequent health care utilization, although

we do model total healthcare expenditures.


VI.    DESCRIPTIVE RESULTS


       Based on the definitions of asthma episodes discussed above, we obtained a sample that

included 44,926 patients in FFS plans and 18, 305 in non-FFS plans (63,231 patients in total).

       Controller/Reliever Ratio. As shown in Figure 1, the controller/reliever ratio has been

rising over time. Between 1995 and 1999, it increased by approximately 40%, with more rapid

increases in the two most recent years. The ratio is consistently higher for patients in FFS plans

than for those in non-FFS plans and, since 1997, the rate of increase appears to be higher for the

FFS plan beneficiaries than for those in non-FFS plans. However, irrespective of plan type,

almost all plans had average controller/reliever ratios greater than one (plan-specific data not

shown).

       Patient Demographics. Table 1 reports the demographic characteristics of the sample,

stratified by FFS and non-FFS plans. Patients in FFS plans had a mean age of 34 years

compared to 27 years for non-FFS plans (p<.001) and were more likely to be female (57% versus

52%, p<.001). Patients in FFS plans were also more likely than patients in non-FFS plans to be
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 11 -

located in the North Central region (67% versus 9%, p<.001), as well as more likely to receive

their health care coverage as the employee rather than as the spouse or dependent (41% versus

37%, p<.001).

       County Race and Income. Substantial differences in racial distribution and mean income

between FFS and non-FFS plans were evident from county-level U.S. Census data linked to the

claims data. The mean household county income of patients covered by FFS plans ($27,001)

was significantly lower than that for patients covered by non-FFS plans ($31,223) (p<.001).

Interestingly, the racial distribution of counties for patients covered by FFS plans was less likely

to be white than that of non-FFS plans.

       Health Status. As expected given possibilities for adverse selection, patients in FFS

plans appear to be sicker than those in non-FFS plans. Table 2 documents that patients in FFS

plans have higher numbers of major diagnostic categories, higher Charlson comorbidity scores

and higher rates of comorbidities of allergic rhinitis, depression, gastrointestinal disorders, and

migraine (p<.001 for all comparisons). The rate of comorbid anxiety was not statistically

different between FFS and non-FFS plans (p=0.78). Qualitatively similar patterns were evident

both for patients ages 4-11 and those ages 12-64, although differences were typically larger for

adults than for children.

       Copayments. Table 3 indicates that prescription drug copayments are significantly higher

in non-FFS plans than in FFS plans, for both asthma medications and nonasthma medications.

Across all drugs and all years (1995-2000) the average out of pocket copayment made by

patients in non-FFS plans was $8.64 compared to $5.20 in FFS plans (p<.001). However, as

shown in Figure 2, average controller/reliever copayment ratios were higher in FFS plans than in

non-FFS plans, even as FFS plan beneficiaries had greater controller/reliever medication
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 12 -

utilization ratios (see Figure 1). In both types of plans the controller/reliever copayment ratio has

been rising over time along with the increased use of controller medications.

       The mean copayments reported in Table 3 mask considerable variation in copayments

over time and across plans. Figure 3 illustrates that out-of-pocket copayments for asthma

medications have been consistently higher for patients in non-FFS plans compared to patients in

FFS plans. Although both patients in both types of plans experienced significant jumps in out-

of-pocket copayments beginning in 1998, the gap between FFS and non-FFS plans appears to

have narrowed. In addition to these time trends, there is high variation in copayment levels for

specific drugs within year. For example, in 1999 copayments for fluticasone, an inhaled

corticosteroid (a controller medication), varied from $2 in one plan to $28 in another plan.

Similarly, 1999 copayments for albuterol, a short-acting beta agonist (a reliever medication,

typically sold as a generic), ranged from $2 to $12 across plans.

       Figure 4 reports the trend in the ratio of total payments (third party payor plus patient

copayment) for controller versus reliever prescription drug claims, alongside the trend in the

ratio of patient out-of-pocket copayments for controller vs. reliever medications. Both ratios

show an upward trend, largely reflecting the increased use of controller medications. However,

Figure 4 clearly indicates that between 1995 and 1999 the total payment ratio rose at a steeper

rate than the copayment ratio. This suggests that, although large employers and health plans

were using copayments to help manage rising prescription drug costs, at least between 1995 and

1999 they appeared to be absorbing proportionately more of the cost increase than they passed

on to beneficiaries in the form of higher copayments. Put another way, the practice of medicine

improved in the sense of both FFS and non-FFS beneficiaries increasing the controller/reliever
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                               - PAGE 13 -

utilization ratio, and while beneficiaries experienced increases in controller/reliever copayment

ratios, third party payors bore an even larger increase in controller/reliever payments.

       Average copayments for outpatient visits, emergency room visits, and inpatient visits also

differed between non-FFS and FFS plans (Table 3). Although statistically significant,

copayments for outpatient visits and emergency room visits were fairly similar across non-FFS

and FFS plans. By contrast, copayments for inpatient stays were significantly and materially

higher among patients covered by FFS plans than those covered by non-FFS plans ($16.12

versus $2.78, respectively, p<.001). Hence, while non-FFS plans had significantly higher

copayment rates for prescription drugs relative to FFS plans, the opposite took place in terms of

inpatient copayments.

       Medication Use. Table 4 summarizes the medication use of asthma patients covered by

non-FFS and FFS health plans. Patients covered by FFS plans have a higher ratio of controller to

reliever medications than patients in non-FFS plans (1.49 versus 1.17, p<.001), as well as a

higher number of annualized asthma prescriptions (4.89 versus 4.17, p<.001). With the

exception of leukotriene modifiers (the most recent new therapeutic agents), patients in FFS

plans have more days of therapy and higher units dispensed for each therapeutic class of asthma

medication than patients in non-FFS plans (p<.001 for all comparisons). For leukotriene

modifiers, days of therapy and units dispensed were higher for asthma patients covered by non-

FFS plans (p<.001).

       The most commonly prescribed asthma medications were the short acting beta agonists

(SABAs). Patients in non-FFS plans were somewhat more likely than patients in FFS plans to be

prescribed SABAs, oral steroids, and leukotriene modifiers; they were less likely to be

prescribed bronchodilators, inhaled steroids, and anticholinergics (p<.001 for all comparisons).
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 14 -

       Health Care Utilization. Table 5 reports the non-prescription drug health care utilization

of patients in non-FFS and FFS plans. For each measure—emergency room visits,

hospitalizations, hospital days, and outpatient visits—annualized utilization was higher in FFS

plans than in non-FFS plans (p=0.09 for all comparisons). Thus, despite higher

controller/reliever medication ratios, health care utilization was higher in FFS plans than in non-

FFS plans. However, this association is likely confounded by the greater average age and level

of disease severity of patients covered by FFS plans (Table 2).


VII.   ECONOMETRIC FINDINGS


       FFS Model. Table 6 reports the results of a multinomial logit model of the log odds of a

patient receiving controller medication alone, or a controller and a reliever (combination

therapy), relative to a reliever alone. Residents of the North Central region are significantly less

likely to be treated with controllers alone or combination controllers-relievers than with relievers

alone (p-values <0.01). Females were significantly less likely to receive a combination treatment

rather than a solo reliever treatment. Adults were more likely to receive a controller alone, or a

combination treatment (with the former being particularly large) than a reliever only treatment.

       We also included county-level variables from the Census as proxies for the income of

patients--variables not available directly from the claims. Being in the highest average income

county (>$35K) significantly increased the odds of receiving a controller-only treatment, but had

no significant effect on combination treatment, relative to reliever-only treatments. None of the

other county characteristic income variables was statistically significant.

       The presence of allergic rhinitis increased the odds of getting a controller alone or a

combination therapy relative to reliever only therapy. Comorbidities of migraine or sinusitis had
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                 - PAGE 15 -

no significant impact on choice of drug therapy. Depression reduced the odds of getting

controller alone therapy relative to reliever alone, but had no significant impact on combination

therapy. Interestingly, the presence of an anxiety disorder increased the odds of getting a

combination therapy (p-value <0.02), but had no significant impact on the probability of

receiving either of the solo treatments. The number of unique 3-digit ICD-9 codes was

positively associated with the log odds of getting a controller alone, or a controller plus reliever,

and thereby was implicitly negatively associated with the log odds of getting a reliever only

therapy.

       The ratio of plan mean controller to mean reliever copay had no significant impact on

drug treatment choice (p-values > 0.50). In results not shown, this lack of significance persisted

when mean copays were entered separately in levels, or in various other forms. On the other

hand, the medication ratios measuring provider prescribing preferences for controller alone (p-

value <0.01) or for combination treatment (p-value <0.01) were positive, large and highly

significant determinants for the probability of the patient receiving that therapy, relative to

reliever only therapy. In terms of cross-effects, only provider prescribing preferences for

combination therapy positively and significantly affected the probability of a patient receiving

controller-only therapy; provider preferences for controller only therapy had no significant

impact on the patient’s probability of receiving combination treatment (p-value = 0.184). The

chi-square test statistic for the null hypothesis that coefficient estimates on the copay and

provider prescriber preference variables are simultaneously equal to zero indicate decisive

rejection in both equations (p-values <0.01).

       Non-FFS Model. Table 7 reports the results of the corresponding multinomial logit

model for patients in non-FFS plans. Living in the West reduced the odds of receiving either
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 16 -

controller alone or combination treatment relative to reliever alone therapy. Residents of the

North Central region were more likely to receive combination treatment, but not controller only

therapy, relative to controller alone treatment. As in the FFS case, females were significantly

less likely to receive combination treatment, relative to reliever only, and adults were more likely

to receive a controller alone or a combination therapy (with the former being particularly large),

relative to reliever-only treatment. None of the county-level income variables from the Census

was statistically significant.

        The presence of allergic rhinitis significantly increased the odds of getting controller only

or combination therapy relative to reliever only treatment; the impacts of other comorbidities

were similar in this non-FFS regression to those in the FFS analysis. Higher numbers of unique

3-digit ICD-9 codes significantly increased the odds of getting a controller alone or combination

therapy relative to reliever only treatment.

        As with the FFS model, the ratio of plan mean controller to mean reliever copayment had

no significant impact on the probability of receiving controller-only therapy, although it did have

a positive and significant impact on the odds of receiving combination treatment. On the other

hand, both medication percentages measuring provider prescribing preferences were highly

significant determinants of the probability of a patient receiving the corresponding therapy; while

these own effects were positive and significant, both cross-effects were not statistically

significant. The chi-square test statistics for the null hypothesis that coefficients on the copay

and provider prescriber preference variables simultaneously equal zero indicate decisive

rejection in both equations (p-values <0.01).

        Turning now to the log total expenditure regressions for FFS (Table 8) and non-FFS

(Table 9) beneficiaries, we provide parameter estimates with and without the sample selectivity
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                 - PAGE 17 -

adjustments, for each of the three treatment arms. In the FFS regressions of Table 8, we first

note that parameter estimates on the lambdas (conditional expected values of the residuals

derived from each of multinomial logistic equations) are negative and statistically significant (all

p-values <0.001). Not surprisingly, differences between the selectivity-adjusted and unadjusted

parameter estimates are particularly large for those variables significantly affecting prescriber

therapy in the first-state multinomial logit equations. For example, coefficient estimates on the

adult variable in all three equations are much smaller in the selectivity-adjusted than in the

unadjusted regressions; this also holds for the allergic rhinitis variable, where sign changes

occur.

         However, when a Hausman test is conducted to test whether the coefficient estimates

differ significantly in the selectivity-adjusted and unadjusted OLS regressions with the FFS

sample, the null hypothesis of parameter equality is not rejected; indeed, the test statistic is

negative, a reflection of the fact that the difference in diagonal elements of the variance-

covariance matrices can in given samples be negative, even though asymptotically they are

positive in expectation.

         In terms of the non-FFS sample (Table 9), results are qualitatively similar to those with

the FFS population. In particular, estimates of the three lambdas are negative and significant in

all three treatment equations (p-values ,0.001), with the exception of the reliever only equation

where the negative estimate is not statistically significant. While two of the three Hausman test

statistics on parameter equality in the selectivity-adjusted and unadjusted OLS regressions are

positive, in all three cases the null hypothesis is not rejected.
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 18 -




    VIII.     DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS


        This study describes the patterns of medication use among patients with asthma, factors

affecting the type of drug therapy prescribed these patients, and impacts on total healthcare

expenditures, using a dataset encompassing more than 25,000 patient years of claims. The

average controller/reliever ratios were found to be greater than one, both for members of non-

FFS (1.17) and FFS (1.49) plans. Moreover, the controller/reliever medication ratio has been

consistently rising over time, suggesting that the clinical practices it embodies reflects a

considerable degree of acceptance of the consensus guidelines, and the supporting research

literature.

        Theoretically, holding other things equal, one would expect higher relative prices for

controller to reliever medicines to be associated with a lower controller/reliever ratio. However,

teasing this out of the data statistically is complex. Shifts in the composition of drugs in the

controller and reliever classes over time, and changes in plan design, could cause the ratio of

controller to reliever copays to either rise or fall over time. As shown in Figure 1, the

controller/reliever medication ratio has been trending upward over time. However, after

controlling for other variables we do not find a statistically significant relationship between out-

of-pocket copayments and asthma treatment patterns. Moreover, Figure 4 indicates that total

payments (third party payor plus patient copay) have been rising more rapidly than copayments

only, suggesting that health plans and large employers are reluctant to increase copayments for

covered beneficiaries at the same rate that total payments have increased. In this sense and over
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                 - PAGE 19 -

this 1995-1999 time period, health plans and payors have contributed to greater diffusion of

guideline-compatible treatments that favor increases in the controller/reliever ratio.

       The observation that the prescribing of all classes of asthma medications (except

leukotriene modifiers) was greater among members of FFS plans is generally consistent with the

findings that these patients are “sicker” than their counterparts in non-FFS plans, as measured by

the number of comorbid conditions and higher levels of health care utilization. Asthma patients

covered by FFS health plans made more extensive use of all other types of health services we

examined, including inpatient hospitalizations, use of emergency services and ambulatory visits.

       The principal objective of this study has been to examine whether and how the

characteristics of health plan coverage as part of the employee benefits affects the therapy

selection decision among patients with asthma. The preponderance of clinical literature now

suggests that patients with asthma experience more favorable clinical courses when they make

regular use, often several times daily, of inhaled corticosteriods, leukotriene modifiers, and other

medications that “control” inflammation and reversible airway disease. In the descriptive

analysis, we found that the controller/reliever ratio continued to rise (and its increase even

accelerated in recent years) despite rising medication copays. However, this apparent association

between mean copayments at the plan level and plan-level controller/reliever ratios is potentially

endogenous. For example, if mean copayments are higher for controller medications than

reliever medications, growing use of controllers would result in a rising mean copayment ratio

for controller-to-reliever medications. That is, at the plan level, the direction of influence

between the controller-to-reliever copayments and the controller/reliever ratio could go in either

direction, or even both ways.
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                - PAGE 20 -

       To reduce the endogeneity problem, we examined the effect of plan-level copayment

variables on individual treatment choices. When we did so, no statistically significant

association was found. It is possible that this lack of association resulted from an understatement

of the size of out-of-pocket copayments. This understatement is due to the averaging of patient

copays across asthma drugs and years at the plan level, an effort we undertook in order to reduce

the number of degrees of freedom consumed by plan-, drug-, and year-specific copayments.

Most of the large copayment increases have occurred since 1999. Plans that instituted very large

copayment increases for certain asthma drugs may, indeed, have shifted asthma treatment

patterns. However, in our analysis these more recent changes were aggregated with earlier

experience of patients where copayment changes were not as common, nor as large. Thus, we

expect that there is a downward bias in our estimate of the copayment effect that deserves further

scrutiny. We have re-estimated our models using only 1998-2000 data, and while we obtained

results on the copay variables that trended more toward becoming statistically significant, they

were not significant at usual p-values. We suspect that these copay variables will become more

significant as additional years of post-2000 data are added to the sample.

       On the other hand, we found that provider prescribing patterns were strongly associated

with patient treatment patterns, although the nature of this association differed somewhat for

patients in FFS and non-FFS plans. We leave it for future research to assess whether,

controlling for physician practice prescribing preferences, differences in copayment benefit

design across plans serviced by the same physician practice result in statistically different

treatment patterns. It is of course possible instead that physician practice effects are dominant

regardless of the variation in the copayment benefit designs of the plans covering the patients
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                               - PAGE 21 -

they treat. Resolution of this issue will have very important implications for the effectiveness of

plan design in controlling healthcare costs.

       In addition to the specific statistical issues already discussed, the conclusions from our

analysis should be viewed in light of the limitations common to most retrospective studies. In

particular, although we have attempted to correct for selection bias associated with patients

having higher versus lower controller to reliever ratios, other sources of selection bias may

remain. For example, the MarketScan claims data used in the analysis lack clinical measures of

symptom severity (e.g., FEV-1 values). In addition, missing data on within region location (e.g.,

rural, urban, suburban) could have introduced bias due to geographical variations in asthma

treatment practice patterns.

       Although future work is unlikely to be able to control for all sources of selection bias in

retrospective database studies of the type reported here, the provider prescribing pattern variables

appear to offer promise as identifying variables. For example, future work could use

instrumental variables or parametric selection models to control for unobserved factors

associated with both treatment selection and outcomes when examining the effects of asthma

treatments on health care utilization. This general approach is likely to have broad applicability

to other medical conditions and treatments as well.
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                           - PAGE 22 -


REFERENCES

Alan, Sule, Thomas F. Crossley, Paul Grootendorst and Michael R. Veall [2002], "The Effects of
       Drug Subsidies on Out-of-Pocket Prescription Drug Expenditures by Seniors: Regional
       Evidence from Canada", Journal of Health Economics, 21:5, September, pp. 805-826.

Beddhu, Srinivasan, Frank J. Bruns, Melissa Saul, Patricia Seddon, and Mark L. Zeidel [2000],
      “A Simple Comorbidity Scale Predicts Clinical Outcomes and Costs in Dialysis
      Patients,” American Journal of Medicine, 108(8): 609-613.

Berndt, Ernst R. [2002], "Pharmaceuticals in U.S. Health Care: Determinants of Quantity and
       Price", Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(4):

Berndt, Ernst R. [2001], "The U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry: Why Major Growth in Times of
       Cost Containment?", Health Affairs, 20:2, March/April, pp. 100-14.

Blomqvist, Ake [2001], "Does the Economics of Moral Hazard Need to be Revisited? A
      Comment on the Paper by John Nyman", Journal of Health Economics, 20:2, March, pp.
      283-88.

Bourguignon, Francois, Martin Fournier and Marc Gurgand [2001], “Selection Bias Correction
      Based on the Multinomial Logit Model,” Paris: Center for Research on Econometrics and
      Statistics, unpublished working paper, December 27. Available at
      http://www.crest.fr/pageperso/lmi/gurgandselmlog.htm.

D’Hoore W, Bouckaert A, Tilquin C. Practical Considerations on the Use of the Charlson
      Comorbidity Index with Administrative Data Bases. J Clin Epidemol 1996;49(12):1429-
      1433.

Donahue J.G., Weiss S.T., Livingston J.M., Goetsch M.A., Greineder D.K., Platt R. [1997],
      Inhaled Steroids and the Risk of Hospitalization for Asthma. Journal of the American
      Medical Association. 277(11): 877-891.

Feenberg, Daniel and Jonathan Skinner [1994], "The Risk and Duration of Catastrophic Health
      Care Expenditures", Review of Economics and Statistics, 76, pp. 333-47.

Frischer M., Heathe H., Chapman S., Norwood J., Bashford J., and Millson D. [1999], Should
       the Corticosteroid to Bronchodilator Ratio be Promoted as a Quality Prescribing Marker?
       Public Health 113(5): 247-250.

Gottlieb D.J., Belser A.S., O’Connor G.T. [1995], Poverty, Race, and Medication Use are
       Correlates of Asthma Hospitalization Rates. Chest. 108: 28-35.

Grootendorst, Paul [2002], "Beneficiary Cost Sharing under Canadian Provincial Prescription
      Drug Benefit Programs: History and Assessment", Canadian Journal of Clinical
      Pharmacology, in press.
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                          - PAGE 23 -


Harris, B. L., A. Stergachis, and L. D. Ried [1990], "The Effect of Drug Co-payments on
        Utilization and Cost of Pharmaceuticals in a Health Maintenance Organization", Medical
        Care, 28, pp. 907-17.

IMS Health [2002], "IMS Reports 16.9% Growth in 2001 U.S. Prescription Sales". Available at
      <http://www.imshealth.com/public/structure>.

Jain P. and Golish J.A. [1996], Clinical Management of Asthma in the 1990s: Current Therapy
        and New Directions. Drugs 52 Suppl. 6: 1-11.

Johnson, R. E., M. J. Goodman, M.C. Hornbrook, and M. B. Eldredge [1997], "The Effect of
      Increased Prescription Drug Cost Sharing on Medical Care Utilization and Expenses of
      Elderly Health Maintenance Organization Members", Medical Care, 35, pp. 1119-31.

Laumann J.M. and Bjornson D.C. [1998], Treatment of Medicaid Patients with Asthma:
     Comparison with Treatment Guidelines Using Disease-Based Drug Utilization Review
     Methodology. Annals of Pharmacotherapy. 32(12): 1290-1294.

Lee, L. F. [1983], “Generalized Econometric Models with Selectivity,” Econometrica, 51:507-
        512.

Leibowitz, Arleen, Willard G. Manning, Emmett B. Keeler, Naihua Duan, Kathleen N. Lohr and
      Joseph P. Newhouse [1985], "The Effect of Cost Sharing on the Use of Medical Services
      by Children", Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Publication Series, R-3287-HHS,
      September, 33 pp.

Leibowitz, Arleen, Willard G. Manning and Joseph P. Newhouse [1985], "The Demand for
      Prescription Drugs as a Function of Cost Sharing," Social Science and Medicine, 21:10,
      pp. 1063-70.

Levine, Sharon, David Campen, Mirta Millares and Anthony Barrueta [2000], “Kaiser
       Permanente’s Prescription Drug Benefit,” Health Affairs, 19(2): 17-22.

Majeed A., Ferguson J., and Field J. [1999], “Prescribing of Beta-2 Agonists and Inhaled
      Steroids in England: Trends Between 1992 and 1998, and Association with Material
      Deprivation, Chronic Illness and Asthma Mortality Rates.” Journal of Public Health
      Medicine. 21(4): 395-400.

Manning, Willard G. and M. Susan Marquis [2001], "Health Insurance: Tradeoffs Revisited",
      Journal of Health Economics, 20:2, March, pp. 289-93.

Manning, Willard G. and M. Susan Marquis [1996], "Health Insurance: The Tradeoff Between
      Risk Pooling and Moral Hazard", Journal of Health Economics, 15, pp. 609-40.

Manning, Willard G. et al. [1986], "How Cost Sharing Affects the Use of Ambulatory Mental
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                             - PAGE 24 -

       Health Services," Journal of the American Medical Association, 256:1930-34.

Marquis, M. Susan [1985], "Cost-Sharing and Provider Choice", Journal of Health Economics,
      4:137-57.

National Asthma Education Program (NAEP) [1991], Expert Panel Report: Guidelines for the
       Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

Nestor A., Calhoun A.C., Dickson M., and Kalik C.A. [1998], “Cross-Sectional Analysis of the
       Relationship Between National Guideline Recommended Asthma Drug Therapy and
       Emergency/Hospital Use Within a Managed Care Population.” Annals of Allergy Asthma
       Immunology. 81(4): 327-330.

Newhouse, Joseph P. and the Insurance Experiment Group [1993], Free for All? Lessons from
     the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Nyman, John [1999], "The Economics of Moral Hazard Revisited", Journal of Health
     Economics, 18, pp. 811- 824.

Pharmacy Benefit Management Institute [2001], Takeeda-Lilly Prescription Drug Benefit Cost
      and Plan Design Survey Report, Temple AZ.

Poirier, S., Jacques LeLorier, V. Page and A. Lacour [1998], "The Effect of a $2 Co-Payment on
        Prescription Refill Rates of Quebec Elderly and Its Relationship to Socioeconomic
        Status", Canadian Pharmaceutical Journal, 131, pp. 30-34.

Shelley M., Croft P., Chapman S., and Pantin C. [2000], “Is the Quality of Asthma Prescribing,
       as Measured by the General Practice Ratio of Corticosteroid to Bronchodilator,
       Associated with Asthma Morbidity?” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 53(12): 1217-
       1221.

Sin D, J.V. Tu . [2001], “Underuse of Inhaled Steroid Therapy in Elderly Patients with Asthma,”
        Chest, 119: 720-725.

Smith, D. G. [1993], "The Effects of Co-Payments and Generic Substitution on the Use and
       Costs of Prescription Drugs", Inquiry, 30, pp. 189-98.

Stafford, Randall S., Jun Ma, Stan N. Finkelstein, Kenan Haver and Iain M. Cockburn [2002],
       "National Trends in Asthma Visits and Asthma Pharmacotherapy, 1978-2002", Palo Alto
       CA: Stanford Center for Research in Disease Prevention, unpublished manuscript,
       September, 22 pp.

Suissa S., Ernst P., Bolvin J.F., et al. [1994], “A Cohort Analysis of Excess Mortality in Asthma
       and the Use of Inhaled Beta-Agonists.” American Journal of Respiratory Critical Care
       Medicine. 149(3 pt 1): 604-610.
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                          - PAGE 25 -

Tamblyn, R., R. Laprise, J. A. Hanley, M. Abrahamowitz, S. Scott, N. May, J. Hurley, R. Grad,
      E. Latimer, R. Perreault, P. McLeod, A. Huang, P. Larochelle, and L. Mallet [2001],
      "Adverse Events Associated with Prescription Drug Cost-Sharing Among Poor and
      Elderly Persons", Journal of the American Medical Association, 285, pp. 421-429.

Witt, Whitney P., William H. Crown, Jon Maguire, Ernst R. Berndt and Stan N. Finkelstein
       [2002], "Asthma in the Family: Determining Family-Level Medical Services Use and
       Healthcare Expenditures", Cambridge, MA: Medstat., unpublished
       manuscript, September, 47 pp.

Zeckhauser, Richard J. [1970], "Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between Risk
      Spreading and Appropriate Incentives", Journal of Economic Theory, 2, pp. 10-26.
HEALTHCARE UTILIZATION: DO PATIENT COPAYMENTS MATTER?                                                 - PAGE 26 -

FOOTNOTES

1
 See Zeckhauser [1970] for a seminal discussion. For more recent analyses, see the exchanges
among Nyman [1999], Blomqvist [2001], and Manning and Marquis [1996,2001].
2
 For evidence from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, see Newhouse [1993], Manning et
al. [1986], Leibowitz, Manning and Newhouse [1985], and Marquis [1985]. More recent
evidence for a more aged population is given in Feenberg and Skinnner [1994].
3
 The term copayment typically refers to fixed payments by the individual for service received
(e.g., five dollars for each generic prescription); coinsurance typically refers to a fixed
percentage payment by the individual (e.g., 20% of the retail price of the drug). In this paper, we
use the term copayment to refer to any out of pocket payments by consumers for drugs or other
services.
4
    Berndt [2002]; also see Berndt [2001].
5
    IMS Health [2002].
6
For policies and impacts of changing prescription drug cost-sharing provisions in Canada, see
Alan et al. [2002], Grootendorst [2002], Poirier et al. [1998] and Tamblyn et al. [2001].
7
    For further discussion, see Berndt [2002] and the references cited therein.
8
    See Pharmacy Benefit Management Institute [2001].
9
 For related empirical evidence (much of it quite dated), see Harris et al. [1990], Johnson et al.
[1997], Leibowitz, Manning and Newhouse [1985], Marquis [1985] and Smith [1993].
10
  For related empirical analyses, see Keeler et al. [1985], Leibowitz et al. [1985], and Newhouse
[1993].
11
     See, for example, Levine, Campen, Millares and Barrueta [2000].
12
     Gottlieb, Belser, and O’Connor [1995]; Frischer, et al. [1999]; Shelley, et al. [2000].
13
     See Jain and Golish [1996]; Majeed, Ferguson, and Field [1999]; Nestor, et al. [1998]; and Suissa, et al. [1994].
14
 Majeed, Ferguson, and Field [1999]; Nestor, et al. [1998]; Suissa, et al. [1994]; Laumann and Bjornson [1998];
and Donahue et al. [1997].
15
     Frischer, et al. [1999]; Shelley, et al. [2000].
16
     See, for example, Gottlieb, Belser and O’Connor [1995].
17
     For further details, see D’Hoore, Bouckaert, and Tilquin. [1996].
18
     See, for example, D’Hoore, Bouckaert, and Tilquin. [1996], and Beddhu et al. [2000].
                  Table 1: Summary of Asthma Patient Characteristics
                           by Insurance Plan Type, 1995-2000

                                         FFS      Non-FFS       Total   P-Value
N                                       44,926     18,305      63,231     n/a

Trigger Type
  (1) 2 OP Asthma Claims               37.05%      36.91%      37.01%    0.74
  (2) Asthma ER + Asthma RX            0.69%       0.82%       0.73%     0.06
  (3) IP Resp. Inf. + Asthma            0.04%       0.08%       0.05%    0.12
  (4) IP Asthma                        0.26%       0.32%       0.28%     0.15
  (5) 2 Asthma RX                      61.97%      61.87%      61.94%    0.82

Mean Age                                34.09       27.19       32.09     <.01
% Females                              57.41%      52.09%      55.87%     <.01

Geographic region
 Northeast                             15.63%      47.56%      24.88%     <.01
 North central                         67.01%      8.76%       50.15%     <.01
 South                                 12.05%      32.76%      18.04%     <.01
 West                                  5.31%       10.92%      6.93%      <.01

Year of Trigger
 1996                                  34.67%      13.13%      28.43%     <.01
 1997                                  20.21%      13.55%      18.28%     <.01
 1998                                  21.99%      14.62%      19.86%     <.01
 1999                                  23.13%      58.71%      33.43%     <.01

Member Type
 Employee                              40.76%      38.68%      40.16%     <.01
 Spouse                                22.02%      17.55%      20.73%     <.01
 Dependents                            37.21%      43.77%      39.11%     <.01
  4-11 years                           15.76%      27.97%      19.30%     <.01
  12-18 years                          15.94%      14.24%      15.45%     <.01
  Other                                5.51%        1.57%       4.37%     <.01

County Race/Ethnicity
 White
   0 - 25%                             0.49%       0.84%       0.59%     <.01
   26 - 50%                            1.44%       7.00%       3.05%     <.01
   51 - 75%                            21.25%      35.73%      25.44%    <.01
   76 - 100%                           76.82%      56.43%      70.92%    <.01
 Black                                                                   <.01
   0 - 25%                             91.70%      76.30%      87.24%    <.01
   26 - 50%                            8.02%       22.85%      12.31%    <.01
   51 - 75%                            0.26%       0.85%       0.43%     <.01
   76 - 100%                           0.01%       0.00%       0.01%     0.15
 Hispanic
   0 - 25%                             96.76%      93.35%      95.77%    <.01
   26 - 50%                            2.67%       5.52%       3.49%     <.01
   51 - 75%                            0.52%       1.13%       0.69%     <.01
   76 - 100%                           0.06%       0.01%       0.04%     <.01
              Table 1: Summary of Asthma Patient Characteristics
                       by Insurance Plan Type, 1995-2000

                                     FFS      Non-FFS       Total   P-Value
 Other                                                                <.01
  0 - 25%                          99.94%      99.83%      99.91%     <.01
  26 - 50%                         0.02%       0.15%       0.06%      <.01
  51 - 75%                         0.04%       0.02%       0.03%      0.21
  76 - 100%                        0.01%       0.00%       0.01%      0.20

County Mean Household Income        27,001      31,223     28,269    <.01
                   Table 2: Co-Morbidities among Asthma Patients
                          by Insurance Plan Type, 1995-2000

                                       FFS       Non-FFS       Total   P-Value
All Patients, N                       44,926      18,305      63,231     n/a

# Major diagnostic categories          6.26        5.35        6.00     <.01
Charlson Comorbidity Index             0.79        0.62        0.74     <.01

Asthma-specific Comorbidites:
 Allergic Rhinitis                    23.27%      18.67%     21.94%     <.01
 Anxiety                               2.39%       2.35%      2.38%     0.78
 Depression                           10.31%      8.17%      9.69%      <.01
 GI Disorders                         24.55%      20.73%     23.45%     <.01
 Migraine                             6.02%       5.05%      5.74%      <.01

Patients Aged 4-11, N                  7,084       5,123      12,207     n/a

# Major diagnostic categories          5.19        4.85        5.05     <.01
Charlson Comorbidity Index             0.55        0.51        0.53     <.01

Asthma-specific Comorbidites:
 Allergic Rhinitis                    25.72%      20.69%     23.61%     <.01
 Anxiety                               0.78%       0.49%      0.66%     0.05
 Depression                           4.29%       2.81%      3.67%      <.01
 GI Disorders                         15.30%      14.50%     14.97%     0.22
 Migraine                             3.08%       3.10%      3.09%      0.93

Patients Aged 12-64, N                37,842      13,182      51,024     n/a

# Major diagnostic categories          6.46        5.55        6.22     <.01
Charlson Comorbidity Index             0.84        0.66        0.79     <.01

Asthma-specific Comorbidites:
 Allergic Rhinitis                    22.81%      17.88%     21.53%     <.01
 Anxiety                               2.69%       3.07%      2.79%     0.02
 Depression                           11.44%      10.26%     11.13%     <.01
 GI Disorders                         26.28%      23.15%     25.47%     <.01
 Migraine                             6.57%       5.81%      6.38%      <.01
                            Table 3: Plan-Level Average Copayments
                               by Insurance Plan Type, 1995-2000

                                                    FFS       Non-FFS    Total   P-Value
N*                                                 33,828      18,214   52,042     n/a

Prescription Copayment                                 5.20    8.64      6.20     <.01
 For Asthma Related Drugs                              5.06    8.04      5.92     <.01
 For Non-Asthma Related Drugs                          5.24    8.83      6.28     <.01

Outpatient Visit Copayment                             7.71    8.10      7.84     <.01
 For Asthma Related Visits                             7.83    8.25      7.97     <.01
 For Non-Asthma Related Visits                         7.69    8.09      7.83     <.01

Emergency Room Visit Copayment                     10.24       13.03    11.22     <.01
 For Asthma Related Visits                         15.25       13.92    14.79     <.01
 For Non-Asthma Related Visits                     9.89        12.94    10.96     <.01

Inpatient Visit Copayment                          16.12       2.78     11.45     <.01
  For Asthma Related Visits                        18.07       1.79     12.37     <.01
  For Non-Asthma Related Visits                    15.92       2.94     11.38     <.01

* Average copayment was not available for all plans.
                    Table 4: Annualized Asthma Medication Claims
                          by Insurance Plan Type, 1995-2000

                                        FFS      Non-FFS       Total   P-Value
N                                      44,926     18,305      63,231     n/a

Ratio of Controller to Reliever         1.49       1.17        1.40     <.01

Number of Asthma Prescriptions          4.89       4.17        4.68     <.01
 Bronchodilators                        0.71       0.37        0.61     <.01
 Oral Steroids                          0.45       0.45        0.45     0.69
 SABAs                                  2.14       2.11        2.13     0.20
 Inhaled Steroids                       1.22       0.90        1.13     <.01
 Luekotriene Modifiers                  0.24       0.28        0.25     <.01
 Anticholinergics                       0.12       0.05        0.10     <.01

Estimated Days of Therapy
 Bronchodilators                       21.99       10.43      18.64     <.01
 Oral Steroids                         5.91        4.59       5.53      <.01
 SABAs                                 46.44       41.75      45.09     <.01
 Inhaled Steroids                      30.19       20.96      27.51     <.01
 Luekotriene Modifiers                 8.89        9.09       8.94      0.61
 Anticholinergics                      2.89        1.07       2.36      <.01

Units Dispensed
 Bronchodilators                       34.05       14.86      28.50     <.01
 Oral Steroids                         18.65       18.16      18.51     0.44
 SABAs                                 78.01       79.50      78.44     0.37
 Inhaled Steroids                      31.33       21.46      28.47     <.01
 Luekotriene Modifiers                 12.73       12.44      12.65     0.63
 Anticholinergics                      5.26        2.36       4.42      <.01

Selection of Asthma Medication
 Bronchodilators                      15.94%      9.66%       14.12%    <.01
 Oral Steroids                        23.71%      26.42%      24.50%    <.01
 SABAs                                76.57%      80.63%      77.75%    <.01
 Inhaled Steroids                     35.00%      31.95%      34.11%    <.01
 Luekotriene Modifiers                5.88%       6.62%       6.09%     <.01
 Anticholinergics                     4.14%       2.13%       3.56%     <.01
     Table 5: Annualized Per Beneficiary Asthma-Related Health Care Utilization
                         by Insurance Plan Type, 1995-2000

                                        FFS       Non-FFS       Total      P-Value
N                                      44,926      18,305      63,231        n/a

Measures of Health Care Use
 Emergency room visits                  0.38        0.37        0.38         0.09
 Hospitalizations                       0.08        0.05        0.07         <.01
 Hospital Days                          0.36        0.23        0.32         <.01
 Outpatient visits                      5.46        1.40        4.29         <.01
                                                                        Table 6
                                          Multinomial Logit Model of Medication Selection: Patients in FFS Plans
                                                       Controller Alone                                Controller + Reliever
                                         Paramater Estimate             Pr > | t |          Paramater Estimate             Pr > | t |
Intercept                                                -3.4707          <0.001                            -2.2667          <0.001
Demographics
Region North Central                                       -0.3932          <0.001                           -0.1591            0.0020
Region Northeast                                           -0.0290           0.8430                          -0.0014            0.9900
Region West
                                                           -0.1649           0.1410                          -0.0199           0.8070
Female                                                     -0.0119           0.7700                          -0.1062          <0.001
Adult                                                       0.8893          <0.001                            0.2170          <0.001
Clinical Characteristics
Allergic Rhinitis                                          0.5128           <0.001                            0.6086          <0.001
Migraine                                                   -0.0270           0.7380                          -0.0390            0.5220
Depression                                                 -0.1795           0.0060                          -0.0067            0.8850
GI disorders                                               -0.0537           0.2740                          -0.1022            0.0050
Sinusitis                                                  -0.0655           0.1520                           0.0110            0.7400
Anxiety disorders                                          -0.1843           0.1320                          -0.2209            0.0150
#3-digit ICD-9 codes                                       0.0483           <0.001                            0.0481          <0.001
County Characteristics
County Average Income $15-20K                              0.2960            0.3290                          -0.0804            0.6810
County Average Income $20-25K
                                                           0.4274            0.1550                           0.0241            0.9010
County Average Income $25-35K                              0.3661            0.2240                           0.0713            0.7140
County Average Income >$35K                                0.8503            0.0050                           0.1602            0.4170
Copay Variables
Ratio of Controller/Reliever Copayment                     -0.0667           0.5030                           0.0308            0.6820
Tax Provider ID Controller %                               6.4705           <0.001                           1.1769            0.1840
Tax Provider ID Combination%                               1.0605            0.0320                          4.1513           <0.001
Chi2(3)*                                                  60.3200           <0.001                         164.5700           <0.001
LR chi2(38)                                             1816.3600           <0.001
Psuedo-R2                                                  0.0341
Number of Observations                                      26379




Notes: Referance category is Reliever Alone. * Chi-square test for significance of copay variables.
                                                                           Table 7
                                          Multinomial Logit Model of Medication Selection: Patients in Non-FFS Plans
                                                         Controller Alone                              Controller + Reliever
                                           Paramater Estimate             Pr > | t |        Paramater Estimate             Pr > | t |
Intercept                                                  -6.1203          <0.001                          -5.2240          <0.001
Demographics
Region North Central                                        -0.2239            0.0880                        -0.1658            0.0440
Region Northeast                                            -0.2124            0.0960                        -0.0735            0.3350
Region West
                                                            -0.2940           0.0170                         -0.3179          <0.001
Female                                                      -0.0941           0.2870                         -0.1897          <0.001
Adult                                                        1.1020          <0.001                           0.2973          <0.001
Clinical Characteristics
Allergic Rhinitis                                            0.8721          <0.001                           0.7965          <0.001
Migraine                                                    -0.0033            0.9870                         0.1745            0.2130
Depression                                                   0.0975            0.5540                        -0.1856            0.1160
GI disorders                                                -0.0568            0.6290                        -0.1773            0.0230
Sinusitis                                                    0.0685            0.5400                         0.0651            0.3690
Anxiety disorders                                           -0.6812            0.0450                        -0.3315            0.1250
#3-digit ICD-9 codes                                         0.0667           <0.001                          0.0632          <0.001
County Characteristics
County Average Income $15-20K                               -0.2739            0.5990                        -0.2224            0.5050
County Average Income $20-25K
                                                            -0.1448            0.7660                        -0.1310            0.6770
County Average Income $25-35K                               -0.1357            0.7770                        -0.2558            0.4080
County Average Income >$35K                                 -0.3545            0.4770                        -0.3857            0.2280
Copay Variables
Ratio of Controller/Reliever Copayments                      0.0816           0.7120                         0.6444           <0.001
Tax ID Prescriber Controller %                              11.4306           0.0030                         1.0697            0.6640
Tax ID Prescriber Combination%                               6.6881           0.0650                        11.1009           <0.001
Chi2(3)*                                                    16.1400           0.0011                        53.6800           <0.001
LR chi2(38)                                                598.6700          <0.001
Psuedo-R2                                                    0.0463
Number of Observations                                         6768




Note: Referamce category is Reliever Alone
                                             Table 8. Log-Linear Regression Results: Patients in FFS Plans
                                                       [Dependent Variable: Log(Total Payments)]


                                            Controller Alone                     Controller + Reliever                              Reliever Alone
                              Selectivity Adjusted NOT Adjusted            Selectivity Adjusted NOT Adjusted            Selectivity Adjusted NOT Adjusted
                              Parameter Pr > | t | Parameter Pr > | t |    Parameter Pr > | t | Parameter Pr > | t |    Parameter Pr > | t | Parameter Pr > | t |
                              Estimate             Estimate                Estimate             Estimate                Estimate             Estimate
Intercept                         1.9666 0.1070         6.0066 <0.001         5.1129 <0.001         6.1208 <0.001           2.1427 <0.001         5.0938 <0.001
Demographics
Region North Central              0.2803 <0.001         0.0633   0.1480       0.2251 <0.001         0.0277   0.2860         0.2460 <0.001       -0.0547  0.1360
Region Northeast                  0.1217 0.3370         0.0510   0.6300       0.0421   0.5890      -0.0277   0.6590        -0.0985 0.3030       -0.1831  0.0160
Region West                       0.0961 0.2430        -0.0021   0.9790       0.0357   0.6270      -0.0488   0.2720        -0.0528 0.5290       -0.1999 <0.001
Female                           -0.0138 0.6880        -0.0282   0.3620       0.0364   0.1000       0.0018   0.9160         0.0295 0.4590        0.0208  0.2720
Adult                             0.0208 0.8410         0.6823 <0.001         0.2500   0.0010       0.6550 <0.001           0.1375 0.0510        0.6722 <0.001
Clinical Characteristics
Allergic Rhinitis                -0.1254 0.0030         0.1099   0.0010      -0.1567   <0.001       0.1311   <0.001        -0.0451 0.0180        0.1312   <0.001
Migraine                         -0.0165 0.7140        -0.0320   0.5810       0.0102     0.8330    -0.0150     0.6480      -0.0002 0.9950       -0.0284    0.5050
Depression                        0.3995 <0.001         0.3139 <0.001         0.3262   <0.001       0.2709   <0.001         0.4994 <0.001        0.4013   <0.001
GI disorders                      0.0789 0.0090         0.0648   0.0710       0.1248   <0.001       0.0992   <0.001         0.0661 0.1720        0.0460    0.0640
Sinusitis                         0.0539 0.0510         0.0222   0.5120      -0.0033     0.8630    -0.0139     0.4530       0.0220 0.3810       -0.0107    0.6360
Anxiety disorders                 0.1709 0.1370         0.0651   0.4730       0.2036     0.0100     0.0827     0.1090       0.3699 <0.001        0.2874   <0.001
#3-digit ICD-9 codes              0.0877 <0.001         0.1055 <0.001         0.0763   <0.001       0.0986   <0.001         0.1119 <0.001        0.1324   <0.001
County Characteristics
County Average Income $15-       -0.1565   0.6690      -0.0311    0.8940      0.0583     0.6350     0.0944     0.3860       0.0111   0.9420      0.1220    0.3730
County Average Income $20-       -0.2616   0.4660      -0.0493    0.8310     -0.0396     0.7390     0.0696     0.5190      -0.0803   0.5820      0.1146    0.4000
County Average Income $25-       -0.1384   0.6950       0.0375    0.8710     -0.0055     0.9670     0.0906     0.4010      -0.0379   0.8140      0.1104    0.4190
County Average Income            -0.4295   0.2400      -0.0510    0.8270     -0.2139     0.1420     0.0553     0.6140      -0.3223   0.0290      0.0816    0.5560
Correlations
Lamda(1)                         -3.1896 <0.001                              -7.0098 <0.001                                -8.9698 <0.001
Lamda(2)                        -10.5181 <0.001                              -4.1839 <0.001                                -8.2394 <0.001
Lamda(3)                         -7.8338 <0.001                              -5.4709 <0.001                                -3.1968 <0.001
R-square                                                0.4597                                      0.4791
Hausman Test Statistic                                -13.9200 <0.001                             -189.900 <0.001        <0.001                 62.0700 <0.001
Number of Observations                                    3903                                       11427                                        11049




Notes: 1. Lamda is the conditional expected values of the residuals derived from controller alone(1), controller+reliever(2) and reliever alone(3)-multinomial
logit equation. 2. P-values are derived from bootstrapped standard errors.
                                             Table 9. Log-Linear Regression Results: Patients in Non-FFS Plans
                                                         [Dependent Variable: Log(Total Payments)]

                                              Controller Alone                      Controller+Reliever                             Reliever Alone
                               Selectivity Adjusted NOT Adjusted           Selectivity Adjusted NOT Adjusted           Selectivity Adjusted NOT Adjusted
                               Parameter Pr > | t | Parameter Pr > | t |   Parameter Pr > | t | Parameter Pr > | t |   Parameter Pr > | t | Parameter Pr > | t |
                               Estimate             Estimate               Estimate             Estimate               Estimate             Estimate
Intercept                         3.1781     0.0660     5.6622 <0.001          4.0577 <0.001        3.5437 <0.001         3.7828 <0.001        4.5272 <0.001
Demographics
Region North Central              -0.0192   0.9200     -0.0674  0.5690         0.0679  0.4200       0.0688  0.2240       -0.0722  0.1220       -0.0908 0.1640
Region Northeast                   0.0627   0.7480     -0.0121  0.9220         0.1229  0.0640       0.1263  0.1500       -0.0072  0.9330        0.0157 0.8020
Region West                       -0.3234   0.0040     -0.3268  0.0030        -0.1499  0.0650      -0.1729  0.0390       -0.2879 <0.001        -0.2616 <0.001
Female                            -0.0143   0.8840      0.0329  0.6670         0.0515  0.3350       0.0520  0.3010       -0.0028  0.9630       -0.0105 0.7990
Adult                              0.0170   0.9550      0.4876 <0.001          0.5631 <0.001        0.6438 <0.001         0.8801 <0.001         0.7813 <0.001
Clinical Characteristics
Allergic Rhinitis                  0.2900  0.1590       0.1509  0.0840        0.2727  0.0210        0.3353 <0.001         0.2532  0.0060        0.0820 0.2230
Migraine                           0.1048  0.4700      -0.0253  0.8820        0.0991  0.4890        0.1046  0.1190        0.0926  0.5090        0.0606 0.6120
Depression                         0.4014 <0.001        0.5120 <0.001         0.2330 <0.001         0.2548  0.0020        0.6096 <0.001         0.5847 <0.001
GI disorders                       0.0911  0.3520       0.1856  0.0680        0.1223  0.0060        0.1212  0.0160        0.1177  0.0610        0.1100 0.0680
Sinusitis                         -0.0216  0.8150      -0.0048  0.9590        0.0600  0.1570        0.0607  0.0850       -0.0919  0.0740       -0.1036 0.0750
Anxiety disorders                  0.1594  0.7060       0.0599  0.8400        0.1935  0.1880        0.1409  0.2510        0.1276  0.1330        0.2035 0.2150
#3-digit ICD-9 codes               0.1413 <0.001        0.1277 <0.001         0.1249 <0.001         0.1292 <0.001         0.1871 <0.001         0.1792 <0.001
County Characteristics
County Average Income $15-
20K                               -0.1889   0.6200     -0.2485    0.5700      0.2593     0.4400     0.2088    0.3820     -0.2283    0.6180     -0.1431    0.6050
County Average Income $20-
25K                               -0.4244   0.2990     -0.4548    0.2640      0.1860     0.5540     0.1668    0.3830     -0.0160    0.9720      0.0184    0.9440
County Average Income $25-
35K                               -0.5821   0.2100     -0.5504    0.1730      0.1211     0.7070     0.0628    0.7520     -0.0408    0.9310     -0.0328    0.8990
County Average Income >$35K
                                  -0.4976   0.2950     -0.5362    0.2040      0.2382     0.4620     0.1771    0.4640      0.0865    0.8570      0.0843    0.7510
Correlations
Lamda(1)                          -2.3181   0.0000                            -3.4653    0.0010                          -1.1454    0.4450
Lamda(2)                          -5.6860   0.0000                            -2.1676 <0.001                             -3.9541 <0.001
Lamda(3)                          -7.3977   0.0000                            -5.0881 <0.001                             -1.9950 <0.001
R-square                                                0.4563                                      0.3806                                      0.3872
Hausman Test Statistic                                 16.2200    0.4381                           -4.8800   >0.999                             3.3300    0.9997
Number of Observations                                     711                                        2881                                        3176




Notes: 1. Lamda is the conditional expected values of the residuals derived from controller alone(1), controller+reliever(2) and reliever alone(3)-multinomial
logit equation. 2. P-values are derived from bootstrapped standard errors.
             Figure 1. Controller/Reliever Medication Ratios by Plan Type and Year

2.5




 2




1.5

                                                                                            FFS
                                                                                            Non-FFS
                                                                                            Total

 1




0.5




 0
      1995            1996                1997                1998                   1999
             Figure 2. Controller/Reliever Copayment Ratios by Plan Type and Year

1.8



1.6



1.4



1.2



 1
                                                                                       FFS
                                                                                       Non-FFS
                                                                                       Total
0.8



0.6



0.4



0.2



 0
      1995            1996                1997               1998               1999
            Figure 3. Trends in Asthma Medication Copayments by Plan Type

10


9


8


7


6

                                                                                   FFS
5                                                                                  non-FFS
                                                                                   Total

4


3


2


1


0
     1995         1996               1997               1988                1999
             Figure 4. Trends in Total Payment Versus Copayment Ratios


 3




2.5




 2



                                                                                Totpay
1.5
                                                                                Copay



 1




0.5




 0
      1995       1996               1997               1998              1999
