NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCHOOL-TO-CAREER PROGRAMS AND TRANSITIONS
TO EMPLOYMENT AND HIGHER EDUCATION
David Neumark
Donna Rothstein
Working Paper 10060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10060
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

Neumark is Senior Fellow, Public Policy Institute of California; Professor of Economics, Michigan State
University; and Research Associate, NBER. Rothstein is Research Economist, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
U.S. Department of Labor. We are grateful to Daiji Kawaguchi and Jon Sonstelie, and seminar participants
at the Public Policy Institute of California, for helpful comments. This work was partially supported by the
Education Policy Center at Michigan State University. The views expressed are those of the authors and do
not reflect the views or policies of the Public Policy Institute of California, the Bureau of Labor Statistics or
its staff members, or the Education Policy Center. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by David Neumark and Donna Rothstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

School-to-Career Programs and Transitions to Employment and Higher Education
David Neumark and Donna Rothstein
NBER Working Paper No. 10060
October 2003
JEL No. J18, J24, J60, I21
ABSTRACT
The 1994 Federal School-to-Work Opportunities Act (STWOA) provided more than $1.5 billion
over five years to support increased career preparation activities in the country’s public schools.
However, the STWOA was not re-authorized, so state governments face decisions about levels of
funding support for school-to-career (STC) programs. Coupled with the availability of a new
longitudinal data source with rich information on STC programs – the 1997 National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY97) – it is therefore an opportune time to study the effectiveness of STC
programs. This paper uses the NLSY97 to assess the effects of STC programs on transitions to
employment and higher education among youths leaving high school, with a focus on estimating the
causal effects of this participation given possible non-random selection of youths into STC
programs.
David Neumark
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington Street, Suite 800
San Francisco, CA 94111
and NBER
neumark@ppic.org
Donna Rothstein
Bureau of Labor Statistics
2 Massachusetts Ave., NE
Suite 4945
Washington, DC 20212
rothstein.donna@bls.gov

I. Introduction
The 1994 Federal School-to-Work Opportunities Act (STWOA) provided more than $1.5 billion
to support increased career preparation activities in the country’s public schools.1 The STWOA was
spurred by a concern among policy-makers and researchers that youth labor markets in the United States
are overly chaotic, entailing unnecessary periods of joblessness, excessive job instability, and
employment in dead-end jobs (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1990). This perception of the problem
was aptly summarized in a report by the U.S. Office of Technology Assessment describing the existing
system as producing youths who were “unmotivated in school and spend years bouncing from one lowpaying job to another” (1995, p. 3).
Congress passed the STWOA in response to three areas of particular concern for public education
identified by researchers and educators. These were: (1) a lack of connection between school and work
that led many youths to be unmotivated in school and to experience subsequent difficulty moving out of
low-wage jobs; (2) youths completing school with insufficient skills needed for the labor market; and (3)
increasing labor market demands for complex thinking, close teamwork, and the ability to learn on the
job. The STWOA aimed to help young people develop the skills needed in the workforce and make
better connections to careers through school-to-career (STC) transition systems, which fostered
partnerships among schools, employers, and others (Office of Technology Assessment, 1995).
Specifically, the STWOA set out to increase: (1) school-based initiatives such as career links to academic
curriculum, and career-awareness activities; (2) work-based activities such as job shadowing, internships,
and apprenticeships; and (3) connecting activities, such as the development of partnerships with
employers and post-secondary institutions.
Spurred in part by funding provided to states under the STWOA, many states have implemented
extensive STC systems, generally entailing close cooperation with schools in the implementation of

1

This amount was originally appropriated for fiscal years 1994 to 1998 for grants to states and local partnerships
under the STWOA (Hershey, et al., 1999).

1

curriculum changes, partnerships with private business and government bodies, etc. 2 After its initial five
years, the STWOA was not re-authorized. As a result, states face sharp reductions in funding for STC
activities.3 Given that funding for STC programs is now almost entirely a state (or local) responsibility,
state policy-makers will inevitably face the question of whether these programs have been effective in
achieving their goals.
Aside from the usual difficulties of judging the success of a government program, an assessment
of STC is particularly difficult because the goal is ill-defined. As reflected in the concerns that spurred
the STWOA, the goal could perhaps best be characterized as “better career decision making” among
young men and women completing their education and entering the labor market. It is difficult to
quantify this goal, and even with agreed-upon measures researchers would face challenges given the
newness of STC programs and data sets most appropriate for their analysis. Nonetheless, researchers are
in a position to begin this task, because new data on STC participation available in the 1997 National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97) make it possible to study the impact of STC programs on the
early STC transition, as young men and women leave high school and make decisions about employment
and higher education.
The goal of this paper is to attempt to uncover evidence on the causal effects of high school STC
programs on employment and higher education, taking advantage of the information on STC program
participation in the NLSY97 as well as other important features of the data set. In particular, we take
seriously the likelihood that individuals select or are selected into participation in STC programs based on
characteristics that may be associated with post-high school enrollment or employment, but that may also
be unobserved by researchers. While STC is attracting increasing attention from researchers, the existing
2

While “school-to-work” is the more common appellation, many states have adopted the label “school-to-career.”
Given that most of the effort is devoted to high-school students, and that the goal is to improve career decisionmaking of youths–which may often entail further education–the STC label provides a better characterization.
Indeed, in the past school-to-work programs have sometimes suffered from the stigma associated with tracking
high-school students into vocational tracks rather than further education (Neumark and Allen, forthcoming).
Thus, in this work the “school-to-career” label is used.
3
For example, in 1996 California won an implementation grant from the National School-to-Work Office. The state
received approximately $130 million over five years. Following the conclusion of federal funding, the California
legislature approved legislation $5 million in state funding, which was later cut to $2 million by Governor Gray
Davis.

2

work has tended to shy away from trying to draw causal inferences, a conclusion also reached in a recent
survey of published academic research on STC across the United States by the Institution on Education
and the Economy (Hughes, et al., 2001). In contrast, while not claiming to have the definitive solution to
this problem, our goal in this paper is to exploit the NLSY97 to confront this issue in a thorough manner.
Of course, even a causal analysis of the effects of STC on higher education and employment does
not lend itself to a full-blown cost-benefit analysis, and indeed given the difficulty of characterizing better
career decision making there may never be a complete analysis of this nature. Nonetheless, information
on the impact of STC programs on transitions to employment and/or higher education can still inform
policy-makers as to whether some of the intended effects of STC are indeed occurring. After all, core
concerns of STC are moving people into higher-paying jobs, encouraging skill formation among new
labor market entrants, and increasing enrollment or employment in the immediate post-high school
period.
Besides addressing the effectiveness of school-to-career, this research relates to broader policy
issues. First, there has been an upsurge of interest in both the research and policy community on
educational quality, with a focus on establishing test-related standards and studying test-related outcomes.
Yet another important perspective on educational quality–not necessarily the most relevant, but perhaps
tied in more directly to the extent to which education ultimately affects socioeconomic outcomes–
concerns the link between education and labor market success (e.g., Card and Krueger, 1992). STC
programs may play an important role in this link. Second, a great deal of research focuses on policies to
mitigate the consequences of poverty or attack the sources of poverty, including social programs, income
support, and mandating higher wages for low-skill workers. To some extent, though, most policy-makers
and researchers would probably agree that the best thing we could do–if we only knew how–is to increase
the skills and productivity of those at the bottom of the socioeconomic scale so that they are able to earn a
market wage high enough to lift them and their families out of poverty. STC programs are one method to
attempt to achieve the goal of raising skills and productivity, perhaps most importantly among those who
would not attend four-year colleges.

3

II. Past Research
Three types of approaches to assessing the consequences of STC programs have been used in the
existing literature. The first relies on evaluations of specific programs, or what might be considered case
studies. For the most part, this research has not uncovered compelling evidence of positive effects of
STC programs. A 1994 report of the National Center for Research in Vocational Education (NCRVE)
provides a thorough compendium of research on these programs (Stern, et al., 1994). Based on this
compendium, it is safe to say that there is as yet relatively little persuasive evidence of positive impacts of
these programs on adult labor market outcomes. First, few studies have focused on labor market
outcomes more than a year or two after completion of the programs. But there is limited evidence that
over a period of a few years beneficial effects of some types of STC programs dissipate, as comparison
group members find good jobs on their own. Second, many of these studies do not construct a reasonable
comparison group, let alone consider the problem of selection into the program on the basis of
unobserved characteristics that might also be correlated with outcomes. Third, even those studies that
attempt to construct a good comparison group find no beneficial short-term labor market effects, with the
possible exception of those students who remained with the employer with whom they Aapprenticed@
during the program. Finally, some of the evidence suggests that STC programs may discourage postsecondary education.
A national STC study was completed relatively recently by Mathematica Research, Inc. (Hershey,
et al., 1999). However, the Mathematica study does not assess the causal relationship between STC and
student outcomes, but rather provides a national picture of STC initiatives. The Mathematica study
argues that STC implementation “generally involves broad and diverse initiatives that in varied ways
touch most or all students, so it is impossible to distinguish between participants and an unaffected
comparison group” (Hershey, et al., 1999, p. xviii). As a result, it focuses more on some of the processes
involved in STC implementation–important information, but quite different from the focus of this paper.
The second approach to studying STC is indirect, and stems from the argument that STC
programs are needed as a means of increasing early job market stability, reducing the costly nature of

4

“chaotic” youth labor markets in the United States. The counter-argument to this negative view of the
turbulent nature of youth labor markets is that workers receive positive returns to job shopping (e.g.,
Topel and Ward, 1992), presumably as workers (and employers) learn about their skills, aptitudes, and
interests by trying different jobs, leading to increasingly better matches as young workers move through a
series of jobs. Thus, this second approach has explored the effects of early labor market stabilityBwhich
STC programs are supposed to encourageBon adult labor market outcomes.
Earlier research on this question considered the relationship between early job market stability
and adult wages by exploring the correlations between a wide range of individuals= youth labor market
experiences and their labor market outcomes as more mature adults, in a multivariate framework that
controlled for other adult characteristics typically associated with these outcomes (Gardecki and
Neumark, 1998). Looking at wages, health and pension benefits, and full-time employment for
individuals in their late-20s to mid-30s, the results suggest that these labor market outcomes are for the
most part unrelated to the stability of early labor market experiences, especially for men, although as
many studies have found, training bestowed longer-term benefits.
However, because unobservables related to match quality and patterns of search and job shopping
in the early years in the labor market may be related to measures of early job market stability, this
evidence may not reveal the causal effect of early job market stability per se on adult labor market
outcomes. Consideration of models of on-the-job search reveals that the bias in the OLS estimates can go
in either direction. To remedy this problem, Neumark (2002) uses instrumental variables methods to
eliminate endogeneity or heterogeneity bias in the estimated relationship between early job market
stability and adult wages. Specifically, time-series and geographical variation in labor market conditions
facing workers entering the labor market is used to generate instruments for the job stability experienced
by workers as youths. The findings indicate that once account is taken of the endogenous determination
of early job stability and adult wages, the evidence points to positive effects of early job stability on adult
wages, suggesting that policies that exogenously increase early job stability might have net beneficial
effects. However, as this evidence is indirect it is suggestive at best.

5

Finally, the third approach to studying STC programs, on which the proposed research builds, is
to analyze large-scale longitudinal micro data sets, using statistical research designs intended to uncover
the causal impact of STC programs. Although this approach sacrifices some of the richness and
institutional detail afforded by case studies, it provides results that are much more generalizable and
broadly applicable, allows more precise and more disaggregated analyses by virtue of large sample sizes,
and in the case of long panels eventually permits the estimation of effects of STC programs on many
aspects of individuals= careers. A critical impediment to research on STC programs using large-scale
micro data sets, however, has been the absence of large representative data sets with information on such
programs. Fortunately, though, the new NLSY97 offers researchers opportunities to analyze direct
evidence on STC programs in the context of a large longitudinal micro data set.
Neumark and Joyce (2001) attempt to evaluate the effects of STC using the first round of the
NLSY97, but given the newness of the data set they are restricted to estimating effects on work- and
education-related expectations of high-school students. Overall, the evidence in Neumark and Joyce
(2000) did not support the finding that there is a causal effect of STC program participation on behavior
likely associated with future college attendanceBeither test taking or the subjective probability of
obtaining a four-year college degree. On the other hand, STC program participation does appear to have
modest positive effects on educational attainment in terms of respondents= subjective probabilities of
obtaining a high-school diploma. Finally, more in accordance with the traditional view of STC programs,
the data indicate that participation in these programs increases the perceived likelihood of future labor
market activity, both for the year following the survey and at age 30, with effects in the range of two to
five percentage points. Regardless, this study is more limited than the present research both in terms of
the outcomes it can study, as well as the solutions it considers with respect to the problem of causal
inference.
Of course in some respects experimental evidence based on random assignment to STC programs
is ideal. To the best of our knowledge, there is no such evidence available for STC programs per se. The
only exception is the recent (and ongoing) evaluation of career academies by the Manpower

6

Demonstration Research Corporation (Kemple and Snipes, 2000; Kemple, 2001). The most recent results
from this evaluation consider students one year after the completion of high school, and find no impact on
high school graduation rates, post-secondary education, or employment. While studies of this
natureBcarefully constructed experiments using random assignmentBare in principle the ideal way to
evaluate STC programs, such experiments are expensive, extremely difficult to implement, and when they
depart from their “ideal” setting are prone to problems identified in the literature on the evaluation of
other types of social programs (e.g., Heckman, et al., 2000). For both of these reasons, and because of
some of the advantages afforded by secondary longitudinal data, we suspect that examination of the
effects of STC based on longitudinal micro-data sets will ultimately play an important role in assessing
the effectiveness of STC programs.
III. Estimating the Causal Effects of STC Using the NLSY97
The core empirical framework will be estimation, at the individual level, of the relationship
between employment and/or enrollment in the post-high-school period, and participation in STC.4 STC
participation will be categorized in terms of participation in specific types of programs discussed below.
The analysis is based on dichotomous choice models for employment and enrollment.5 Generically, let
Yij be an indicator equal to one for when individual i in school j is employed or enrolled (depending on
the analysis), let STCij be a dummy variable for whether the individual reports participating in an STC
program (a vector of dummy variables for participation in a variety of STC programs is used in the
empirical implementation), and let Xij be a vector of controls that at times will include both individual and
school characteristics. We estimate linear probability models for Yij as a linear function of these
variables:

4

We considered studying other outcomes, including criminal activity, single parenthood, part-time vs. full-time
employment, type of post-secondary education, etc. But the combination of lower incidence of these different or
more detailed outcomes, and participation rates of about 10 to 20 percent in most types of STC programs,
precluded obtaining sufficiently precise estimates in these other analyses.
5
Those who report their employer as the military are coded as employed.

7

(1)

Yij = α + βSTCij + Xijγ + εij.6

The parameters of interest are β, of course, with estimates of β denoted b. Consistent estimation
of β requires that εij be uncorrelated with the controls in Xij as well as with STCij. However, as in most
research on program evaluation, the core problem that this research has to confront is “endogenous
selection.” The researcher can identify individuals who participate in STC programs, and can measure
outcomes hypothesized to be related to this participation. But because individuals choose to participate in
the program, it is difficult to establish whether an empirical relationship between program participation
and an outcome is a result of the program, or instead simply reflects individuals more disposed toward a
particular outcome having participated in the program. For example, individuals with the highest
expectations of work after high school may choose to participate in STC programs, perhaps because they
are more interested in learning about the job market. When actual work behavior is observed, then, we
would find that those who participated in STC have higher employment rates. Yet in this example there
is a non-causal source of the positive relationship between STC and employment. Alternatively, schools
with student populations that tend not to go to college may be more likely to offer STC programs and
hence have both higher participation and higher post-secondary employment (and lower college
enrollment). In either case STCij is correlated with εij, so that b is a biased estimate of the causal effect of
STC programs. Formally, while equation (1) may be the model we can estimate, the true model for an
individual observation is
(2)

Yij = α + βSTCij + Xijγ + qi + υij,

where q is an unobservable, fixed over time for each individual, reflecting underlying factors influencing
post-high school enrollment and employment decisions and outcomes, so that the error term ε in equation

6

We estimated versions of all models reported in this paper using logit models as well, and the results were very
similar. Using the linear probability model simplifies the presentation, and avoids distributional assumptions that
underlie the logit model. Reported standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity. Also, because there are often
multiple observations on students within the same school, the reported standard errors allow for heteroscedasticity
of the error term across schools and non-independence of an arbitrary nature within schools, which typically
results in somewhat larger standard errors.

8

(1) reflects both q and an idiosyncratic error term υ. The assumption is that E(υ|STC, X, q) = 0, but
because of selection into STC based on q, E(ε|STC, X) ≠ 0.
The most common approach to the endogenous selection problem generally, which is typically
made possible by the existence of large-scale longitudinal data sets, is to implement a panel data
estimator. Such estimators provide a measure of the outcome of interest before and after program
participation, so that the measure before the intervention captures the unobserved individual
characteristics that might be associated with program participation, and the change in the outcome then
provides a causal estimate. However, there is a fundamental difficulty that precludes longitudinal
estimation in studying the effects of STC. In particular, because we are studying the effects of a program
on individuals’ first labor market experiences (with the exception, perhaps, of some work while in high
school), or on further school enrollment of those already enrolled, there are no meaningful observations
on the outcomes of interest prior to the program.
As a result, in this research we have to consider other methods. Each of these is subject to some
criticisms–but indeed the same can be said of social experiments and longitudinal estimation (in other
contexts). The hope is that the “collage” of evidence from the alternative approaches, along with some
analysis of whether each approach is likely to lessen any biases rather than exacerbate them, will help
provide a range of causal estimates of the effects of STC.
The first line of defense against unobserved heterogeneity is to try to introduce an extensive set of
controls for the factors that might affect the dependent variables–in this case post-high school enrollment
and employment–and also be correlated with STC participation. In principle, this may include direct
measures of such factors, or proxy variables for unobservable factors, which we denote Z. Because proxy
variables figure prominently in our analysis, including what might be considered a set of ideal proxies, we
discuss the conditions under which a proxy variable corrects for the unobservable in some detail.
Wooldridge (2002) discusses the two conditions under which inclusion of proxy variables for unobserved
factors leads to consistent estimates of the other parameters of interest. The first condition is that Z is
redundant in the equation of interest, or equivalently E(Y|STC,X,q) = E(Y|STC,X,Z,q). This is not a

9

controversial assumption, as the only reason we include Z is because we do not have a measure of q. The
second condition is that if we take the linear projection of q on Z, and define the projection error as η,
then η is uncorrelated with STC and each of the variables in X. In words, this requires that the proxy Z is
sufficiently closely related to the unobservable q that once Z is included in equation (2) there is no
omitted variable bias in the estimated coefficients of STC and X from the variation in q that is not
reflected in the linear projection of q on Z.7
Wooldridge terms the case when the second condition does not hold exactly as an “imperfect
proxy,” and shows that the inclusion of such a proxy is still likely to reduce bias in the OLS estimates as
long as the proxy is reasonable. Of course, one can never know with certainty that a given set of proxy
variables adequately captures the unobservables that underlie the endogenous selection problem. But
comparing the estimates of the coefficients of STC participation using a narrow set of control variables
and a detailed set of proxy variables can help to gauge whether biases from remaining unobservables are
likely. Specifically, if the inclusion of the detailed proxy variables has little or no impact on the
estimates, then because their inclusion reduces the bias, it is arguably less plausible (more so the more
complete the set of proxy variables) that remaining unobservables generate a correlation between STC
participation and enrollment or employment.
The NLSY97 offers a detailed set of control variables for characteristics of both the individual
respondents and their families. In addition to fairly typical demographic controls (sex, race, ethnicity, and
age), the data set includes three additional sets of control variables that we view as potentially important.
These include data on: living arrangements and the respondent’s family (including urban residence,
whether one lives with both biological parents, only the biological mother or father, a biological parent
and a step parent, or in some other arrangement, as well as information on household size, household

7

Note that this implies that, in contrast to the classical measurement error case where we would postulate the
relationship between the unobservable q and the “error-ridden” proxy Z as Z = θq + µ, with µ uncorrelated with q,
we instead use q = λ + Zπ + µ’, where µ’ is uncorrelated with Z. Then when µ’ appears in the estimated equation,
unlike in the classical measurement error case it does not lead to inconsistent estimates because of a correlation
with Z.

10

income,8 and the biological mother’s schooling); test scores from the Armed Services Vocational
Aptitude Battery (ASVAB); and self-reported measures of school behavior (whether the respondent was
threatened at school, or had gotten into a physical fight at school, and whether the respondent had been
late with no excuse two or more times, or absent two or more weeks, all measured in 1997). This rich
array of variables seems likely to capture some of the variation in underlying propensities for post-high
school enrollment or employment, including the quality and quantity of human capital investments in
children, resources available in the household, educational norms in the family, labor market networks,
the individual respondents’ academic ability, and the extent to which the respondent is learning traits such
as timeliness and reliability that are valued by employers. But these variables may also directly affect
enrollment and employment outcomes, so they perhaps should not viewed as proxy variables.
Aside from a rich set of controls, the NLSY97 data have a second feature that is potentially very
useful in trying to uncover the causal effects of STC. Specifically, the NLSY97 also includes the
respondent’s self-reported subjective probabilities for future education and employment, including:
receipt of a high school diploma by age 20; obtaining a four-year college degree by age 30; and working
over 20 hours per week at age 30. As explained in more detail in the next section, these variables are
measured in 1997, before the STC participation that is used in the estimation. By including these work
and schooling expectations, we have in mind the following “experiment.” Prior to participating in STC,
students are asked about their post-high school work and schooling expectations. Then some participate
in STC and some do not, and we subsequently observe some dimensions of their post-high school work
and schooling behavior. If, for example, conditional on educational expectations, STC participants are
more likely to be enrolled in college after leaving high school, then it might be quite sensible to infer a
causal effect of STC, because the expectations questions should have controlled for remaining
unobservables associated with post-high school educational decisions or outcomes.

8

Household income is from Round 1, and is from the parent questionnaire except in the rare event that the youth is
defined as independent in 1997.

11

These expectations data can be thought of in two alternative ways that may help justify their use.
First, the expectations variables can be thought of as coming closer to serving as perfect proxy variables.
They should easily satisfy the redundancy condition because they should play no independent role net of
the unobserved propensities for post-high school enrollment and employment for which they are proxies.
And they should satisfy the second condition for a proxy, because it seems very likely that once these are
included, there should not be any remaining correlation between the unobservable q in equation (2) and
STC (or X). Indeed, we can think of any remaining variation in q net of these expectations (or the error
term η in the linear projection of q on these expectations) as nothing but forecast error. In this case η
would be uncorrelated with X and any variation in STC that could have been predicted at the time the
expectations were formed, which is the variation that gives rise to endogenous selection. An exception to
this would be if assignment to STC programs is based on information about η that is unknown to the
individual, which could occur if schools have better information about factors leading to benefits from
STC than students have and assign students to STC based on this. But as long as STC participation is
chosen by students, the earlier school and work expectations may be ideal proxies.
Alternatively, including the expectations questions can be interpreted as coming closer to the
longitudinal estimator that we would like to have, but which–as explained above–does not exist in the
study of STC. That is, these latter controls are meant to capture some measures of an individual’s
propensity for later enrollment or employment prior to participation in STC, and in that sense, perhaps,
can be interpreted as proxies for the unobserved lagged behavior that is in some cases included as an
independent variable to address the problem of endogenous selection. The tradeoff, however, is that these
variables may to some extent be outcomes of the high school experience, including STC. Although most
of our specifications rely on STC participation measured after these behaviors and expectations are
measured, the STC participation may be related to earlier features of respondents’ high school education.
If so, then a finding that including these behaviors and expectations variables reduces or eliminates the
effects of STC might reflect “over-controlling” that leads to understatement of the effects of STC because
we have effectively included a version of the dependent variable as an independent variable. But

12

conversely, if the effects of STC persist upon including these variables, we would argue that a causal
interpretation of the effects of STC would be significantly bolstered.
The methods discussed thus far focus on trying to control “directly” for the individual-level
heterogeneity that may underlie endogenous selection of individuals into STC participation, by including
one version or another of controls for this heterogeneity. The alternative way to approach the selection
problem is to indirectly avoid the bias caused by this unobserved heterogeneity, using an instrumental
variable (IV) that helps predict participation in STC, but is not itself correlated with the unobserved
factors associated with this participation that also affect enrollment and employment outcomes. This is
particularly useful if despite the availability of the proxy variables and the expectations data there is still
substantial selection on individual-specific unobservables. In this case equation (1) is augmented with an
equation for the propensity to participate in STC, in which Z denotes the instrumental variable:
(3)

STCij = α’ + β’Zij + λij.

In the NLSY97, in addition to the survey questions administered to individuals, a survey of
schools elicits information on STC programs offered by schools; these data are accessible only to BLS
researchers.9 The school-level information on offerings of STC programs raises the possibility of using
school-level variation in STC programs to address the selection problem. In particular, under some
assumptions these school offerings could provide instrumental variables to use in accounting for the
endogenous selection of individuals into STC programs. School offerings of STC programs would
provide a reasonable IV for individual participation if two conditions hold. First, these offerings should
influence individual participation. And second, the expectation of Y in equation (1) conditional on X and
STC participation should not depend on whether the school offers STC programs.

9

For the most part, the school survey asks about the same programs covered in the individual survey, with a few
exceptions. First, the individual survey also includes information on “career major” programs, which are a
sequence of courses based on an occupational goal. However, information on these programs is elicited in a
different manner from the questions used for other school-to-work programs, and hence is not analyzed here. (In
the school survey, in contrast, information on all types of school-to-work programs comes from a similar set of
questions.) Second, on the school survey apprenticeships and internships are covered separately. Third, the
school survey does not cover mentoring programs. And finally, there is an “other” category for STC programs,
which we ignore in our analysis.

13

A priori, it seems likely that the first condition would hold. However, in earlier work (Neumark
and Joyce, 2000) this IV strategy was considered in estimating equations for expected employment and
enrollment behavior, and, surprisingly, there turned out to be virtually no correspondence between the
STC programs in which students reported participation, and school reports of provision of STC programs.
In particular, overall and by type of program, individual and school reports were generally statistically
independent.10 But whereas the earlier research was based on the 1996 school survey, data from a new
2000 school survey are now available, and the newer survey collected data in a more reliable fashion that
should increase the correspondence between individual and school reports regarding STC. In particular,
the 1996 survey used a grid structure to elicit information from schools on STC programs. The grid had
some confusing features, which may well explain why there was an item non-response rate averaging
approximately 15 percent. In contrast, the 2000 survey was redesigned, although eliciting largely the
same information, and has an item non-response rate averaging only 2.3 percent.11 It turns out that the
STC offerings in the 2000 school survey have much higher predictive power for individual participation.
Most importantly, in first-stage regressions for STC program participation (based on the specifications
used later in the paper) the estimated coefficient on whether the school offers the corresponding program
is always positive and significant at the one-percent level, with F-statistics for the instruments in the firststage regression (which with a single instrument are the squares of the t-statistics on the instrument) often
exceeding 10. At the same time, though, we still find that there is a good deal of slippage between
individual reports of participation and school offerings, as it is quite common for individuals to report
participation in programs that their schools do not report offering, which would appear to be impossible.

10

In working more with these data, we uncovered some errors in use of the school survey data in Neumark and
Joyce (2000), in that some schools that did not respond to the survey were inadvertently treated as offering no
STC programs. However–reinforcing the poor correspondence between the individual and school data–when
these schools were dropped the association between individual and school reports of STC programs weakened
rather than strengthened.
11
In addition, although likely less important, whereas Neumark and Joyce (2000) used self-reported STC
participation from Round 1, this paper uses data from Rounds 2-4. In Rounds 2-4 the questions in the individual
survey refer to current participation (specifically, participation since the last survey), rather than whether one ever
participated, which should increase the correspondence of the answers from the individual and school surveys.

14

However, it is the second condition–that the IV can be excluded from the employment or
enrollment equation we are estimating–that appears to be most problematic. It is easiest to illustrate the
problem by first considering the ideal case. The ideal case is one in which school offerings of STC
programs are randomly distributed across schools. In this case it might still be possible to tell a story in
which STC offerings affect enrollment and employment even conditional on individual participation. For
example, if a school offers extensive STC programs even non-participants might be affected, perhaps
because of the influence of peers or the overall culture of the school. But when STC programs are not
randomly distributed across schools the problem could be far worse. If, for example, STC programs tend
to arise in schools that are failing to send students to college, or schools that fail to place students in jobs,
then these offerings may turn out to be strongly correlated with the error term in equation (1).
It turns out to be readily apparent in these data that STC program offerings are strongly associated
with school-level characteristics that may be associated with students’ post-secondary enrollment and
employment. In Table 1, we report estimates of linear probability models for the STC programs that each
individual is offered in his or her school, first for participation in any program, and then in each specific
type of program. The independent variables are a number of school-level characteristics reported on the
same school survey described above. Because this analysis is intended to be informative about the
possibility of estimating equation (1) using instrumental variables, the sample here is the subsample of the
main analysis sample in this paper (described in more detail below) for which individuals can be matched
to the school survey, and hence for which the instruments are available.
Inspection of Table 1 shows that many school-level characteristics that are likely to be associated
with post-high school outcomes are also strongly associated with STC offerings.12 For example, the
proportions of students involved in four types of problematic behavior–truancy, pregnancies, alcohol

12

We report coefficients for the regressions including the school-level characteristics only. But because the more
appropriate question for IV estimation might be whether STC offerings are associated with school-level
characteristics after controlling for the characteristics of individual respondents, we also report on the statistical
significance of the results if we include all of the individual-level controls as well, using the ‘+’ superscripts.
(Specifically, we include the controls listed in Table 4.) As indicated by the ‘*’ and ‘+’ superscripts in the table,
this has virtually no impact on the conclusions.

15

possession, and drugs–are in many cases significantly related to school STC offerings. The directions of
the effects are not always consistent, but the estimates overall indicate that characteristics of the student
body are associated with STC programs students are offered. Teacher characteristics are also strongly
associated with STC offerings. In particular, students in schools with highly paid teachers are
significantly less likely to be offered many types of STC programs.
Although less relevant for assessing whether we can use the school-level variation in offerings of
STC as an IV, Table 2 reports estimates of the same specifications reported in Table 1, but simply using
all of the school survey observations available in the NLSY97, weighted for representativeness of the
sample of schools. While the statistical strength of the relationships between school and student-body
characteristics and STC offering is somewhat weaker, the estimates are often quite similar, and many are
statistically significant. While not as directly informative about the potential for using IV estimation,
these estimates are informative about the simpler question of the types of schools that offer STC
programs.
Based on these findings, as well as the still problematic relationship between school STC
offerings and individual STC participation noted above, we do not put any store in IV estimation based on
the STC programs offered by schools. STC programs are sufficiently strongly associated with
characteristics of schools and their students that the school-level variation is not helpful in identifying the
effects of STC participation. Another way to think about the same problem is as follows. A simple way
to examine the question of whether STC programs increase post-high school education or employment is
to look directly at school-level estimates of these post-high school outcomes as functions of the STC
programs that schools offer. Such regressions would be easily interpreted from a policy perspective, as
they attempt to ask whether getting more STC programs to be offered by schools increases post-high
school enrollment or employment. However, these regressions only answer this question if the observed
variation in school STC offerings is not correlated with the error terms in these “reduced-form” equations.
Thus, for example, if STC programs tend to proliferate in under-performing schools, this would tend to
obscure beneficial effects of STC in the across-school “experiment.” The evidence in Table 1 suggests

16

that, in fact, variation in offerings of STC programs at the school level is strongly associated with
characteristics of schools that are likely to be strongly related to post-high school outcomes for their
students. We therefore do not pursue this strategy of estimating the effects of STC participation based on
school-level variation in offerings of STC.
The preceding estimates illustrate that there are important school-level characteristics of the
student body and the school itself that are associated with whether STC programs are offered. These
associations suggest that if we use individual-level STC participation to identify the effects of STC, but
the variation in participation stems partly from variation across schools, then we may obtain biased
estimates. That is, ε in equation (1) may have a school-level component that is correlated with individual
STC participation. It turns out that the NLSY97 has one additional feature that we can exploit to address
this problem. Specifically, there are data on multiple students in the same school. This occurs because
the NLSY97 consists of multi-stage stratified random samples (a cross-section sample and a supplemental
sample of additional blacks and Hispanics);13 the multi-stage stratification leads to observations that tend
to be clustered by geographic areas. All schools in the sampling units were identified and assigned a
unique code. While these codes are not included in the public-use files, they are available to BLS
researchers. Because of this feature, school fixed effects can be added to equation (1) to control for all
unobserved factors that are common to students within a school. The school fixed-effects estimator
identifies the effects of STC participation from the within-school differences between those who do and
do not participate in STC and the differences in outcomes associated with this participation, and hence
does not rely at all on variation in STC participation that may be driven by the problematic across-school
variation in offerings of STC.
In other words, even though schools that offer STC differ from other schools, so that we cannot
identify the effects of STC from across-school variation, the NLSY97 data permit us to look within
schools, estimating the effects of STC solely from within-school variation in STC. Of course, since

13

In the data, anyone of Hispanic origin is coded as Hispanic, and blacks must be non-Hispanic.

17

individuals within schools differ from one another, in the within-school estimation attention must still be
paid to individual-level heterogeneity.

IV. Data Set, Variables, and Analysis Sample
The research relies on the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97), which offers
the best information available to researchers to date on STC programs. In the NLSY97 individuals are
surveyed about “programs schools offer to help students prepare for the world of work.” The STC
programs covered in the NLSY97 include: job shadowing; mentoring (matching students to an individual
in an occupation); cooperative education (combining academic and vocational studies); work in a schoolsponsored enterprise; tech prep (a planned program of study with a defined career focus); and internships
or apprenticeships.
In Round 1, the STC questions cover the types of programs in which individuals participated (at
all and most recently), whereas in subsequent rounds the questions shifted to participation in the past year.
The questions are asked of all 9th to 12th graders in Round 1. In Rounds 2-4 they are asked of any
respondents enrolled in school (including college), although we focus on participation while in high
school by only using STC information for years in which respondents were enrolled in high school.
The manner in which the STC data are collected raises two issues. First, because some (and most
likely the larger share of) STC participation occurs in the later high school years, we cannot use the
NLSY97 to study the effects of STC on high school completion. Because high school dropouts would by
construction report less STC participation, there would be a spurious negative correlation between STC
participation and dropping out of high school. Second, a moderate share of individuals report some
college enrollment in the last year in which they are enrolled in high school, so in principle these
individuals could be reporting STC during their short initial spell of college. As a check on the
robustness of our results, we excluded the STC information for that interview year when calculating
our STC measures. We found that our qualitative conclusions were unaffected by this alteration in
the STC measure.

18

The analysis is based on data from the first four rounds of the NLSY97. When the first round
was administered, in 1997, respondents were aged 12-17.14 With the second round, then, we can begin to
observe some respondents who have left high school, but we get many more such observations with the
third and fourth rounds, and therefore focus on educational and employment outcomes measured as of the
third or fourth rounds. Table 3 gives some idea of the breakdown of the sample. First, with respect to the
basic sample, of the total 8,984 original respondents to the NLSY, 8,510 were interviewed in 1999 or
2000 (Rounds 3 and 4).15 Of these, attention will be restricted to those aged 18 or older, which eliminates
about 40 percent of the sample (about 3,500 observations), and to those for whom we get at least one
observation (in 1999 or 2000) at which they are not enrolled in high school, yielding 4,234 observations.
The sample is restricted in this way to isolate those individuals for whom we can observe the early years
of their employment or higher education after leaving high school. In future research we will study the
longer-term career trajectories of STC participants and non-participants.
In addition to meeting these criteria, information on STC participation is also required. In order
to get an accurate reading on STC participation, and to be able to measure some behaviors and
expectations as of a well-defined date prior to the STC participation we study, we focus mainly on the
information provided in the surveys after the first round in 1997, which for each subsequent round covers
participation in the past year. (However, we verified the robustness of the results to using information on
any STC in which the respondent had ever participated.) Requiring STC information after Round 1 drops
sample observations for those who did not answer the STC part of the survey after this round, either
because they had not spent time in high school in 1997 or a subsequent year, or in subsequent years were
not enrolled as of the interview date and hence were not asked the STC questions. Coupled with some
14
15

Respondents were aged 12-16 as of December 31, 1996.
Like any longitudinal study, the NLSY97 suffers from some attrition, as indicated by the dropoff in interviews. In
general, though, the National Longitudinal Surveys have been very successful at following cohort members over
time. It is quite plausible that attriters differ from non-attriters with respect to their STC transitions—for example,
those who become idle after leaving high school may be more like to attrit. However, only if attriters differ from
non-attriters with respect to the effects of school-to-work will the parameter estimates of interest be biased. This
question can be explored using methods paralleling those in Falaris and Peters (1998), who test for attrition bias
by comparing estimates of behavioral equations of “eventual” attriters and non-attriters in the period prior to
attrition of the former. However, this will not be feasible with the NLSY97 until quite a few more rounds of data
are available.

19

final sample restrictions on availability of the other data used in the study, this takes us down to 3,279
observations. For our baseline analysis sample, we also exclude private schools, which are not the focus
of STC policy, and vocational schools, which in a sense offer nothing but STC. This leaves us with 2,933
observations.
Finally, for two of the analyses the sample is restricted further. First, while one can estimate
linear models with school fixed effects for the full sample, observations that are “singletons” in their
school contribute no identifying information, so there is some interest in comparing estimates with and
without the fixed effects for the subsample of individuals for which there are multiple respondents for
their school; there are 2,230 such observations. Second, the work and schooling expectations data from
1997 are only asked of those born in 1980 or 1981, the two oldest birth cohorts, leaving us with 2,057
observations from the baseline analysis sample; we lose far fewer than a proportionate number of
observations because the other sample restrictions leave us with mainly older NLSY97 respondents.
V. Results
STC Participation
We begin by presenting some linear probability models for who participates in STC, in part to
provide descriptive information on STC participation, and in part to provide a preliminary assessment of
the severity of the problem of endogenous selection into STC programs. Table 4 presents in the first row
the proportions of students participating in any STC and then in each type of program covered in the
individual survey, and in the remaining rows presents the linear probability estimates for any STC
participation and participation in each type of program. The models include the demographic controls,
the living arrangement/family controls, and the test scores and school behaviors that are used as proxy
variables for unobserved heterogeneity.
One curious finding is that for three types of STC programs (coop, school enterprise, and tech
prep) black students are significantly more likely to participate, with the estimates indicating participation
probabilities that are higher by 32 to 79 percent relative to the overall sample. Note that this appears to be
a within-school phenomenon, as there was no significant evidence in Tables 1 or 2 that schools with more

20

black students were more likely to offer STC. Whether this reflects higher returns to STC for blacks is
addressed below; the alternative is that blacks for some reason are more likely assigned to such programs
despite no greater benefit for them, which would raise a number of interesting questions that are not the
focus of this paper.
The most striking finding, though, which is more directly relevant to the question of whether and
how we can estimate the causal effects of STC participation, is that almost no other variables are
significantly related to STC participation, aside from what might be considered a smattering of the
estimated coefficients the statistical significance of which could just reflect randomness; indeed,
excepting the estimates of the black-white difference, 7.5 percent of the remaining coefficient estimates
are significant at the five-percent level. This is also reflected in the very low R-squares for these models
of individual participation, which are generally one-fifth or less of the R-squares for the models for
whether schools offered STC, even when individual characteristics were omitted from those models
(Table 1). The finding that very few variables predict STC participation suggests that problems from
endogenous selection into STC participation may not be too severe. If STC participation were randomly
assigned we would, of course, expect none of the variables in Table 4 to predict participation, and the
evidence does not deviate from this too strongly. Nonetheless, because STC participation was not
randomly assigned, selection on unobservables of course cannot be ruled out.
Basic Multivariate Analysis
Tables 5A and 5B begin the multivariate analysis. While Table 5A reports the estimated
coefficients of the variables for participation in STC programs, Table 5B reports estimated coefficients
for the control or proxy variables for the specifications including the full sets of proxy variables. Turning
first to Table 5A, the first four columns report linear probability estimates of models for whether the
individual has some college education since leaving high school, and the last four columns report models
for current employment. For each of the two dependent variables, the first column includes only the
demographic controls. The second through fourth columns include an increasingly larger set of the

21

control or proxy variables: first adding the living arrangement/family variables, then the test scores, and
finally the school behaviors.16
Looking first at college education, the estimates in Table 5A reveal considerable heterogeneity in
the effects of different types of STC programs. In column (1), with minimal controls, we see that
mentoring and school enterprise STC programs are associated with a significantly higher likelihood of
some college education, with the differential ranging from about 0.07 to 0.11. Relative to the sample
proportion of 0.50 with some college, these estimates imply increases of 14 to 22 percent in the
probability of college attendance. On the other hand, tech prep STC programs are associated with a
significantly lower likelihood of college education.
In columns (2)-(4), as the control variables are added, these estimated effects weaken in size and
statistical significance although overall the changes are small.17 Adding the controls for living
arrangements and family structure, the estimated effects of school enterprise and tech prep fall slightly
and remain statistically significant (the latter only at the ten-percent level), while the estimated effect of
mentoring falls by about one-third and becomes statistically insignificant. This latter result reflects the
finding that those with non-traditional family structure are less likely to be in mentoring programs (Table
4), and, as shown in column (1) of Table 5B, are less likely to attend college, so that absent these controls
the omitted variable bias is positive. When the ASVAB scores are added, in column (3) of Table 5A, the
estimated effects of school enterprise and tech prep fall further, although the former remains statistically
significant. At the same time, the estimated effect of job shadowing rises and becomes statistically
significant at the ten-percent level, presumably reflecting the negative association of all four test scores
with participation in job shadowing (Table 4), and the positive associations between test scores and
college attendance (Table 5B, column (1)). Finally, when the school behaviors are also added, we find

16
17

The variables included in each of these sets of controls are listed in Table 4.
We use the word “effect” to summarize our results once we include the proxy variables, as this represents our first
strategy to recover causal effects. We are well aware, of course, that each strategy may not in fact reveal causal
effects.

22

that only school enterprise STC programs are significantly associated with college attendance, with a
positive effect estimated at 0.088.
Columns (1’)-(4’) turn to current employment. The results for current employment are less
sensitive to the addition of the proxy variables than were the results for some college. In all cases we find
statistically significant positive effects of coop and internship/apprenticeship STC programs, with effects
near 0.07. Relative to a sample proportion currently employed of 0.64, these estimates imply that these
types of STC programs are associated with approximately 11 percent increases in the probability of posthigh school employment.
The estimates of the coefficients of all of the control (and proxy) variables in the fullest
specifications are reported in Table 5B. Aside from the findings already noted, there are a few other
noteworthy results, most unsurprising. First, women and blacks are significantly more likely to have
attended some college, conditional on the observables, while blacks are less likely to be employed. In
general, household structures deviating from two biological parents are associated with a lower likelihood
of college attendance and a higher likelihood of employment, while respondents from smaller households,
from households with higher income, and whose mothers are more educated are more likely to have
attended some college. Presumably all of these effects reflect the impact of economic resources on
college attendance. Also not surprisingly, the ASVAB scores–in particular for word knowledge and math
knowledge–are significantly positively associated with college attendance, but not with current
employment. Finally, all four indicators of troublesome behaviors in high school are significantly
associated with a lower probability of attending college. Thus, the proxy variables have rather strong
effects, and in the expected directions, on the enrollment and employment outcomes, suggesting that the
reason they do relatively little to mediate the effects of STC participation is because they are very weakly
associated with this participation–as documented in Table 4–rather than because they are uninformative
about enrollment and employment outcomes.
Overall, the basic multivariate analysis suggests some positive effects of STC participation on
college education and on current employment. More specifically, school enterprise programs are

23

associated with a higher likelihood of obtaining some college education, and coop and
internship/apprenticeship programs are associated with increased employment. As already noted, the
extensive set of proxy variables does relatively little to alter the estimated relationships between STC and
enrollment and employment, although there may still be important unobservables underlying these
estimated effects. In particular, although the links between coop or internship/apprenticeship programs
and later employment seem reasonably straightforward, the link between school enterprise and college
attainment is less obvious, suggesting that the estimated effect of school enterprise programs may be
spurious and reflect underlying differences in unobservables rather than effects of STC participation. In
the following subsections such questions receive more attention.
Work and Schooling Expectations
The next analysis introduces variables measuring respondents’ work and schooling expectations
during high school. Recall that these are measured in 1997, prior to when STC participation is measured.
Thus, the hope is that these variables capture unobserved characteristics of respondents associated with
the dependent variables, without themselves being driven by STC participation. Further, these variables
are intended to “mimic” a longitudinal before-and-after estimator by asking whether observed work and
schooling behavior differs from earlier expectations in a manner that suggests an effect of STC
participation.
The results are reported in Table 6. For each dependent variable, we first report the estimates
excluding these variables (and hence paralleling columns (4) and (4’) of Table 5) for the subsample of
observations–the 1980 and 1981 birth cohorts–for which these data are available. Holding the sample
constant allows us to isolate the effects of adding the expectations variables. The estimates for this
subsample in columns (1) and (1’) of Table 6 are generally similar to the corresponding estimates for the
full analysis sample. For some college, only for school enterprise STC programs is there a significant
effect of STC. It is positive like for the full sample, although a bit larger (0.113 compared with 0.088).
For current employment, the estimated effect of internship/apprenticeship programs is the same (0.072),

24

and remains statistically significant for the subsample. However, the estimated effect of coop programs
falls somewhat (from 0.071 to 0.047) and is no longer statistically significant.
Columns (2) and (2’) report the results when the expectations variables are added. There is
remarkably little change in the estimated coefficients or their statistical significance. The estimated effect
of school enterprise on college attendance falls by 0.009 and remains statistically significant, and the
estimated effect of internship/apprenticeship programs is unchanged.18 Furthermore, none of the
magnitudes of the estimated coefficients of the other STC programs change much or become statistically
significant. Finally, we note that the expectations for a four-year degree are strongly positively associated
with actual college attendance. At the same time, these expectations are strongly negatively associated
with employment, whereas work expectations for age 30 are strongly positively associated with
employment. This latter evidence indicates that the expectations variables are quite informative about
subsequent behavior, bolstering the validity of this approach.
Thus, it appears that once we include the detailed set of control variables (in the last columns of
Table 5A), this analysis points to little remaining selection bias in the estimated effects of STC. While
the analysis with the expectations data could only be done on a subsample, we can take the finding of no
indication of remaining bias and return to the estimates for the full sample. The evidence, therefore, still
points to positive causal effects of school enterprise STC programs on college attendance, and of coop
and internship/apprenticeship programs on employment, in the immediate post-high school period.
School Fixed Effects
Finally, we turn to the analysis incorporating the fixed school effects, to avoid any identification
of the effects of STC participation driven by across-school variation. For this analysis, we restrict
attention to the subsample of individuals with multiple observations in the same school, as it is only these
individuals who identify the effects of STC programs; any variation for individuals who are the sole
representatives of their school are captured in the fixed effect for their school. We first report estimates
18

This evidence also indicates that concerns regarding “over-controlling” were clearly not warranted, as the
inclusion of the variables measuring expectations (and behaviors, in Table 5) has relatively little impact on the
estimates.

25

without the school fixed effects for this subsample, and then with the fixed effects. Of course, the fixed
effects estimates would be identical if the “school singletons” were included, albeit with different
standard errors, so we can still do the comparison to the full sample estimates without fixed effects.19 In
these specifications we include the full set of proxies, but we exclude the expectations variables because
they did not matter in Table 6, and because this would impose a further sizable sample restriction.
The estimates in columns (1) and (1’) of Table 7, for the “fixed effects sample” but excluding the
fixed effects are quite similar to the full sample results (columns (4) and (4’) of Table 5A). There is a
positive and significant estimated effect of school enterprise on college attendance that is only a shade
larger (0.091 versus 0.088), and positive and significant estimates of the effects of coop and
internship/apprenticeship programs on current employment. However, while the estimated effect of coop
programs is of similar magnitude, the estimated effect of internship/apprenticeship programs is larger
(0.123 versus 0.072). In addition, the estimated effect of tech prep programs on college attendance is
larger negative (−0.070 versus −0.042) and statistically significant.
The important question, though, is how the estimates change when the school fixed effects are
added. In the estimates for college attendance, the effects of STC programs strengthen, with the already
significant effects of school enterprise and tech prep programs growing, and a positive and significant
effect of job shadowing programs emerging as well. In the estimates for current employment, the
estimated positive effect of coop programs grows from 0.073 to 0.089, remaining statistically significant,
while the estimated effect of internship/apprenticeship programs falls from 0.123 to 0.072, and becomes
statistically significant only at the ten-percent level. The changes in the estimated effects of STC program
participation are not large, but they are not trivial either, and in some cases the conclusions are
substantively different (e.g., with respect to job shadowing). Hausman tests for whether we need the
school fixed effects (relative to random effects) yield p-values of 0.19 for the some college specification,
and 0.25 for the current employment specification. Formally these results suggest that we can exclude the

19

If observations on individuals who are the only sample member from their school are included the standard errors
are larger.

26

school fixed effects. But these p-values are nonetheless relatively low, and the standard errors increase
very little in the fixed effects estimation–in contrast to what occurs in many applications. Thus, because
there is little cost to retaining the school fixed effects, because the estimates are a bit different, and
because including the school fixed effects does not introduce any bias, we view these as our preferred
estimates.
Provisional Summary
To summarize, then, our analysis points to a number of beneficial effects from certain types of
STC programs. In particular, job shadowing and school enterprise programs increase post-high school
college attendance, while coop and internship/apprenticeship programs increase employment, although
the statistical evidence for internship/apprenticeship programs is weaker. Finally, working in the other
direction, tech prep programs appear to reduce college attendance without any offsetting increases in
employment. Thus, this evidence suggests that specific types of STC programs can be used to increase
post-secondary education and employment, and hence presumably to increase skill formation.
Heterogeneity in the Effects of STC
To this point we have reported estimated effects of STC participation for the full sample.
However, the effects of STC may differ across racial or ethnic groups, or across other characteristics of
individuals that are associated with socioeconomic status or the likelihood of attending college (aside
from STC). In fact, the “findings” on which the STWOA is based refer specifically to the problems posed
by disadvantaged and minority youths. And STC practitioners commonly argue that STC programs are
particularly helpful for such youths. We are also interested in how the effects of STC differ between men
and women.
We therefore re-estimated some of our key specifications allowing the effects of STC to differ
across groups. In each case, we maintained a single specification for the pooled sample, but interacted
each of the STC participation variables with indicators for the groups considered (e.g., white, black, and
Hispanic). We used the fixed effects specifications from Table 7, which for reasons discussed earlier we
view as the most reliable estimates. Aside from race and ethnicity, we estimated models allowing

27

different effects for: those in the top, middle, and bottom third of the distribution of the ASVAB math
knowledge score; respondents whose biological mothers had 13 or more years of education and 12 or
fewer years; respondents living with both biological parents and those with alternative living
arrangements; and males and females. In the case of the math knowledge test, mother’s education, and
living arrangement variables, the estimates in Table 5B indicated that these were strongly related to
college attendance. And all of the variables aside from the sex of the respondent are related to
socioeconomic advantage.
Selected results are reported in Table 8. To make the results easier to digest, for each
specification only estimated coefficients of the STC-group interactions that are significantly different
from zero for at least one group are reported. It is important to keep in mind, though, that in most cases
the differences across groups were not statistically significant, in which case the pooled estimates
reported in Table 7 cannot be rejected. The evidence in this table should be interpreted as simply
establishing for which groups we can conclude that there are statistically significant effects of different
STC programs.
Results from the specification allowing different effects by race and ethnicity are reported in
columns (1)-(1’’). Looking first at college attendance, there is generally more evidence of beneficial
effects of STC programs for whites, as for whites only there are statistically significant positive effects of
internship/apprenticeship programs on college attendance, and of coop and tech prep programs on
employment. At the same time, two programs–tech prep and mentoring–have negative effects (on
schooling and employment, respectively) only for whites. Also of note is that the only evidence of
positive effects of internship/apprenticeship programs on employment arises for minorities, with the
estimate statistically significant for blacks, large (but insignificant) for Hispanics, and near zero for

28

whites. The earlier finding that school enterprise programs have positive effects on college attendance
appears to apply to all groups, although the estimated effect is not statistically significant for blacks.20
The results disaggregating the effects by the ASVAB math knowledge score are reported next.
There is no clear message here, as there are some positive and significant effects of alternative programs
for each ability group. Columns (3) and (3’) report results for the specification allowing different effects
depending on the biological mother’s education. Here, too, there is some evidence of positive program
effects (for different programs) in each of the two groups. This is not the case, however, for the final
specification, which allows the effects to differ depending on living arrangement. Here we see that there
is no evidence of beneficial effects of STC for those in non-traditional families, and conversely all of the
evidence of beneficial effects occurs for respondents living with both biological parents.
The estimates discussed to this point concern differences among respondents that are likely
related to socioeconomic advantage or disadvantage. While it is difficult to synthesize the disparate
estimates, some summary is possible. First, if we consider whites, those with high ASVAB scores, those
with more-educated mothers, and those living with two biological parents as relatively advantaged, then a
couple of conclusions emerge. First, job shadowing and mentoring have some beneficial effects on
college attendance, but only for the more-advantaged individuals. There is some evidence of positive
effects of school enterprise and internship/apprenticeship STC programs on college attendance for both
more- and less-advantaged groups, and similarly some evidence of negative effects of tech prep programs
on both more and less-advantaged individuals. Turning to employment, the evidence of positive effects
of coop STC programs is strongest for more-advantaged individuals, while the evidence of positive
effects of internship/apprenticeship programs arises only for less-advantaged individuals. Job shadowing
appears to have some negative effects for both types of individuals.

20

Finally, note that the results in Table 8 do not help explain the higher participation rates of blacks in coop, school
enterprise, and tech prep programs, which were documented in Table 4. This suggests that explanations of these
higher participation rates other than greater benefits for blacks should be explored, although that is beyond the
scope of this study.

29

Thus, the combined evidence does not permit any firm conclusion that the beneficial effects of
STC programs are confined to either the more- or less-advantaged; certainly the evidence does not
indicate that the benefits of STC accrue primarily or even relatively more to minorities and others who are
less likely to attend college or more likely to face employment difficulties. Finally, there is some
indication that internship/apprenticeship programs may be particularly advantageous for the lessadvantaged, as these programs boost college enrollment among those with the lowest test scores, and
boost employment among blacks (and probably Hispanics) and among those with less-educated mothers.
The final two columns of Table 8 break out the results separately for men and women. There are
some similarities with the combined estimates. In particular, the earlier findings that school enterprise
STC programs boost post-secondary education and that coop programs boost employment appear to hold
for both men and women; although in each case the estimates are not significantly different from zero for
one sex, the estimates are very close for men and women. But there are also some striking differences.
First, the finding that internship/apprenticeship programs boost employment is driven entirely by men, as
for them the estimated effect (0.125) is positive and significant, while for women it is near zero. Second,
there are some other significant findings that emerge in the specifications allowing different effects for
men and women. Specifically, it appears that job shadowing boosts post-secondary education for men,
while internship/apprenticeship programs boost it for women. On the other hand, there is stronger
evidence of a negative effect of tech prep on post-secondary education of women. However, for the
estimates disaggregating the effects of STC by sex, the differences between the estimated effects
(evaluated one program at a time) were never statistically significant at the ten-percent level. This
differed from the case for the other breakdowns in Table 8, where there were always significant
differences for at least one of the STC programs. Thus, while the estimated sex differences are intriguing,
we give them less weight.
VI. Discussion and Conclusions
The empirical research presented in this paper attempts to estimate the causal effects of
participation in school-to-career (STC) programs on further education and employment in the years

30

immediately after individuals leave high school. The new National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY97) offers unparalleled opportunities to study this question, given a detailed battery of STC
participation questions asked of respondents, a survey of schools attended by sample members soliciting
information on STC offerings and other school characteristics, repeated observations on individuals in the
same school, and a rich data set generally. Nonetheless, the fundamental problem faced by this research
is the classic selection problem in program evaluation–namely, do those individuals with unmeasured
characteristics associated with post-high school enrollment or employment participate in STC at different
rates from other individuals?
The paper considers four approaches to address this selection problem: detailed control and proxy
variables; controlling for prior expectations regarding work and schooling; instrumenting for individual
STC participation with school-level offerings of STC programs; and school fixed effects. It turns out that
school-level variation in offerings of STC programs is strongly associated with characteristics of schools
and their students, suggesting that the IV approach is invalid. Rather, only the methods that use variation
in STC participation within schools as identifying information are likely to recover unbiased estimates of
the effects of STC. On a priori grounds (because it uses only within-school variation) and on empirical
grounds the school fixed effects estimates are preferred. However, the evidence using the proxy variables
and the prior expectations is quite similar, leading to a relatively robust set of findings.
Specifically, the evidence indicates that some STC programs (school enterprises) boost post-high
school education (and tech prep may reduce it), and other STC programs (cooperative education and
internships/apprenticeships) boost post-high school employment.21 The magnitudes implied by the
estimates are reasonable yet also sizable, suggesting that participation in these programs boosts the
probabilities of enrollment or employment by about 0.05 to 0.1, relative to base probabilities of about 0.5
for college attendance and 0.6 for employment.

21

There is also evidence that job shadowing boosts college enrollment, but this finding is not as robust across the
alternative statistical analyses.

31

Although not central to our analysis, there is also some evidence of differences in the effects of
STC programs across groups distinguished by race and ethnicity and other characteristics associated with
socioeconomic status, and across men and women. The most important finding regarding these
differences is that STC does not appear to be particularly beneficial for disadvantaged students. Instead,
there is some evidence of beneficial effects for all groups, although the programs that deliver the benefits
vary.
Of course the findings presented in this paper fall short of the ideal of experimental evidence
based on random assignment. While we believe that there is a clear need for more experimental evidence
on the effects of STC, we also believe that the data in the NLSY97 offer compelling approaches to the
selection problem. Indeed, we conjecture that in future work on the effectiveness of STC experimental
evidence and analysis of secondary data sources with careful attention paid to endogenous selection will
play complementary roles. Each has strengths and weaknesses, with experimental approaches offering
the most compelling evidence, and analysis of secondary data yielding more generalizable results and
permitting researchers to test a wider variety of hypotheses regarding different types of STC programs
and different outcomes.

32

References
Angrist, Joshua D. 2001. “Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with Dummy Endogenous
Regressors: Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol.
19, No. 1, pp. 2-28.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100, No. 1,
February, pp. 1-40.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1980. “Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data.” Review of Economic Studies,
Vol. 47, No. 1, January, pp. 225-38.
Falaris, Evangelos M., and H. Elizabeth Peters. 1998. “Survey Attrition and Schooling Choices.” Journal
of Human Resources, Vol. 33, No. 2, Spring, pp. 531-54.
Heckman, James, Neil Hohmann, and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2000. “Substitution and Dropout Bias in Social
Experiments: A Study of an Influential Social Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 115,
No. 2, pp. 651-94.
Hershey, Alan M., Marsha K. Silverberg, and Joshua Haimson. 1999. Expanding Options for Students:
Report to Congress on the National Evaluation of School-to-Work Implementation. Princeton, New
Jersey: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Hughes, Katherine L., Stephen F. Hamilton, and Robert J. Ivry. 2001. School-to-Work: Making a
Difference in Education. New York: Institute on Education and the Economy, Teachers College,
Columbia University.
Kemple, James J., and Jason C. Snipes. 2000. Career Academies: Impacts on Students’ Engagement and
Performance in High School. Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.
Kemple, James J. 2001. Career Academies: Impacts on Students’ Initial Transitions to Post-Secondary
Education and Employment. Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.
Neumark, David. 2002. “Youth Labor Markets in the U.S.: Shopping Around vs. Staying Put.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 84, No. 3, August, pp. 462-82.
Neumark, David, and Ann Allen. “What Do We Know About the Effects of School-to-Work? A Case
Study of Michigan.” Forthcoming, Journal of Vocational Education Research.
Neumark, David, and Mary Joyce. 2001. “Evaluating School-to-Work Programs Using the New NLSY.”
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 36, No. 4, Fall, pp. 666-702.
Office of Technology Assessment, United States Congress. 1995. Learning to Work: Making the
Transition from School to Work (Publication No. OTA-HER 637). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Stern, David, Neal Finkelstein, James R. Stone, John Latting, and Carolyn Dornsife. 1994. Research on
School-to-Work Transition Programs in the United States. Berkeley, CA: National Center for Research in
Vocational Education, University of California.

Topel, Robert H., and Michael P. Ward. 1992. AJob Mobility and the Careers of Young Men.@ Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. CVII, No. 2, May, pp. 439-80.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data (Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press).

Table 1: Linear Probability Estimates of School Characteristics Associated with Schools Offering STC, Individual-Based
Estimates

Share with schools
offering
Regression results:
Student/teacher ratio
Log size
Proportion of students
involved in:
…Chronic truancy
…Pregnancies
…Alcohol possession
…Drugs
…Weapons on school
property
Proportion of teachers
with 10+ years
experience
Proportion of teachers
with degree above
bachelor’s
Teacher’s salary/$1000
Computer center/lab
Receives Title I

Any STC
(1)
.930

Job
shadowing
(2)
.650

Coop
(3)
.595

School
enterprise
(4)
.211

Tech
prep
(5)
.534

Internship
(6)
.436

Apprenticeship
(7)
.260

-.008***,++
(.003)
.101***,+++
(.034)

.007
(.006)
-.002
(.047)

-.033***,+++
(.005)
.251***,+++
(.044)

-.002
(.005)
-.026
(.036)

-.001
(.006)
.015
(.054)

-.010*,+
(.006)
.185***,+++
(.046)

-.009*,+
(.005)
.118***,+++
(.036)

.008
(.215)
-.580**,+
(.268)
.198
(.456)
.324
(.273)
-.165
(.544)
.043
(.060)

.753**,++
(.346)
-.840
(.539)
1.904*
(1.160)
-.817
(1.141)
-1.248
(1.620)
.019
(.137)

.163
(.358)
-.785
(.649)
1.173
(1.341)
-.802*
(1.052)
.577
(1.400)
.140+
(.143)

.832**,++
(.367)
-1.141*,+
(.674)
2.298**,+
(1.108)
-1.147*,+
(.595)
1.625
(1.613)
-.101
(.118)

-.116
(.359)
-.579
(.583)
.906
(1.304)
.385
(.802)
-1.428
(1.366)
-.269*,+
(.141)

.890**,++
(.363)
-.375
(.591)
-1.576
(1.255)
1.849**,++
(.834)
-3.411**,++
(1.434)
-.008
(.141)

.398
(.389)
-1.084+
(.689)
2.501**,++
(1.169)
-1.637**,++
(.714)
-.142
(1.142)
-.140
(.142)

.036
(.048)

.106
(.117)

.059
(1.145)

.182*,+
(.093)

.053
(.121)

.362***,+++
(.115)

-.015
(.118)

-.008***,++
(.003)
-.002
(.053)
-.024
(.022)
.013
(.035)
-.022
(.054)
-.007
(.062)
-.038
(.082)

-.003
(.006)
-.107
(.084)
.001
(.049)
.105
(.067)
-.264**,+
(.110)
-.128
(.092)
.144
(.179)

-.014**,++
(.006)
.131
(.110)
-.023
(.046)
-.018
(.064)
-.133
(.109)
-.027
(.091)
-.303
(.194)

-.015**,++
(.006)
-.034
(.098)
-.034
(.045)
.063
(.044)
.061
(.089)
-.097
(.072)
-.060
(.189)

-.019***,+++
(.006)
.237**,++
(.097)
.027
(.057)
-.018
(.064)
-.005
(.121)
.104
(.092)
-.061
(.204)

-.006
(.007)
.004
(.114)
-.061
(.056)
.077
(.060)
-.068
(.122)
-.116
(.091)
-.256
(.180)

.005
(.005)
.125*,+
(.071)
-.038
(.045)
-.070
(.060)
-.094
(.110)
.046
(.079)
-.053
(.195)

Receives National
School Lunch
Proportion of students
Hispanic or Latino
Proportion of students
black
Proportion of students
limited English
proficient
R2
.099
.052
.153
.083
.067
.101
.084
There are 1,868 observations. The sample included in this table is those individuals for which IV estimation of the regression models for
employment and education outcomes could be estimated, since this analysis assesses IV estimation. ***, **, and * indicate that the
estimated coefficients are significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, and ten-percent level, respectively. The table also provides
information on the statistical significance of these school characteristics in specifications that include the full set of individual-level
controls (see, e.g., the controls in Table 4). In particular, the superscripts +++, ++, and + after the asterisks indicate that the estimated
coefficients when these other controls are added are significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, and ten-percent level, respectively.
The signs of the significant estimates were never different including the controls. Information on STC offerings is from the 2000 School
Survey. We use information only for the most recent school attended. Mentoring is included in the STC categories in the survey of
individuals, but not in the school survey. Apprenticeships and internships are asked about separately on the school survey, but not the
individual survey. Other school characteristics also come from the school survey. Private schools and vocational/technical schools are
excluded. The teacher’s salary is the normal yearly base with a master’s degree and no experience. Dummy variables are included for
missing data on some school characteristics. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity, and were adjusted to account for the
clustering of observations within schools, allowing for non-independence within schools and heteroscedasticity across schools.

Table 2: Linear Probability Estimates of School Characteristics Associated with Schools Offering STC, School-Based
Estimates
Any
Job
School
Tech
STC
shadowing
Coop
enterprise
prep
Internship Apprenticeship
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Share of schools offering
.926
.654
.493
.225
.519
.363
.243
Regression results:
Student/teacher ratio
-.003
.011**
-.016***
-.003
-.005
-.002
-.005
(.003)
(.005)
(.005)
(.004)
(.006)
(.005)
(.004)
Log size
.079***
-.008
.211***
.041
.078**
.149***
.098***
(.026)
(.035)
(.032)
(.028)
(.037)
(.035)
(.027)
Proportion of students involved
in:
…Chronic truancy
.067
.729**
-.055
1.122***
-.565**
.446
.099
(.159)
(.286)
(.332)
(.326)
(.279)
(.334)
(.254)
…Pregnancies
-.181
-.833
-.771
-.715*
-.277
-.282
.335
(.297)
(.545)
(.576)
(.387)
(.546)
(.523)
(.508)
…Alcohol possession
.432
1.842**
1.054
2.280**
1.503*
-.020
.404
(.297)
(.784)
(1.063)
(.944)
(.823)
(.106)
(.718)
…Drugs
.055
-.964
-.178
-.193
.876
.780
-.946**
(.298)
(.774)
(.815)
(.629)
(.574)
(.824)
(.402)
…Weapons on school
-.512
-1.372
-.434
-.525
-2.093*
.022
.014
property
(1.029)
(1.430)
(1.639)
(.117)
(1.222)
(1.365)
(.973)
Proportion of teachers with 10+
.019
-.012
-.165
.065
-.291**
-.050
.096
years experience
(.039)
(.152)
(.133)
(.126)
(.132)
(.102)
(.146)
Proportion of teachers with
.009
.163
.108
.078
.057
.355***
.021
degree above bachelor’s
(.039)
(.102)
(.103)
(.102)
(.105)
(.092)
(.092)
Teacher’s salary
-.008***
-.007
-.005
-.011*
-.018***
-.008
-.001
(.003)
(.005)
(.005)
(.006)
(.005)
(.005)
(.004)
Computer center/lab
-.057*
-.051
.060
.083
.126
-.118
.052
(.033)
(.093)
(.095)
(.066)
(.088)
(.087)
(.074)
Receives Title I
-.027
-.020
-.073
-.027
.020
-.001
-.069*
(.021)
(.047)
(.046)
(.040)
(.045)
(.045)
(.036)
Receives National School
-.011
-.042
.005
.035
.048
-.047
.019
Lunch
(.020)
(.042)
(.046)
(.028)
(.049)
(.048)
(.037)
Proportion of students Hispanic
.013
-.135
.001
.036
.094
-.182*
-.160**
or Latino
(.043)
(.103)
(.111)
(.097)
(.099)
(.101)
(.081)
**
Proportion of students black
-.122
-.166
.072
-.062
.096
-.143
.083
(.102)
(.114)
(.114)
(.062)
(.106)
(.068)
(.098)
Proportion of students limited
-.025
.216
-.409**
-.140
.276*
.106
.046
English proficient
(.070)
(.134)
(.159)
(.143)
(.146)
(.181)
(.122)
There are 3,368 observations. ***, **, and * indicate that the estimated coefficients are significantly different from zero at the
one-, five-, and ten-percent level, respectively. For the analysis in this table, we simply use school-level observations, so there
are no instances of multiple observations on the same school. Observations are weighted to make the sample of schools
representative. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity. See notes to Table 1 for additional details.

Table 3: Sample Construction and Analysis Samples
Sample inclusion criteria
(1)
Total sample in 1997
Interviewed in 1999 or 2000
Age ≥ 18 at 1999 or 2000 interview
Not enrolled in high school by 1999 or 2000
Answered STC questions covering high school after Round 1
Complete data on baseline controls
Baseline analysis sample: exclude private/vocational school
students
Subset of baseline analysis sample with multiple observations
per school
Subset of baseline analysis sample with data on work and
schooling expectations (asked only of those born 1980 and
1981)

Number of observations
(2)
8,984
8,510
5,047
4,234
3,347
3,279
2,933
2,230
2,057

We use the 1999 or 2000 interview as the “post-high school interview,” choosing the earliest
one at which the respondent is aged 18 or older and no longer enrolled in high school. More
restrictive sample inclusion criteria are imposed in each successive row. Baseline controls
include race/ethnicity, education, and family structure (whether respondent lives with one, two,
or no biological parents, and which ones, and household size). When other control variables
are introduced in the regression models dummy variables indicating missing data are included.

Table 4: Linear Probability Estimates of Individual Characteristics Associated with STC Participation
Share participating
Demographic:
Female
Black
Hispanic
Age (months)
Living arrangement /
family:
Urban
Biological parent & stepparent
Biological mother only
Biological father only
Other arrangement
Household size
Log household income
Biological mother’s
schooling
ASVAB:
Arithmetic reasoning
Word knowledge
Paragraph comprehension
Math knowledge
School behaviors:
Threatened at school

Any STC
.415

Job
shadowing
.175

Mentoring
.084

Coop
.135

School
enterprise
.067

Tech prep
.110

Internship /
apprenticeship
.097

.008
(.019)
.063**
(.029)
.022
(.029)
.011
(.016)

.023
(.015)
-.007
(.024)
-.005
(.022)
.012
(.012)

.014
(.011)
.022
(.015)
.022
(.017)
.005
(.009)

-.010
(.014)
.043**
(.020)
.004
(.019)
.007
(.011)

.004
(.010)
.053***
(.014)
.004
(.014)
-.006
(.008)

-.027**
(.011)
.057***
(.018)
.028
(.018)
-.000
(.010)

.004
(.011)
.008
(.015)
.024
(.017)
-.001
(.009)

-.048*
(.028)
-.003
(.029)
-.026
(.024)
.010
(.053)
-.004
(.047)
-.014**
(.006)
.006
(.006)
-.001
(.004)

-.033
(.023)
-.016
(.023)
-.035*
(.019)
-.025
(.040)
-.033
(.035)
0.005
(.005)
.006
(.004)
.000
(.003)

.004
(.015)
-.016
(.016)
-.034***
(.012)
-.015
(.030)
.032
(.032)
-.004
(.004)
.002
(.003)
.001
(.002)

.004
(.016)
-.013
(.019)
.008
(.017)
.026
(.040)
.002
(.035)
-.000
(.005)
.001
(.004)
-.001
(.002)

.002
(.011)
.015
(.016)
-.010
(.011)
.090
(.030)
-.015
(.026)
-.005
(.003)
.002*
(.001)
-.001
(.002)

-.039*
(.021)
.003
(.018)
-.015
(.015)
.024
(.037)
-.019
(.031)
-.001
(.004)
-.001
(.003)
-.001
(.002)

-.002
(.014)
-.000
(.018)
-.016
(.015)
-.048
(.030)
-.002
(.030)
-.011***
(.004)
.002
(.004)
.005**
(.002)

-.006
(.020)
-.011
(.019)
-.016
(.019)
-.000
(.019)

-.001
(.016)
-.014
(.015)
-.007
(.016)
-.015
(.015)

-.013
(.012)
.002
(.011)
-.006
(.012)
.013
(.011)

-.002
(.013)
.006
(.012)
-.012
(.014)
-.011
(.013)

-.006
(.011)
.017
(.011)
.015
(.010)
-.012
(.010)

.010
(.014)
.022*
(.011)
-.020
(.012)
-.019
(.012)

-.007
(.012)
-.032***
(.011)
-.001
(.012)
.019*
(.011)

.060**
.022
.008
.010
.009
.023
.018
(.025)
(.019)
(.013)
(.018)
(.013)
(.016)
(.016)
Got into physical fight at
-.010
-.021
-.000
.014
.017
-.022
-.003
school
(.031)
(.023)
(.017)
(.023)
(.018)
(.021)
(.019)
Late with no excuse 2+
-.009
.018
-.018
-.009
.020*
-.002
.010
times
(.022)
(.017)
(.012)
(.015)
(.012)
(.014)
(.013)
Absent 2+ weeks
-.072**
-.059*
-.024
-.046**
-.022
-.002
-.040**
(.034)
(.024)
(.016)
(.021)
(.016)
(.025)
(.017)
.016
.014
.009
.011
.016
.016
.013
R2
There are 2,933 observations. ***, **, and * indicate that the estimated coefficients are significantly different from zero at the one-, five-,
and ten-percent level, respectively. Students in private schools and vocational/technical schools are excluded. Dummy variables are
included for missing data on some individual variables. STC participation is measured based on responses from the 1998, 1999, and 2000
interviews regarding school-to-work participation while in high school; the 2000 data is used only if the 2000 interview is the post-high
school interview defined in the notes to Table 3. All other variables are defined as of the first round (1997), with the exception of age,
which is defined as of the interview at which STC participation is measured. The ASVAB test scores are standardized to have mean zero
and standard deviation of one for the calibration sample that took the test. The subset of ASVAB scores we use are those that make up the
AFQT. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity, and were adjusted to account for the clustering of observations within schools,
allowing for non-independence within schools and heteroscedasticity across schools.

Table 5A: Linear Probability Estimates of Effects of STC Participation on College Attendance and Employment
Some College
Employment
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1’)
(2’)
(3’)
Job shadowing
.015
.016
.042*
.037
.010
.007
.008
(.026)
(.025)
(.024)
(.023)
(.024)
(.024)
(.024)
*
Mentoring
.066
.043
.029
.026
-.051
-.046
-.046
(.036)
(.034)
(.031)
(.031)
(.033)
(.033)
(.033)
Coop
-.019
-.004
.010
.007
.073***
.071***
.072***
(.028)
(.027)
(.026)
(.026)
(.027)
(.027)
(.027)
School
.112***
.100***
.083**
.088***
.030
.024
.020
enterprise
(.037)
(.036)
(.033)
(.033)
(.037)
(.037)
(.037)
Tech prep
-.059**
-.051*
-.042
-.042
-.012
-.017
-.017
(.030)
(.030)
(.029)
(.030)
(.028)
(.028)
(.028)
Internship /
.045
.021
.022
.021
.065**
.071**
.073**
apprenticeship
(.032)
(.031)
(.030)
(.030)
(.030)
(.030)
(.030)
Control
variables
included:
Demographic
Х
Х
Х
Х
Х
Х
Х

(4’)
.004
(.024)
-.046
(.033)
.071***
(.027)
.021
(.037)
-.018
(.028)
.072**
(.030)

Х

Living
arrangement /
X
X
Х
Х
X
Х
family
ASVAB
X
Х
Х
Х
School
Х
Х
behaviors
There are 2,933 observations in all of the specifications. Estimated effect on relative probability of college attendance (columns (1)-(4)
and employment (columns (1’)-(4’)) are reported. School and work outcomes are measured as of the post-high school interview (1999
or 2000). Asterisks denote statistical significance of the coefficient estimates, with ***, **, and * indicating that the estimate is
significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, and ten-percent level, respectively. STC participation is defined as in Table 4. The
standard errors allow for general heteroscedasticity, and were adjusted to account for the clustering of observations within schools,
allowing for non-independence within schools and heteroscedasticity across schools. The sets of control variables are listed in detail in
Table 4. There are dummy variables for a small number of cases with missing data for the following variables: log household income;
biological mother’s schooling; ASVAB scores; and urban residence.

Table 5B: Linear Probability Estimates of Control Variable Coefficients,
College Attendance and Employment
Some College
Employment
Specification
Table 5A, col. (4) Table 5A, col. (4’)
(1)
(2)
Demographic:
Female
.090***
-.017
(.017)
(.019)
Black
.060***
-.106***
(.023)
(.026)
Hispanic
.008
-.017
(.024)
(.027)
Age
.034**
.047***
(.014)
(.015)
Living arrangement / family:
Urban
.027
-.024
(.020)
(.022)
Biological parent & step-parent
-.049*
.085***
(.026)
(.028)
***
Biological mother only
-.108
.031
(.021)
(.024)
Biological father only
-.088*
.178***
(.050)
(.044)
Other arrangement
-.068
.001
(.044)
(.050)
Household size excluding youth
-.015***
-.005
(.006)
(.006)
Log household income
.010**
.002
(.004)
(.006)
Biological mother’s schooling
.023***
-.011***
(.003)
(.003)
ASVAB:
Arithmetic reasoning
-.011
-.014
(.017)
(.019)
Word knowledge
.047***
.032
(.017)
(.019)
Paragraph comprehension
.014
.007
(.017)
(.019)
Math knowledge
.156***
-.009
(.016)
(.019)
School behaviors:
Threatened at school
-.078***
-.027
(.023)
(.023)
Got into physical fight at school
-.096***
-.080***
(.025)
(.030)
**
Late with no excuse 2+ times
-.039
.003
(.020)
(.022)
Absent 2+ weeks
-.121***
-.044
(.028)
(.032)
All specifications correspond to Table 5A, columns (4) and (4’). See notes to
Table 5A for details.

Table 6: Linear Probability Estimates of Effects of STC Participation on College
Attendance and Employment, Incorporating Prior Work and Schooling Expectations
Some College
Employment
(1)
(2)
(1’)
(2’)
Job shadowing
.024
.014
.026
.027
(.028)
(.027)
(.030)
(.030)
Mentoring
.019
-.008
-.016
-.015
(.039)
(.038)
(.041)
(.041)
Coop
.021
.030
.047
.043
(.031)
(.030)
(.033)
(.033)
-.013
-.007
School enterprise
.113***
.104***
(.040)
(.048)
(.049)
(.039)
Tech prep
-.046
-.016
.015
.014
(.038)
(.035)
(.033)
(.033)
Internship / apprenticeship
.012
.016
.072**
.072**
(.036)
(.036)
(.035)
(.036)
Expectations:
High school diploma by age
…
.010
…
.017
20
(.072)
(.090)
4-year degree by age 30
…
.428***
…
-.111***
(.035)
(.041)
Work over 20 hours/week at
…
.054
…
.241***
age 30
(.064)
(.078)
There are 2,057 observations, because the sample is restricted to those born in 1980 and
1981 for which the expectations data are available. See notes to Tables 4 and 5A for
details. All of the specifications include the demographic, living arrangement/family,
ASVAB, and school behavior variables that are the same as those included in columns
(4) and (4’) of Table 5A. The standard errors allow for general heteroscedasticity, and
were adjusted to account for the clustering of observations within schools, allowing for
non-independence within schools and heteroscedasticity across schools.

Table 7: School Fixed Effects Linear Probability Estimates of Effects of STC
Participation on College Attendance and Employment
Some College
Employment
(1)
(2)
(1’)
(2’)
Job shadowing
.035
.063**
-.013
-.018
(.027)
(.030)
(.028)
(.035)
Mentoring
.018
.048
-.049
-.073
(.034)
(.039)
(.036)
(.046)
Coop
.004
-.013
.073**
.089**
(.031)
(.035)
(.032)
(.037)
School enterprise
.091**
.133***
-.007
-.024
(.038)
(.048)
.047)
(.056)
Tech prep
-.070**
-.095**
.006
.030
(.036)
(.040)
(.032)
(.041)
Internship / apprenticeship
.038
.055
.123***
.072*
(.036)
(.041)
(.035)
(.042)
Hausman test for excluding
…
.19
…
.25
school fixed effects, p-value
School fixed effects
X
X
There are 2,230 observations, because only observations on respondents in schools with
multiple observations are included. All of the specifications include the demographic,
living arrangement/family, ASVAB, and school behavior variables that are the same as
those included in columns (4) and (4’) of Table 5A. See notes to Table 5A for details.
The standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity. The Hausman test is computed for
the vector of STC coefficients. The test is based on random versus fixed effects, and
comes from the regression form of the test with standard errors robust to general
heteroscedasticity and non-independence of observations within schools (Wooldridge,
2002, Chapter 10).

Table 8: School Fixed Effects Linear Probability Estimates of Effects of STC Participation on College Attendance and Employment, Specifications
Interacting STC Participation with Respondent Characteristics
Some College
ASVAB math
Biological mother’s
Race/ethnicity
knowledge Score
education
Living arrangement
Sex
High
Lives w/
Some
school or
two bio.
Other
White
Black
Hispanic
High
Medium
Low
college
less
parents
living arr.
Men
Women
(1)
(1’)
(1’’)
(2)
(2’)
(2’’)
(3)
(3’)
(4)
(4’)
(5)
(5’)
Job shadowing
.122**
.086**
.097**
.032
Mentoring

.122*

.050

.009

.145**

.193*

.005

.001

.087*

Coop
School
enterprise
Tech prep
Internship /
apprenticeship

.119**

.113

.253**

-.166**

-.082

.067

.084*

-.042

.086

Job shadowing

-.150

Mentoring

-.113*

-.017

-.037

Coop

.139***

-.018

.079

.100*

-.029

-.101

School
enterprise
Tech prep

.054
**

.076

.052
-.027

.075

.166**

.113*

.175*

.083

.113

.149**

-.222***

-.033

-.037

-.162***

-.072

-.125**

.090*

.002

.005

.100*

.047

-.119**

-.143**

.033

.127***

.039

.087*

.088

.178**
Employment
.067
-.090*

.126*

.158***

.029

.045

Internship /
.001
.204**
.148
.005
.147**
.125**
.021
apprenticeship
Range
…
…
…
> .75
0 - .75
<0
…
…
…
…
…
…
Observations
1,295
503
432
687
547
625
889
1,191
1,230
1,000
1,084
1,146
See notes to Tables 5A and 7. Specifications include STC program participation interacted with dummy variables for each group. They include school fixed
effects, and are in other respects identical to Table 7. The “high,” “medium,” and “low” cutoffs for the estimates in columns (2)-(2’’) were chosen to assign
roughly one-third of each group to each sub-sample. Standard errors are not reported.

