CONSEQUENCES AND PREDICTORS OF NEW HEALTH EVENTS

                  James P. Smith

                Working Paper 10063
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CONSEQUENCES AND PREDICTORS OF NEW HEALTH EVENTS

                                            James P. Smith

                                         Working Paper 10063
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10063


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




Senior Economist RAND. Paper prepared for Economics of Aging Conference, Carefree, Arizona. I would
like to thank the expert programming assistance of David Rumpel and Iva Macclennan. Financial support was
provided by the National Institute of Aging. The comments of Dana Goldman, David Cutler, and participants
at the Conference are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by James P. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consequences and Predictors of New Health Events
James P. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 10063
October 2003
JEL No. I0

                                     ABSTRACT
Smith uses the HRS and AHEAD panels to examine the consequences of new health on a series of

SES related outcomes- out-of-pocket labor supply, labor force activity, household income and

wealth. For each of these outcomes, new severe health events have a significant effect although most

of the impact on income and wealth takes place through labor supply and not not medical expenses.

The paper also examines the ability of different measures of SES to predict the future onset of

disease. The author finds no predictive effect of income or wealth but education does predict future

onset even after controlling for current health status. The reasons for this continuing predictive effect

of education are explored in the paper.

James P. Smith
Senior Economist
RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
smith@rand.org
       There is renewed interest in why people of lower socio-economic status (SES) have

worse health outcomes. No matter which measures of SES are used (income, wealth, or

education), the evidence that this association is large is abundant (Marmot (1999), Smith (1999)).

The relation between SES and health appears also to be pervasive over time and across countries

at quite different levels of economic development (Kitagawa and Hauser (1973), Townsend et al.

(1988)). Considerable debate remains about why the relation arises and what the principal

directions of causation might be ((Smith (1999), Adams et al. (2003), Deaton (2003)). However,

many analytical difficulties exist when one tries to understand its meaning. These difficulties

include the complex dimensionality of health status that produces considerable heterogeneity in

health outcomes, the two-way interaction between health and economic status, and the separation

of anticipated from unanticipated health or economic shocks.

       The emphasis in health research has been on understanding and disentangling the

multiple ways in which socio-economic status may influence a variety of health outcomes.

Consequently, much less is currently known about the impact health may have on SES. But at

least for working-aged individuals, health feedbacks to labor supply, household income, and

wealth may be quantitatively quite important. Therefore, one aim of this paper will be to

estimate the effect of new health events on a series of subsequent outcomes that are both directly

and indirectly related to SES. These outcomes will include out-of-pocket medical expenses, the

intensive and extensive margins of labor supply, health insurance, and household income.

       Finding evidence that there are significant feedbacks from new health events to these

subsequent correlates of SES does not negate the real possibility that the probability of

experiencing the onset of a minor or major new health event may not be uniform across several

SES dimensions. This pathway is also explored here by examining whether the onset of new




                                                 1
chronic conditions is related to household income, wealth, and education once one conditions for

a set of pre-existing set of demographic and health conditions.

       This research will use multiple waves of data on health status and transitions, medical

expenses, labor supply, income, and wealth accumulation from the first five waves of the Health

and Retirement Survey (HRS). HRS is a national sample of about 7,600 households (12,654

individuals) with at least one person in the household 51-61 years old originally interviewed in

the fall of 1992 and winter of 1993. The principal objective of HRS is to monitor economic

transitions in work, income, and wealth, as well as changes in many dimensions of health status.

The first follow-up of HRS respondents was fielded approximately two years after the baseline.

HRS instruments span the spectrum of behaviors of interest: on the economic side, work,

income and wealth; on the functional side, health and functional status, disability, and medical

expenditures.

       The paper is divided into three sections. The first documents the considerable amount on

new health activity that afflicts individuals during their fifties and early sixties. The second

section analyses the impact of these new health events on a series of outcomes—medical

expenses, work effort, income, and health insurance. In the third section, this perspective is

reversed by examining which dimensions of SES—income, wealth, and education—are able to

predict future health outcomes.


Section 1. The Best of Times and the Worst of Times

       Matters are pretty quiet for most people on the economic front when they are in their

fifties. For better or worse, what one does for a living has long since been settled and salary

adjustments stick pretty closely to CPI swings. But it is anything but quiet and settled on the

health front. Table 1 documents the extent of this activity by listing in the first column



                                                  2
prevalence rates of major and minor chronic conditions for respondents who were members of

the original HRS cohort (those born between 1931 and 1941). Major conditions were defined as

cancer, heart condition, stroke, and diseases of the lung. All other onsets are defined as minor.

At baseline in 1992, 39% of HRS respondents claimed to have no chronic conditions at all while

43% reported that they had had some minor onset sometime in the past. About one in five stated

that they already had experienced a major condition onset.1

         The extent of the new health problems reported during these eight years is impressive if

not depressing. Independent of their baseline status, about half of all respondents experienced

some type of onset during the first five HRS waves. Note that the conditional probability of a

major onset is much higher if one had already reported some type of health problem at HRS

baseline than if one was chronic condition free. To illustrate, the probability of experiencing a

major onset sometime after HRS started is 53% higher if one had a minor condition at baseline

instead of having no chronic condition at all. This no doubt reflects the progressive nature of

disease whereby having relatively minor medical problem (such as hypertension) heightens the

odds of experiencing another much more severe one (such as a heart attack).

         The final column in Table 1 looks back and summarizes the consequences of all this

activity by listing prevalence rates at the end of the 5th round of HRS. By this time, more than

four out of every five HRS respondents had experienced an onset of some chronic condition, and

for a third of them the onset was one that I label major. In less than a decade, the fraction of

respondents without any health condition was cut in half while the proportion with a severe

health problem doubled.




1
 In this and all other tables in this paper, major trumps minor. That is, an individual who reports both a minor and
major onset is included in the major category.


                                                          3
         While certainly a real concern for the families involved, the sheer extent of this new and

largely negative health activity raises several analytical questions and opportunities for research.

The most direct question involves what the financial consequences of this health deterioration

might be, an issue I address in the next section. The analytical opportunities stem from the

considerable variation in individual health status during these ages, especially compared to that

observed in the standard mainstays of life-cycle models.


Section 2. The Consequences of New Health Events

         It is useful to first outline the essential issues in estimating effects of SES on health as

well as the effects of health on SES. Current realizations of both economic status and health

reflect a dynamic history in which both health (Ht) and SES (Yt) are mutually affected by each

other as well as by other relevant forces. Most of the relevant ideas can be summarized by the

following two equations:

(1) Ht = α0 + α1Ht-1 + α2Yt-1 + α3 ∆Yt+ α4 Xt-1+ u1t

(2) Yt = β0 + β1 Ht-1 + β2Yt-1 + β3∆Ht + β4Xt-1 + u2t

where Xt-1 represents a vector of other possibly non-overlapping time and non-time varying

factors influencing health and SES and u1t and u2t are possibly correlated stochastic shocks to

health and SES. The key parameters α3 and β3 measure the effects of new innovations of SES on

health, and health on SES respectively. In this framework, we can also estimate whether past

values of SES predict health (α2≠ 0) or past values of health predict SES (β3≠ 0).2

         To estimate the “effect” of either on the other (α3 and β3), we require exogenous variation

in health (or SES) that is not induced by SES (health). In an earlier paper (Smith 1999), I


2
 For an insightful debate about the conditions under whether coefficients are zero or stationary also reveals
something about causality, see the paper by Adams et al. (2003) and the comments on that paper in the same
volume.


                                                          4
proposed one research strategy for isolating new health events—the onset of new chronic

conditions. While to some extent people may anticipate onset, much of the actual realization and

especially its timing may be unanticipated. While new onsets may provide the best chance of

isolating health shocks, not all new onset is a surprise. A set of behavioral risk factors and prior

health or economic conditions may make some people more susceptible than others to this risk.

Thus, predictors of new onsets should be included in models to increase one’s confidence that

the remaining statistical variation in new onsets is “news.” Similarly, to estimate α3 we require

variation in SES not induced by health and my approach to this issue will be outlined in the next

section. In this section, I present my results for equation 2 above- the effect of health on SES-

and in the section that follows I discuss my results relevant to equation 1.

       One thing that may happen when people become newly sick is that their medical

expenses may rise, and the extent to which they rise may be influenced by the continued

presence of health insurance. But medical expenses are by no means the only way health shocks

can affect wealth accumulation. Most directly, healthier people may work longer hours in any

given week and more weeks during a year, both of which may lead to higher earnings. To

estimate the impact of the onset of new health conditions, a parallel set of models is estimated

predicting out-of-pocket medical expenses, the continued possession of health insurance, labor

supply, household income, and wealth or savings.

       A new health event in one year may affect medical expenditure, labor supply and income

not only in the year in which the event occurred but in future years as well. For example, at one

extreme, the onset of a new condition may induce only single period changes in labor supply

after which labor supply may stabilize. But it is possible that spillover effects of a health shock

may further depress work effort in future years or alternatively some recovery to original levels




                                                  5
may take place. One way of estimating such patterns is to estimate a series of four equations for

each of HRS waves 2–5 summarizing changes in each outcome between adjacent waves, say


              5
∆Lt = αX + ∑ βt ∆ H t
             t =2



where Lt is the between-wave change in labor supply and Ht the within-period health event from

period t to t-1. Similar equations would apply for household income, out-of-pocket medical

expenses, and other outcomes. If there are only contemporaneous one period effects of health

events, all lagged values of Ht will be zero.3

         X represents a vector of baseline HRS attributes that include baseline measures of birth

cohort (or age), marital status, race, ethnicity, education, region of residence, quintiles of family

income, and a vector of measures of baseline health. These health measures include dummies

for four of the five categories of self-reported health status, the presence of each chronic

condition, a set of behavioral risk factors (smoking, exercise, BMI, drinking), and a scaled index

of functional limitations based on the answers to the ADL questions. Given these extensive set

of baseline health controls, the new onset of chronic conditions in each wave captures the impact

of a new health event that is not predicted by (observed) baseline health and to that extent may

be labeled news.

         While this formulation has been simplified into a single type of new health event ( Ht-i),

different kinds of health changes may have quite different economic consequences (Smith 1999).

Health events can be distinguished by their severity, immediacy, impact on functioning, and

duration. For example, the onset of hypertension may have no immediate consequences, but it


3
 All models in this paper are restricted to survivors—those who neither attrited nor died across the waves—so this
analysis ignores the relationship of SES with attrition and mortality. Given the age range of HRS respondents,
mortality selection but not attrition is unlikely to be that critical. That is clearly not the case in the AHEAD sample.
For a model that incorporates mortality selection see Adams et al. (2003).


                                                           6
may signal a more difficult future. In contrast, a heart attack or stroke has devastating immediate

and future effects on medical expenditures and work effort. At this point in the research effort, I

have made only one simple distinction—whether the health event is classified as severe or

minor. Further distinctions will be pursued in the future and will largely be an issue of how

much data are required.


Medical Expenses and Health Insurance

       One quite direct financial impact of a health onset may be the additional medical costs

that are incurred. While some combination of private and public health insurance will pay the

bulk of these costs, insurance does not cover all of them. Some people may lack health

insurance, and even for those who have it not all medical costs are covered either due to caps or

exclusion of certain benefits such as drugs. Table 2 presents the distribution of total out-of-

pocket medical expenses associated with an onset of a new health condition that took place

between the baseline and second wave of HRS. That onset could have been either a major or

minor one and separate OOP expense distributions are presented for each situation. These

medical costs are measured over the first five waves of HRS and thus are cumulative across eight

years. The reference group in Table 2 is those HRS respondents who had no medical onset at all

across the first five survey waves.

       The incremental mean medical expenses associated with a severe health onset are about

$5,500 and only about $1,600 if the onset was one I label mild. Given that the time period spans

eight years, these are modest sums. However, not all appears modest and there may be

considerable financial risks associated with new medical problems. For example, after

experiencing a severe onset there is a 10% chance that OOP medical expenses over the next year

will increase by $17,000, a one-in-twenty chance that they will increase by about $25,000, and a



                                                 7
one-in-fifty shot of an increment of more than $40,000. However, these financial risks of

additional medical expenses are mostly associated with severe onsets. If the onset was one

within the mild category, the mean impact of $1,600 is a reasonably good descriptor of shift in

the entire OOP cost distribution. For example, compared to a mean estimate of $1,600, there is

a one-in-twenty chance of a $2,800 increase in OOP medical expenses when the new onset was

mild.

        The cost data contained in Table 2 describe the cumulative impact of a new onset. To

describe year-by-year flows, Table 3 presents estimates of the mean increase in OOP expenses

due to the period-by-period onset of new medical conditions. As described above, these

estimates are based on models that control for pre-existing health conditions, economic status,

and a standard set of demographics. Four sets of models are estimated—one each for the amount

of OOP medical expenses that took place between successive waves. Each model includes as

covariates all prior wave health shocks. The rows in Table 3 represent the wave at which HRS

OOP medical costs are measured, and the columns the time of onset of new health condition.

The final row sums these period costs to compute the cumulative (up to wave 5) increase in OOP

medical costs associated with each medical event.

        Thus, a severe health shock that occurred between waves 1 and 2 of HRS initially

increased mean OOP medical expenses by $1,720 during the two-year interval when it happened.

This same health event also produced future increases in health costs that were of progressively

smaller amounts. By the fifth wave, the mean total cost was a little over $4,000 so that less than

half of the incremental costs were borne around the time of the event. Roughly speaking, the

same pattern exists for major health events taking place in other HRS waves—an initial mean

impact of about $2,000 followed by additional albeit falling cost increments in future years.




                                                8
These estimated increases in total OOP medical costs in Table 3 are not all that different than the

simple unadjusted differences displayed in Table 2 suggesting that these additional costs are due

to the actual onset and not the result of other (measurable) differences at baseline between those

who actually experienced a major health event and those who did not.

       The primary purpose of health insurance is to reduce this financial risk. The second and

third panels of Table 2 present the same type of data on the distribution of OOP medical

expenses, but this time stratified by whether or not the respondent had health insurance at

baseline. Health insurance certainly dampens but does not eliminate medical costs due to new

major illness. The mean increase in OOP medical costs is around $5,000 among those with

health insurance and about twice that amount for those without health insurance. A comparison

of the impact of a severe health event by insurance coverage shows that expenditures are actually

lower at and below the median respondent without health insurance, but that they become

progressively greater for the uninsured in the right tail of the cost distribution. This suggests that

there is an impact of insurance on utilization as well as on expenditures. The lower impact of a

severe onset below the median for those without health insurance may indicate that those without

insurance went without some care costing moderate amounts. But some of the large expenses

appear to have been borne by those without health insurance.

       The financial risks of health events remain for all HRS respondents. Even for those with

health insurance at baseline, there is a one-in-twenty chance of an increase in expenses of about

$11,000 and a one-in-fifty of about $23,000 additional outlays. Of course, the situation is far

more difficult among those without baseline health insurance where even the mean effect of a

new severe onset is about $10,000. For them, there is a 10% chance of $28,000 more in OOP

medical costs, and a 5% chance of an extra $73,000 in additional expenses. In contrast, the shift




                                                  9
in expense distribution induced by a minor onset is not large whether or not the respondent was

covered by health insurance.

           The data in Table 2 control for the presence of health insurance at baseline. One fear

associated with becoming sick is the possibility of losing health insurance, especially if one can

no longer work. For those without health insurance, the concern is that it may now be almost

impossible to obtain it. Table 4 addresses this issue by listing the fraction of HRS respondents

who reported no type of health insurance in each wave. As they age into government programs

like Medicare, even among those who experienced no new health events across the first five

waves the percent without health insurance fell in half (from 14% to 7%). Table 4 also lists the

same data for respondents who experienced a new major health event between each wave. The

timing of the new health event is indicated by the placement of the dotted lines in each column.

While each of the last four columns shows the same downward trend in non-coverage, in each

case there is a noticeable jump at the time the major health event occurred.4

           Table 5 provides a more detailed look at what is happening by listing the types of health

insurance held at each wave. At baseline, among those HRS respondent with health insurance

the dominant mode by far is employer-provided insurance, but as the waves unfold and

retirement comes closer there is a gradual transition toward more government provided

insurance. But with what looks like a one period lag, this transition is clearly accelerated by a

new major event. For example, between the second and fourth waves of data, there is a 25

percentage point drop in employer-only coverage and a 20 percentage point increase in

government-only coverage. This compares to only a 10 percentage point drop in employer and

12 percentage point increase in government coverage for those experiencing no new health

events. The data in Appendix Table A demonstrates that virtually all of this expansion in
4
    There were no such breaks for new minor health events.


                                                         10
government-provided health insurance was Medicare and not either Medicaid or Champus—the

two other major government programs.

       Instead of new major health events raising the prospects of a loss of health insurance they

actually triggered new (earlier) eligibility and lead to an expansion in insurance. This indicates

that in terms of the consequences of health events the pre-retirement years represented by the

original HRS cohort might be quite unique and should not be extrapolated to younger people.

Work and Income

       New health events can impact the financial well being of households in other ways as

well. Perhaps, the most direct is that declining health may make work more difficult. Following

the same format used in Table 3, Tables 6, 7, and 8 summarize the estimated effects of new

health shocks on changes in the probability of work, changes in the number of hours worked per

week (conditional on working), and changes in household income.

       Similar to the time pattern of effects documented earlier for OOP medical expenses, a

new severe health onset has an immediate and large impact of reducing the probability of

working, which is then followed by diminishing ripple like effects in subsequent waves. To

illustrate, a severe health event between the first and second wave of HRS reduced the

probability of work by 15 percentage points between the same two waves. Since the average

labor force participation rate at baseline among those who were about to experience this major

health event was .55, the impact on work is decidedly not trivial. Once again, estimated

incremental effects in subsequent years cascade downward so that by the end of HRS wave 5, the

probability of work had declined by about 27 percentage points due to a major health shock

between waves 1 and 2. This pattern of a large immediate reduction in the probability of work

followed by smaller additional declines in future waves also characterizes major health events




                                                11
that took place between the other waves of HRS. There appears to be a small decline in the

absolute size of the impact on work effort, which would not be surprising as labor force

participation is trending down as HRS respondents age. Just as was reported for medical costs,

estimated effects are considerably smaller if the health events come under the minor label.

       In contrast to these quite dramatic impacts on the probability of work, the estimated

effects on my measure of the intensive work margin—weekly hours conditional on work shown

in Table 7—are not only more modest in their immediate impact, but the contemporaneous

effects are about the same as the cumulative effects indicating little spillover to future years.

Apparently the principal way that work is altered by a new severe health event is through the

extensive margin of whether one works or not.

       Table 8 provides estimates of the biannual changes in annual household income that are

associated with new health events. While labor force activity refers to the same time as the

survey, it is important to remember that household income is for the previous year so that some

part of total income receipts actually predates the onset of the disease. In addition to between-

wave household income changes presented in the first four rows of this table, the final two rows

provide two summary measures of cumulative change over the first five waves. The first—total

yearly income loss—was obtained from summing the column estimates and thus measures the

difference in household income between wave 5 and the wave preceding the new health event.

The second—cumulative income loss—measures the total loss in household income associated

with the health event.

       Not surprisingly given the labor force results described above, new health events reduce

household income with the reduction larger when the shock is major. There is no evidence of

any household income recovery in subsequent years so that the initial income losses persist. In




                                                  12
fact, consistent with the labor force participation effects, there are additional diminishing income

losses in subsequent waves. These period-by-period income losses while cumulatively

significant are much smaller than the reductions in work force participation contained in Table 6.

Off their baseline levels, household income declines are in the order of 10% or less compared to

close to 30% for workforce participation. The reasons for this discrepancy in the two related

outcomes do not lie so much in offsets in other types of income (for example I find little

evidence of additional work effort of spouses) but instead in different reactions to similar health

shocks across the income distribution. Low-income households are much more likely to react to

a health shock by exiting the labor force than are higher-income households.

        The final row in Table 8 presents the cumulative household incomes loss associated with

the health event.5 Evaluated using mean effects, cumulative household income losses are much

larger than the cumulative increases in OOP medical expenses described above in Table 3. For

example, for the wave 1-2 major health shock, the order of magnitude is ten to one. While less

dramatic for the severe health shocks in the other waves, cumulative income losses typically

exceed cumulative medical expenses by a large single-digit integer.

        Table 9 contains my estimates of the sum of cumulative income loss plus cumulative

medical expenses associated with the onset of a health event derived from these models. The

lifetime budget constraint linking consumption, income, assets, and savings implies that this sum

of income loss plus cumulative medical expenses (plus the foregone interest on them) represents

an alternative way of measuring the wealth change or savings that took place across the first five

waves of HRS.




5
 I assume that the health event took place midway between the waves so the income loss coincident with the health
event applies initially for only one year.


                                                       13
       There are several advantages and disadvantages with this alternative measure of the

household savings. Since income is arguably measured with much greater accuracy than

household wealth, this alternative concept should be less contaminated by measurement error

than changes in household wealth are known to be. Second, this alternative measure is also less

affected by capital gains, which during the periods of the recent stock market boom and bust may

well dominate changes in household wealth over time. The principal disadvantage is that this

alternative measure does not incorporate changes in other components of household consumption

besides medical expenses. Invoking standard consumption smoothing arguments may not be a

sufficient safe harbor as standard inter-temporal theory suggests that consumption adjustments

may be triggered in part by new health events.

       With these caveats, the data in Table 9 indicate that the onset of all major health events

should have lead to a reduction in household wealth with that reduction much larger for major

health events compared to the more minor ones. Table 9 also includes the same summary

measures of household income loss and cumulative medical expenses that were obtained from

precisely the same models estimated using the original AHEAD sample. Given the

predominance of retirement and virtually universal coverage by Medicare in the AHEAD

sample, not surprisingly the implied change in household wealth triggered by a new health event

whether it is major or minor is considerably smaller in the AHEAD sample. In the AHEAD

sample, there is much less possibility of any income loss since most respondents’ income is

either annutized or is not contingent contemporaneously on changes in health status (see Smith

and Kington (1997) for additional evidence).

       Table 10 lists results of models that use two alternative measures of changes in household

wealth—the cumulative income loss and OOP medical expenses plus the implicit foregone




                                                 14
interest on them (labeled the cumulative model) and the more direct measure using the change in

household wealth between the first and fifth wave of HRS—as the outcome variables. In this

formulation, negative coefficients in cumulative model imply positive household wealth growth

so that the coefficients in the two alternative models should have opposite signs. In most cases,

this turns out to be the case and estimated coefficients are often remarkably close especially as

there is nothing at the measurement level tying these two outcomes together.

       The principal difference between the two models lies in fact in the final row—the R2—

that are more than eight times larger in the cumulative model. The negative consequences of the

considerably greater measurement error in household wealth are apparent from the much larger

standard errors, lower statistical significance, and somewhat wilder fluctuation in estimated

coefficients (when one would think they might be ordered as in baseline self-reported GHS) in

the household wealth model compared to the cumulative model.

       At least if only signs are used as the criteria, there are many similarities in the estimates

obtained with the two alternative outcome measures. Since these similarities are not forced

through measurement, this may encourage at least some of us to assign more credibility to some

of the results. For example, both outcome specifications predict that younger HRS respondents

experienced greater wealth growth over these eight years and that wealth growth was somewhat

smaller among women, African-Americans, and Latinos. Finally, additional years of

schooling—and most particularly having a college degree—are associated with larger amounts

of wealth accumulation under either definition of the outcome.

       The major exception to this theme of overall similarity concerns the household income

and wealth variables, which have the same signs in both models in the first and third columns of

Table 10. Since additional financial resources should promote savings, the a priori expectation




                                                 15
is that the baseline financial variables should be negative in the cumulative model and positive in

the wealth change specification. But this is only the case for wealth in the model where income

is included in the outcome (the cumulative model) and household income in the wealth change

model. The reason for this confusion stems from the impact of measurement error in both

income and wealth, which when appearing on both sides of the estimated equation seriously

biases the estimated coefficients. The second and fourth columns omit the guilty party from the

respective models, and much more sensible estimates are now obtained for the effect of wealth in

the cumulative model and the effect of income in the wealth change model. Both estimates now

imply reasonable ranges of the marginal propensity to save. By and large the estimated effects

of other variables in the model are not sensitive to these alternative specifications.

       My principal interest in these models concerns the impact of a new health event. I

concentrate only on the impact of new health events between waves 1 and 2. In the cumulative

model, the estimates of household savings induced by the major and minor health onset are close

to those obtained by summing the individual wave estimates that were summarized in Table 9—a

major health onset lead to a cumulative loss of about $52,000 and a minor one a cumulative loss

of about $11,000. Both minor and major health onsets also lead to a cumulative wealth lost

when wealth change models are examined. However, estimates now are not terribly precise—a

predictable consequence of poorly-measured household wealth in the HRS panel.

       I also examined whether or not there were important interaction effects of a new health

onset by interacting the two health event onset variables with race, gender, ethnicity, education,

income, and wealth. None of these interactions were significant except wealth in the cumulative

model and baseline household income in the wealth change model. In both cases, the effects of a

major health onset were larger the higher baseline wealth or income. For example, the impact of




                                                 16
a major health event in reducing wealth growth was larger the higher initial levels of household

income. This finding is consistent with a combination of consumption smoothing and liquidity

constraints. Lower-income households are forced to absorb more of the wealth change in

consumption.


Section 3. Predictors of New Health Events

       In this section, I reverse the question by examining the ability of baseline SES measures

to predict the future onset of disease once one controls for measures of baseline health. I also

explore the extent to which innovations in economic status ‘cause’ changes in health.

       Table 11 contains the results obtained from probit models predicting the onset of a major

or a minor chronic condition between waves 1 and waves 5 of HRS. These models include as

covariates a vector of baseline health conditions of the respondent—self-reported general health

status (excellent, very good, good, with fair and poor the excluded class), the presence of a

chronic condition at baseline, a scale measuring the extent of functional limitations (from 0 to

100 with higher numbers indicating poorer functioning). The models also include a standard set

of behavioral risk factors (currently a smoker, number of cigarettes smoked), whether one

engaged in vigorous exercise, and BMI (entered as quadratic), and a relatively standard set of

demographic controls—birth cohort (born between 1935-1937, after 1937 with pre 1935 or the

older respondents the excluded group), race (1= African-American), Hispanic ethnicity, and sex

(1= women), and region of residence. My main interest lies in the SES measures that include

household income, household wealth, and respondent’s education (two dummies—12-15 years

of schooling, 16 or more years, with less than 12 the excluded group).

       Just as one needed innovations in health that were not caused by SES to estimate the

impact of health on SES, it is also necessary to isolate innovations in SES that were not caused



                                                17
by health to estimate the impact of SES on health. One opportunity for doing so lies in the large

wealth increases that were accumulated during the large stock market run-up during the 1990s.

Given the unusually large run-up in the stock market during these decades, it is reasonable to

posit that a good deal of this surge was unanticipated and thus captures unanticipated exogenous

wealth increases that were not caused by a person’s health. If financial measures of SES do

improve health, such increases in stock market wealth should be associated with better

subsequent health outcomes at least with a lag.6

         Putting aside for a moment the central SES results, most of the estimates listed in

Table 11 are as expected. Older respondents are much more likely to experience a new chronic

onset, and the likelihood of experiencing a new onset is strongly negatively related to better

health status as measured at baseline. There are some suggestions of some to-do’s and not-to-

do’s from the health behavioral risk variables. Even after controlling for an extensive list of

baseline health conditions, smoking, excessive drinking, and the absence of vigorous exercise

places one at elevated risk for the onset of a new major condition but appears to have little

impact on the minor onsets. Women, Latinos and perhaps somewhat surprisingly African-

Americans are all of lower risk of a major new onset while only African-Americans face a

statistically significant higher risk of a new minor onset.

         My principal interest in these models is whether prior wave SES predicts the likelihood

of new illnesses, and if so which measures of SES, and if so why? A pretty consistent

generalization can be made for household income—it never predicts future onset on minor or

major conditions. While household wealth appears to be only related to a major onset, this effect

is not particularly large and as we shall see below it will mostly disappear with a single

6
  One limitation of using increases is stock market wealth is that these increases are concentrated at the top of the
income distribution (see Smith (2000)). Obtaining other credible measures of exogenous changes in financial
resources that more evenly span the entire income distribution would be very useful.


                                                           18
exception when I break out the different types of chronic onset. Finally, my best measure of an

exogenous wealth change—the wealth increase from the stock market—is only statistically

significant in one instance (arthritis) and there it has the incorrect sign so that an increase in

stock market wealth makes the onset of arthritis more likely. Moreover, in results I do not

display in Table 11, having health insurance also does not predict future onset. In sum then, SES

variables that directly measure or proxy for financial resources of a family are either not related

or at best only weakly related to the future onset of disease over the time span of eight years.

        This largely negative conclusion is in sharp contrast to the results obtained for the final

SES measure—education and for the gist of the results reported by Adams et al. (2003) for a

mostly retired population. Additional schooling is strongly and statistically significantly

predictive of the new onset of both major as well as minor disease over the first eight waves of

the HRS.

        To obtain some notion of why all this may be so, Table 12 lists estimated coefficients for

the SES variables obtained with models for each of the chronic conditions separately. In no

single case is the estimated coefficient on household income (which vacillates in sign)

statistically significant. While the coefficients on wealth lean towards negative values, in only

one case (stroke) is a statistically significant result negative result obtained for household wealth.

Combined these results in Table 12 strengthen the overall conclusion that in a sample of the pre-

retirees financial measures of SES do not appear to be able to predict future onset of disease

across a time horizon of almost a decade.

        Once again, however, in all cases except cancer (which looks very much like an equal

opportunity disease), the effects of schooling are preventative against disease onset. But here too




                                                  19
disease differentiate may eventually be informative as the most powerful protection of education

takes place for arthritis and diseases of the lung with diabetes and heart disease in the next tier.

        That leaves us with the most difficult question of all—why does education matter so

much? To try to provide at least some partial insight into this question, I ran an expanded

version of these models. This expansion involved including some of the more likely prospects

that are measured in the HRS—cognition, past health behaviors, early life health and economic

environments, parental attributes and parental health. HRS information on some of these

concepts is quite limited but it does record whether one smoked in the past and whether one was

exposed on the job to a health hazard (and the number of years of exposure), the education of

parents, whether or not each parent is alive, and if deceased the age of death, self-accessed

general health status as a child (the same five point scale), and an assessment of the economic

environment in which one lived during childhood.7 The results obtained from this expanded

model are presented in Table 13 (for major onsets) and Table 14 (for minor offsets).

        First, lets deal with the easier question—which of these new measures did not seem to

matter in this context. Two of the more prominent cognition variables available in the HRS were

added to these models—memory word count and the Wechsher scale (a measure of higher order

reasoning). Neither of these cognition variables was statistically significant and their inclusion

had no impact at all on the education variables. The same conclusion would apply to the ex-

smoker variable, the environmental job exposure variable, and parental education.8




7
  The specific question for health was “Consider your health while you were growing up, from birth to age 16.
Would you say that your health during that time was excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor?” The specific
question for economic circumstances was “Now think about your family when you were growing up, from birth to
age 16. Would you say your family during that time was pretty well off financially, about average, or poor?”
8
  When individual chronic conditions were examined separately, the environmental exposure variable has a
statistically positive effect on diseases of the lung.


                                                      20
        What did matter was the self-evaluation of childhood health and economic status and

parental health as proxied by age of death of each parent.9 For the major health onsets, a

(currently) self-assessed better health status and better economic status during childhood both

reduce the risk of incurring a serious health onset in one’s fifties and early sixties even after

controlling for current health and economic status. There is, of course, ample support for such a

finding in the work of Barker (1997) and others who have emphasized the delayed health impact

of early childhood exposures. I would currently view these results more cautiously until the

disease specific relevance can be rationalized. For example, when models are estimated on the

individual diseases separately, the principal impacts of childhood health appear in heart disease

and diseases of the lung (and not cancer). More puzzling, the major impact of childhood

economic circumstances appears in cancer for which a convincing explanation does not

immediately jump to mind.

        In the minor onset specification in Table 14, what principally matters are the measures of

parental health. Having a living parent or having a parent being older when they died tend to

reduce the likelihood of an onset on new chronic conditions. When these are estimated on a

disease specific basis, the effects are concentrated in hypertension and diabetes and pretty much

non-existent in arthritis. The same caveats mentioned above for the major onsets would apply

here as well.

        With these additional variables included, the effects of own education in predicting

onsets appears to be diminished but the principal impact may have been more on standard errors




9
 For evidence of the role of economic resources during childhood, see Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson (2002) and
Wadsworth and Kuh (1997).


                                                       21
than on point estimates. My admittedly tentative conclusion would be that collectively these

additional factors explain some but not all of the ability of education to predict future onset.10

Conclusions

        In this paper, I examined several questions related to the SES health gradient using a

sample of people first observed when they were mostly between ages 51 and 61. This research

was based on extensive data about baseline health and several dimensions of their SES as well

and the update on this information available from four subsequent follow-ups taking place at

two-year intervals. Innovations in health are proxied by the new onset of chronic conditions, a

relatively common event in this age group, and innovations in economic status by the change in

stock market wealth over this period.

        There are some things that appear clear. Among people in their pre-retirement years,

feedbacks from health to labor supply, household income, and wealth are realities that should

neither be ignored nor dismissed as of secondary importance. Working is the critical link in this

chain with OOP medical expenses, while not ignorable especially for distributional analysis, in

the second tier. These negative income and wealth consequences of new health innovations do

appear to decay with age and are certainly much smaller in an already retired population. What

these consequences would be 10 or 20 years earlier in age is an important and yet unanswered

question (see Smith (2003). The evidence is this paper along with that available in other studies

(Adams et al. (2003), Smith (1999)) means that we can say with more confidence that health has

quantitatively strong consequences for several dimensions of SES, particularly financial ones in

certain age groups.




10
 For an alternative explanation of the role of disease self-management in the health education gradient, see
Goldman and Smith (2002).


                                                         22
       More tentative conclusions are warranted for the ability of SES measures to predict future

onset of disease. Perhaps, most importantly, my evidence does suggest that the role of financial

measures of SES—household income, household wealth, or health insurance—is quite weak. To

put it most simply, household income never appears to predict any future onset over the horizon

of about a decade and there is only weak evidence that levels of changes in household wealth

helps much at all. However, it is not true that SES doesn’t matter. Even after controlling for an

extensive list of baseline health conditions and status, education still strongly predicts the future

onset of disease.

       My attempts to explain why education may matter represent the most tentative part of my

thinking. There is evidence that the pathways may well be disease specific as the predictive

power of schooling varies considerably by disease. There is also some evidence that legacy

effects from childhood may still matter 30 or 40 years later even when the health outcome is the

onset of new disease. Whether or not these legacy effects represent economic, health, or genetic

factors is quite uncertain in my view and requires much more additional research.




                                                  23
References

Adams, Peter, Michael Hurd, Daniel McFadden, Angela Merrill, and Tiago Ribeiro. “Healthy,
   Wealthy, and Wise? Tests for Direct Causal Paths Between Health and Socioeconomic
   Status,” Journal of Econometrics 112:3-56, 2003.

Barker, David J. P. "Maternal Nutrition, Fetal Nutrition and Diseases in Later Life," Nutrition
   13(9):807-13, 1997.

Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Chris Paxson. "Economic Status and Health in Childhood:
   The Origins of the Gradient, “American Economic Review 92(5):1308-34, December 2002.

Deaton, Angus. “Health, Inequality, and Economic Development,” Journal of Economic
   Literature, 41:113-58, March 2003.

Goldman, Dana, and James P. Smith. “Can Patient Self-Management Help Explain the SES
   Health Gradient?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences; USA (PNAS),
   99(16):10929-34, August 6, 2002.

Kitagawa, Evelyn, and Philip Hauser. Differential Mortality in the United States: A Study in
   Socioeconomic Epidemiology, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1973.

Marmot, Michael. “Multi-Level Approaches to Understanding Social Determinants,” in Lisa
   Berkman and Ichiro Kawachi (eds.), Social Epidemiology, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
   1999.

Smith James P. “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets,” Journal of Economic Perspectives.
   13(2):145-66, 1999.

Smith, James P. “Why is Wealth Inequality Rising?” in Finis Welch (ed.), Increasing Income
   Inequality in America: The Facts, Causes, and Consequences, University of Chicago Press,
   2000, pp. 83-116.

Smith, James P. “Unraveling the SES Health Connection,” manuscript, 2003.

Smith James P., and Raynard Kington. “Demographic and Economic Correlates of Health in
   Old Age,” Demography 34(1):159-170, February 1997.

Townsend, P., P. Phillimore, and A. Beattie. Health and Deprivation: Inequality and the North,
   Croom Helm, London, 1988.

Wadsworth, M.E.J., and D.J.L. Kuh. Childhood Influences on Adult Health: A Review of
  Recent Work from the British 1946 National Birth Cohort Study, the MRC National Survey
  of Health and Development, Pediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 11:2-20, 1997.




                                               24
                                            Table 1
                 Pre-existing and New Health Conditions—Original HRS Cohort

Pre-Prevalence                         Cond. Incidence         Incidence    Post-Prevalence

     38.7            NONE                                          49.9           18.5
                      None                  47.8
                     Minor                  36.4
                     Major                  15.5


     42.6          MINOR                                             28.9         45.5
                     None                   51.6
                    Minor                   22.1
                    Major                   26.5

     18.7          MAJOR                                             21.4         36.0
                    None                    50.3
                    Minor                   28.9
                    Major                   21.9
 Source: Calculations by author from first five waves of HRS—sample born between 1931-1941. All
data are weighted.




                                                25
                                             Table 2
                  Distribution of Out-of-Pocket Medical Expenditures Percentiles

Percentiles                     10th     30th    50th      70th         90th     95th    98th   Mean
Wave 2 incidence of chronic condition
severe                      1,007      3,430    6,660    11,011     29,925     43,365   72,266 11,285
mild                          532      2,155    3,187     6,751     15,729     21,199   31,178 7,299
none all five waves           414      1,579    3,164     5,668     12,463     18,356   30,904 5,776

Have health insurance at baseline
severe                      1,130      3,868    6,672    10,624     25,111     32,382   53,432 10,609
mild                          627      2,265    3,908     6,979     15,748     21,199   35,312 7,570
none all five waves           496      1,633    3,235     5,688     12,170     17,584   30,811 5,738

Have no health insurance at baseline
severe.                        73      1,196    4,867    15,291     43,485     93,982   93,982 16,444
mild                          184      1,247    3,094     5,490     15,008     21,729   30,131 5,674
none all five waves           153      1,138    2,787     5,773     14,958     20,692   39,489 6,168
 Calculations by author using HRS—between Waves 1-5. All data are weighted.




                                                    26
                                          Table 3
                Impact of New Health Shock on Out-of-Pocket Medical Expenses
                                     Major Health Shock Between

 Wave                    W1-W2              W2-W3                  W3-W4       W4-W5
  2                     1,720*

   3                    1,037*               2,052*

   4                      893*                 734*               1,490*

   5                      503*                 401                  607*       1,969*

Total                   4,153                3,187                2,097        1,969
                                     Minor Health Shock Between

 Wave                    W1-W2              W2-W3                  W3-W4       W4-W5

   2                       175

   3                       313                 766*

   4                       160                 247                  443*

   5                       567*                682*                 625*         456*

Total                     1,215              1,695                1,065          456
 *Statistically significant at 5%.




                                                 27
                                 Table 4
             Fraction of Respondents Without Health Insurance

                                   Major Health Onset by:

         No Health      Wave 1-2          Wave 2-3          Wave 3-4   Wave 4-5
          Onsets
Wave 1     14.0           13.6              14.4              15.1        16.0
Wave 2     12.4             8.0             14.2              12.1        15.6
Wave 3     10.3             6.1               7.8             10.2        13.8
Wave 4      9.4             6.6               7.6               6.0        9.2
Wave 5      7.3             2.6               4.9               3.6        6.5




                                     28
                                         Table 5
                            Changes in Type of Health Insurance

No New Health Event                  1             2         3      4      5
No health insurance               12.2           10.8      9.1     8.4    6.1
Employer only                     62.8           62.8     60.1    52.0   41.9
Government only                    5.2            7.5     13.0    19.4   25.9
Government and employer            4.9            6.6      8.0    11.2   16.1
Personal only                      5.9            6.4      9.2     7.3    6.5
All other                          9.0            5.0      0.6     1.7    3.5

Severe Health Event, Wave 1 - 2      1             2         3      4      5
No health insurance               11.9            6.3      5.1     4.9    1.6
Employer only                     58.6           57.8     44.8    34.4   23.7
Government only                   10.3           16.1     26.0    35.6   41.9
Government and employer            5.1            9.1     16.8    20.7   23.7
Personal only                      4.5            3.9      7.4     4.0    1.6
All other                          9.6            6.8      0.1     0.4    7.5


Minor Health Event, Wave 1 - 2       1             2         3      4      5
No health insurance               15.4           13.0      9.9     7.2    5.5
Employer only                     59.0           60.5     56.3    47.5   36.0
Government only                    6.0            9.7     17.6    23.6   29.1
Government and employer            4.3            5.9      8.3    14.3   21.1
Personal only                      6.9            5.1      7.4     6.4    5.6
All other                          8.4            5.8      0.5     1.0    2.7




                                            29
                         Table 6
                  Probability of Working
                   Major Health Shock

        W1-W2          W2-W3               W3-W4    W4-W5
 2       -.148*

 3       -.054          -.156*

 4       -.030          -.024              -.091*

 5       -.036           -045               -049    -.112*

Total    -.268          -.225              -.140    -.112
                   Minor Health Shock

        W1-W2          W2-W3               W3-W4    W4-W5
 2       -.041*

 3       -.036*         -.031

 4       -.017          -.022              -.019

 5       -.013          -.004              -.021    -.015

Total    -.107          -.057              -.040    -.015




                           30
                         Table 7
                  Hours Worked Per Week

                    Major Health Shock

        W1-W2          W2-W3              W3-W4     W4-W5
 2       -4.02*

 3        0.64           -4.31*

 4       -0.60            0.63             -1.96*

 5        0.17            0.16             -0.68     -2.54*

Total    -3.83           -3.50             -2.64     -2.54

                   Minor Health Shock

        W1-W2          W2-W3              W3-W4     W4-W5
 2       -1.21*

 3       -0.99           -1.51*

 4        0.40           -0.17             -1.54*

 5        0.30            0.12             0.15      0.07

Total    -1.49           -1.56             -1.39     0.07




                           31
                                   Table 8
                 Impact of Health Shock on Household Income

                            Major Health Shock

                W1-W2           W2-W3                W3-W4        W4-W5

 2              -4,033*

 3              -1,258             -737

 4               -698            -3,231             -2,239

 5               -269              -460               -139     -3,601*

Total Yearly
 Income Loss    -6,258           -4,428             -2,478      -3,601

Cumulative
 Income Loss   -36,884          -13,828             -6,856      -3,601

                            Minor Health Shock

                W1-W2           W2-W3                W3-W4        W4-W5

 2               -498

 3               -988                20

 4                -44             -3,012*            -1,423

 5               -169               125              -2,680*        351

Total Yearly
 Income Loss    -1,699           -2,967             -4,103          351

Cumulative
 Income Loss    -8,727           -8,811             -6,949          351




                                    32
                                         Table 9
                         Cumulative Effects of New Health Events

                              W1-W2                W2-W3           W3-W4     W4-W5

HRS — sample
Major Health Event

Cumulative
 Income Loss                  -36,884              -13,828         -6,856   -3,601

Cumulative
 Income Loss +
Increase Expenses             -48,941              -19,338     - 9,805      -5,901

AHEAD — sample

Cumulative
 Income Loss +
Increase Expenses                                  -11,346                  - 3,553
                                                    -3,005
HRS — sample

Minor Health Event
Cumulative
 Income Loss                    -8,727              -8,811         -6,949      351

Cumulative
 Income Loss +
Increase Expenses             -11,544              -11,584     - 8,610        -316

AHEAD — sample

Cumulative
 Income Loss +
Increase Expenses                                   5,926          -6,838     -702
 Note: AHEAD sample waves moved over one column.




                                           33
                                          Table 10
                Cumulative Income Loss and Cumulative OOP Medical Expenses

                        Cumulative Income Loss and OOP
                               Medical Expenses                                   Wealth5 - Wealth1
                         Estimate     “t”  Estimate               “t”       Estimate   “t” Estimate              “t”

Intercept                 30,503        0.41 21,124              0.28       91,091        0.48    44,937         0.24
Cohort 1935-37           -34,376       -2.83 -29,081            -2.33       51,748        1.67    59,433         1.90
Cohort 1938 Plus         -91,859       -8.55 -77,832            -7.07       36,613        1.34    56,007         2.04
Health Excellent         -23,402       -1.30 -3,574             -0.19      -10,053       -0.22   -10,193        -0.22
Health Very Good         -18,217       -1.12 - 8,747            -0.52       41,862        1.01    39,372         0.94
Health Good               -1,984        0.13   5,786             0.37       32,719        0.85    39,605         1.02
Functional
Limitations Scale            476        1.14     378             0.88          86        0.08     215            0.20
Female                    29,223        2.93 29,905              2.92     -18,124       -0.72 -17,917           -0.68
Black                      9,920        0.72 12,035              0.85     -83,932       -2.42 -62,914           -1.80
Hispanic                  20,222        1.13 12,540              0.68     -79,374       -1.75 -59,523           -1.31
Income                     2.445        20.6                                1.853        6.17 0.3064             1.14
Wealth                   -0.2800        37.6 -0.2096             30.8     -0.2152       11.21
Ed 12-15                  -5,519       -0.48 15,422              1.31      16,398        0.56 15,596            0.53
Ed College or more      -124,676       -8.20 -58,968            -3.86     134,326        3.47 122,282            3.14
Minor Onset wave 2        13,247        0.94 11,128              0.77     -13,364       -0.37 -13,074           -0.36
Major Onset wave 2        47,007        2.33 52,158              2.52     -78,266       -1.52 -78,130           -1.51
R squared                     .19                 .14                        .026                .012
 Models also include controls for baseline prevalence of chronic conditions, regions of residence health risk
behaviors, marital status and the presence of health insurance.




                                                         34
                                                 Table 11
                                Probits for Future Onset of Chronic Condition


                                                              Major                                  Minor

                                                Estimate          Chi Square              Estimate           Chi Square

Intercept                                        -0.8489               10.14               -1.9624                37.91
Cohort 1935-37                                   -0.1920               19.78               -0.0799                 4.02
Cohort 1938 Plus                                 -0.1888               24.99               -0.1535                19.35
Health Excellent                                 -0.2314               13.57               -0.2396                16.76
Health Very Good                                 -0.1766                9.95               -0.0951                 3.17
Health Good                                      -0.0770                2.27                0.0302                 0.37
Functional Limitations Scale                      0.0041                8.63                0.0058                18.15
BMI                                               0.0172                1.47                0.1113                33.25
BMI squared                                      -0.0002                0.85               -0.0012                14.29
Vigorous exercise                                -0.0786                3.94               -0.0266                 0.57
Smoker                                            0.1523                6.68                0.0275                 0.25
Number of cigs                                    0.0075               10.69                0.0005                 0.06
More than 3 drinks                               -0.1583                4.55               -0.0339                 0.24
Female                                           -0.1918               30.12                0.0360                 1.25
Black                                            -0.1245                6.70                0.1396                10.04
Hispanic                                         -0.2994               20.40                0.0600                 1.09
Income                                            0.0111                0.06               -0.0063                 0.03
Wealth                                           -0.0046                2.26               -0.0005                 0.05
Change in stock wealth                           -0.0004                0.44                0.0004                 0.88
Ed 12-15                                         -0.1108                7.78               -0.0912                 5.96
Ed College or more                               -0.0844                2.43               -0.1588                10.26
 Models also control for presence of baseline chronic condition, region of residence, health insurance, and missing
value indicators. Income and wealth measured in $100,000 of dollars and the change in stock wealth in $10,000 of
dollars.




                                                         35
                                                Table 12
                             Probits for Future Onset of Chronic Condition
                                              Any Major                                Any Minor
                                      Estimate      Chi Square                 Estimate       Chi Square
Income                                  0.0111          0.06                   -0.0063            0.03
Wealth                                 -0.0046          2.26                   -0.0005            0.05
Ed 12-15                              -0.1108           7.78                   -0.0912            5.96
Ed College or more                    -0.0844           2.43                   -0.1588           10.26
Change in Stock Wealth                 -0.0004          0.44                    0.0004            0.88

                                                 Cancer                               Hypertension
                                      Estimate        Chi Square               Estimate         Chi Square
Income                                  0.0130            0.05                   0.0153             0.11
Wealth                                 -0.0030            0.53                 -0.0032              1.01
Ed 12-15                                0.0008            0.00                 -0.0675              2.45
Ed College or more                      0.0567            0.61                 -0.0623              1.17
Change in Stock Wealth                  0.0003            0.32                  -0.0001             0.11

                                          Diseases of the Lung                            Diabetes
                                      Estimate         Chi Square              Estimate           Chi Square
Income                                 -0.0271             0.12                  0.0382               0.40
Wealth                                 -0.0067             1.13                -0.0023                0.29
Ed 12-15                              -0.1920             10.32                -0.1153                4.82
Ed College or more                     -0.1432             2.67                -0.0777                1.11
Change in Stock Wealth                  0.0006             1.13                 -0.0023               1.37

                                             Heart Disease                                Arthritis
                                      Estimate        Chi Square               Estimate            Chi Square
Income                                -0.0447             0.64                 -0.0069                 0.03
Wealth                                  0.0015            0.19                  0.0000                 0.00
Ed 12-15                              -0.1086             5.10                 -0.0819                4.29
Ed College or more                    -0.0519             0.62                 -0.1857               12.14
Change in Stock Wealth                 -0.0012            1.36                  0.0006                 2.41

                                              Stroke
                                      Estimate       Chi Square
Income                                  0.0683           0.70
Wealth                                 -0.0175           3.83
Ed 12-15                              -0.0390            0.36
Ed College or more                    -0.0746            0.59
Change in Stock Wealth                 -0.0017           0.57
 Models also control for other variables–see footnote to Table 11. Income and wealth measured in $100,000 of
dollars and the change in stock wealth in $10,000 of dollars.




                                                       36
                                                  Table 13
                            Probits for Future Onset of Major Chronic Condition


                                                             Major                            Major Extended

                                                Estimate         Chi Square             Estimate            Chi Square

Intercept                                        -0.8649               10.14              -0.8963                     7.12
Cohort 1935-37                                   -0.1920               19.78              -0.1778                    14.00
Cohort 1938 Plus                                 -0.1888               24.99              -0.1617                    13.66
Health Excellent                                 -0.2314               13.57              -0.2058                     8.64
Health Very Good                                 -0.1766                9.95              -0.1629                     6.79
Health Good                                      -0.0770                2.27              -0.0624                     1.18
Functional Limitations Scale                      0.0041                8.63               0.0037                     5.31
BMI                                               0.0172                1.47               0.0199                     1.66
BMI squared                                      -0.0002                0.85              -0.0002                     1.01
Vigorous exercise                                -0.0786                3.94              -0.0917                     4.60
Smoker                                            0.1523                6.68               0.0997                     2.10
Number of cigs                                    0.0075               10.69               0.0103                    15.69
More than 3 drinks                               -0.1583                4.55              -0.1669                     4.22
Female                                           -0.1918               30.12              -0.1893                    20.96
Black                                            -0.1245                6.70              -0.0556                     0.97
Hispanic                                         -0.2994               20.40              -0.2098                     7.34
Income                                            0.0111                0.06               0.0456                     0.93
Wealth                                           -0.0046                2.26              -0.0040                     1.60
Change in stock wealth                           -0.0004                0.44              -0.0008                     1.06
Ed 12-15                                         -0.1108                7.78              -0.0783                     2.66
Ed College or more                               -0.0844                2.43              -0.0483                     0.52
Ex smoker                                                                                  0.0195                     0.20
Expose to hazard on job                                                                    0.0200                     0.21
# of years exposed                                                                         0.0021                     0.99
Memory test                                                                                0.0118                     2.53
WAIS scale                                                                                -0.0001                     0.00
Health Ex or VG as child                                                                  -0.0870                     4.68
Not poor during childhood                                                                 -0.0949                     6.31
Mother’s ed                                                                                0.0028                     0.18
Father’s ed                                                                               -0.0018                     0.09
Father alive                                                                              -0.1362                     1.34
Age of father’s death                                                                      0.0002                     0.01
Mother alive                                                                              -0.0743                     0.49
Age of Mother’s death                                                                     -.00002                     0.01
 Models also control for presence of baseline chronic condition, region of residence, health insurance and missing
values. Income and wealth measured in $100,000 of dollars and the change in stock wealth in $10,000 of dollars.




                                                        37
                                                  Table 14
                            Probits for Future Onset of Minor Chronic Condition
                                                             Minor                            Minor Extended

                                                Estimate         Chi Square              Estimate           Chi Square
Intercept                                        -1.9624              38.19               -1.7780                21.54
Cohort 1935-37                                   -0.0799               4.06               -0.1122                 6.58
Cohort 1938 Plus                                 -0.1535              19.29               -0.1761                19.12
Health Excellent                                 -0.2396              16.65               -0.2488                14.57
Health Very Good                                 -0.0951               2.96               -0.0805                 1.83
Health Good                                       0.0302               0.37                0.0224                 0.16
Functional Limitations Scale                      0.0058              18.39                0.0060                15.50
BMI                                               0.1113              32.97                0.1187                31.13
BMI squared                                      -0.0012              13.99               -0.0013                13.40
Vigorous exercise                                -0.0266               0.42               -0.0231                 0.38
Smoker                                            0.0275               0.24                0.0495                 0.60
Number of cigs                                    0.0005               0.07                0.0014                 0.30
More than 3 drinks                               -0.0339               0.30               -0.0271                 0.13
Female                                            0.0360               1.24                0.0704                 3.49
Black                                             0.1396               9.96                0.1366                 7.00
Hispanic                                          0.0600               1.22                0.0614                 0.83
Income                                           -0.0063               0.02               -0.0044                 0.01
Wealth                                           -0.0005               0.00               -0.0001                 0.00
Change in stock wealth                            0.0004               0.88                0.0003                 0.75
Ed 12-15                                         -0.0912               6.02               -0.0527                 1.38
Ed College or more                               -0.1588              10.46               -0.0927                 2.33
Ex smoker                                                                                  0.0536                 2.12
Expose to hazard on job                                                                   -0.0261                 0.44
# of years exposed                                                                         0.0007                 0.12
Memory test                                                                               -0.0055                 0.68
WAIS scale                                                                                -0.0035                 0.28
Health Ex or VG as child                                                                   0.0042                 0.01
Not poor during childhood                                                                  0.0155                 0.20
Mother’s ed                                                                                0.0004                 0.00
Father’s ed                                                                               -0.0046                 0.72
Father alive                                                                              -0.2001                 3.32
Age of father’s death                                                                     -0.0014                 0.88
Mother alive                                                                              -0.2465                 6.51
Age of Mother’s death                                                                     -.00028                 4.60
 Models also control for presence of baseline chronic condition, region of residence, health insurance and missing
values. Income and wealth measured in $100,000 of dollars and the change in stock wealth in $10,000 of dollars.




                                                        38
                                      Appendix Table A
                                 Types of Government Insurance

No New Health Event                    1             2           3     4      5
Medicare                            37.8           44.5     59.5     75.6   81.4
Medicaid                            15.7           13.2     12.0      6.1    4.2
Champus                             37.7           30.5     19.5     10.5    5.8
Medicare and Medicaid                3.3            4.1      6.9      5.9    5.7
All other                            5.5            7.7      2.1      2.1    2.9



Severe Health Event, Wave 1 - 2        1             2           3     4      5
Medicare                            40.8           50.7     62.7     73.8   74.4
Medicaid                            21.8           22.3     16.4      8.1    4.8
Champus                             26.2           15.1      6.5      4.7    4.1
Medicare and Medicaid                2.4            7.4     13.1     11.1   15.6
All other                            8.8            4.6      1.3      2.4    0.9



Minor Health Event, Wave 1 - 2         1             2           3     4      5
Medicare                      37.3       51.9      62.2        75.1       79.0
Medicaid                      19.7       14.8      16.0         6.0        4.7
Champus                       28.0       21.4      10.7         7.3        5.5
Medicare and Medicaid          3.8        4.4       9.3        10.1        9.8
All other                     11.0        7.5       1.9         1.5        1.1
_____________________________________________________________________________




                                              39
