NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE UNHOLY TRINITY OF FINANCIAL CONTAGION
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Carmen M. Reinhart
Carlos A. Vegh
Working Paper 10061
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10061
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003

The authors wish to thank Laura Kodres, Vincent Reinhart, and Miguel Savastano for very useful comments
and suggestions and Kenichi Kashiwase for excellent research assistance
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Graciela L. Kaminsky, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Vegh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Unholy Trinity of Financial Contagion
Graciela L. Kaminsky, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Vegh
NBER Working Paper No. 10061
October 2003
JEL No. F30, F31, F32
ABSTRACT
Over the last 20 years, some financial events, such as devaluations or defaults, have triggered an
immediate adverse chain reaction in other countries -- which we call fast and furious contagion. Yet,
on other occasions, similar events have failed to trigger any immediate international reaction. We
argue that fast and furious contagion episodes are characterized by "the unholy trinity": (i) they
follow a large surge in capital flows; (ii) they come as a surprise; and (iii) they involve a leveraged
common creditor. In contrast, when similar events have elicited little international reaction, they
were widely anticipated and took place at a time when capital flows had already subsided.

Graciela L. Kaminsky
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
Carmen Reinhart
University of Maryland
School of Public Affairs and Department of Economics
4105 Van Munching Hall
College Park, Maryland 20742
and NBER
creinhar@umd.edu
Carlos A. Vegh
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
cvegh@ucla.edu

1
For reasons that are not always evident at the time, some financial events, such as
the devaluation of a currency or an announcement of default on sovereign debt
obligations, trigger an immediate and startling adverse chain reaction among countries
within a region and in some cases across regions. This phenomenon, which we dub “fast
and furious” contagion, was manifest after the floatation of the Thai baht on July 2, 1997,
as it quickly triggered financial turmoil across East Asia. Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia,
and the Philippines were hit the hardest—by December 1997, their currencies had
depreciated (on average) by about 75 percent. Similarly, when Russia defaulted on its
sovereign bonds on August 18, 1998, the effects were felt not only in several of the
former Soviet republics, but also in Hong Kong, Brazil, Mexico, many other emerging
markets, and the riskier segments of developed markets.1 The economic impact of these
shocks on the countries unfortunate enough to be affected included declines in equity
prices, spikes in the cost of borrowing, scarcity in the availability of international capital,
and declines in the value of their currencies and in output.
Table 1 presents summary material for recent contagion episodes. The first column
lists the country, the date that marks the beginning of the episode, the nature of the shock,
and currency market developments in the crisis country, while the remaining columns
include information on the existence and nature of common external shocks, the
suspected main mechanism for propagation across national borders, and the countries that
were most affected.
The challenge for economic researchers is to explain why the number of financial
crises that did not have significant international consequences is far greater than those
that did. It is no surprise that a domestic crisis (no matter how deep) in countries that are

2
approximately autarkic (either voluntarily or otherwise) will not likely have immediate
repercussions in world capital markets. The countries may be large (China or India) or
comparatively small (Bolivia and Guinea-Bissau.) More intriguing cases of “contagion
that never happened” are where the crisis country is relatively large (at least by emerging
market standards) and is reasonably well integrated to the rest of the world through trade
or finance. Along with the fast and furious contagion episodes, these are the cases we
focus on in this paper.
Some recent examples of financial crises with limited immediate consequences
include Brazil’s devaluation of the real on January 13, 1999 and eventual flotation on
February 1, the Argentine default and abandonment of the Convertibility Plan in
December 2001, and Turkey’s devaluation of the lira on February 22, 2001. Given that
Brazil, Turkey, and Argentina are relatively large emerging markets, these episodes could
have been–at least potentially--as highly “contagious” as the Thai and Russian crises.
Nonetheless, financial markets shrugged off these events, despite the fact that it was
evident at the time that some of these shocks would have trade and real sector
repercussions on neighboring countries over the medium term.2 Table 2 presents some
summary material for these episodes, in a format parallel to Table 1.
This paper seeks to address the central question of why financial contagion across
borders occurs in some cases but not others.3 Throughout the paper, we stress that there
are three key elements—an abrupt reversal in capital inflows, surprise announcements,
and a leveraged common creditor (the unholy trinity)--that distinguish the cases where
contagion occurs from those where it does not.

3
First, contagion usually followed on the heels of a surge in inflows of international
capital and, more often than not, the initial shock or announcement pricked the capital
flow bubble, at least temporarily. The capacity for a swift and drastic reversal of capital
flows—the so-called “sudden stop” problem—played a significant role. 4
Second, the announcements that set off the chain reactions came as a surprise to
financial markets. The distinction between anticipated and unanticipated events appears
critical, as forewarning allows investors to adjust their portfolios in anticipation of the
event.
Third, in all cases where there were significant immediate international repercussions,
a leveraged common creditor was involved—be it commercial banks, hedge funds,
mutual funds, or individual bondholders—who helped to propagate the contagion across
national borders.
Before turning to the question of what elements distinguish the cases where
contagion occurs from those where it does not, however, we provide a brief tour of the
main theoretical explanations for contagion and the most salient empirical findings on the
channels of propagation.

What is Contagion?
Since the term “contagion” has been used liberally and taken on multiple
meanings, it is useful to clarify how it will be used in this paper. We refer to contagion
as an episode in which there are significant immediate effects in a number of countries
following an event--that is, when the consequences are fast and furious and evolve over a
matter of hours or days. This “fast and furious” reaction is a contrast to cases in which

4
the initial international reaction to the news is muted. The latter cases do not preclude the
emergence of gradual and protracted effects that may cumulatively have major economic
consequences. We refer to these gradual death by a thousand cuts cases as spillovers.
Common external shocks, such as changes in international interest rates or oil prices, are
also not automatically included in our working definition of contagion. Only if there is
“excess comovement” in financial and economic variables across countries in response to
a common shock do we consider it contagion.

Theories of Contagion
Through what channels does a financial crisis in one country spread across
international borders? Some models have emphasized investor behavior that gives rise to
the possibility of herding and fads. It is no doubt possible (if not appealing to many
economists) that such “irrational exuberance,” to quote Federal Reserve Chairman Alan
Greenspan, influence the behavior of capital flows and financial markets and exacerbates
the booms as well as the busts. Other models stress economic linkages through trade or
finance. This section provides a selective discussion of theories of contagion. The main
message conveyed here—consistent with our unholy trinity proposition--is that financial
linkages (i.e., cross border capital flows and common creditors) and investor behavior
figure the most prominently in the theoretical explanations of contagion.

Herding
Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992) model the fragility of mass behavior
as a consequence of informational cascades. 5 An information cascade occurs when it is

5
optimal for an individual, after observing the actions of those ahead of him, to follow the
behavior of the preceding individual without regard to his or her own information. Under
relatively mild conditions, cascades will almost surely start, and often they will be wrong.
In those circumstances, a few early individuals can have a disproportionate effect.
Changes in the underlying value of alternative decisions can lead to “fads,” that is drastic
and seemingly whimsical swings in mass behavior without obvious external stimulus.
Banerjee (1992) also develops a model to examine the implications of decisions
that are influenced by what others are doing. The decisions of others may reflect
potentially important information in their possession that is not in the public domain.
With sequential decision making, people paying attention to what others are doing before
them end up doing what everyone else is doing (i.e., herding behavior), even when one’s
own private information suggests doing something different. The herd externality is of
the positive feedback type: If we join the crowd, we induce others to do the same. The
signals perceived by the first few decision makers–random and not necessarily correct-determine where the first crowd forms, and from then on, everybody joins the crowd.
This characteristic of the model captures (to some extent) the phenomena of “excess
volatility” in asset markets, or the frequent and unpredictable changes in fashions.
Another story suggests that the channels of transmission arise from the global
diversification of financial portfolios in the presence of information asymmetries. Calvo
and Mendoza (1998), for instance, present a model where the fixed costs of gathering and
processing country-specific information give rise to herding behavior, even when
investors are rational. Because of information costs, there are equilibria in which the
marginal cost exceeds the marginal gain of gathering information. In such instances, it is

6
rational for investors to mimic market portfolios. When a rumor favors a different
portfolio, all investors “follow the herd.”

Trade Linkages
Some recent models have revived Nurkse’s (1944) classic story of competitive
devaluations (Gerlach and Smetts, 1996). Nurkse argued that since a devaluation in a one
country makes its goods cheaper internationally, it will pressure other countries that have
lost competitiveness to devalue as well. In this setting, a devaluation in a second country
is a policy decision whose effect on output is expected to be salutary, as it induces
expenditure-switching (i.e. reduces imports, increases exports, and improves the current
account.) An empirical implication of this type of model is that we should observe a high
volume of trade among the “synchronized” devaluers. As a story of voluntary contagion,
this explanation does not square with the fact that central banks often go to great lengths
to avoid a devaluation in the first place (often by engaging in an active interest rate
defense of the existing exchange rate, as in Lahiri and Végh, 2003) or by enduring
massive losses of foreign exchange reserves nor that devaluations have often been
contractionary.

Financial Linkages
Other studies have emphasized the important role of common creditors and
financial linkages. The “type” of the common creditor may differ across models but the
story tends to remain consistent.

7
In Shleifer and Vishny (1997), arbitrage is conducted by relatively few
specialized and leveraged investors, who combine their knowledge with resources that
come from outside investors to take large positions. Funds under management become
responsive to past performance. The authors call this Performance Based Arbitrage
(PBA). In extreme circumstances, when prices are significantly out of line and
arbitrageurs are fully invested, PBA is particularly ineffective. In these instances,
arbitrageurs might bail out of the market when their participation is most needed. That is,
arbitrageurs face fund withdrawals, and are not very effective in betting against the
mispricing. Risk averse arbitrageurs might chose to liquidate, even when they do not
have to, for fear that a possible further adverse price movement may cause a drastic
outflow of funds later on. While the model is not explicitly focused on contagion, one
could see how an adverse shock that lowers returns (say, like the Mexican peso crisis)
may lead arbitrageurs to liquidate their positions in other countries that are part of their
portfolio (Argentina, Brazil, etc.), as they fear future withdrawals.
Similarly, Calvo (1998) has stressed the role of liquidity. A leveraged investor
facing margin calls needs to sell asset holdings. Because of the information asymmetries,
a “lemons problem” arises and the asset can only be sold at a firesale price. For this
reason, the strategy will be not to sell the asset whose price has already collapsed, but
other assets in the portfolio. In doing so, however, other asset prices fall and the original
disturbance spreads across markets.
Kodres and Pritsker (2002) develop a rational expectations model of asset prices
to explain financial market contagion. In their model, assets’ long run values are
determined by macroeconomic risk factors, which are shared across countries, and by

8
country-specific factors. Contagion occurs when “informed” investors respond to private
information on a country-specific factor, by optimally rebalancing their portfolio’s
exposures to the shared macroeconomic risk factors in other countries’ markets. When
there is asymmetric information in the countries hit by the rebalancing, “uninformed”
investors cannot fully identify the source of the change in asset demand; they therefore
respond as if the rebalancing is related to information on their own country (even though
it is not). As a result, an idiosyncratic shock generates excess co-movement—
contagion—across countries' asset markets. A key insight from the model is that
contagion can occur between two countries even when contagion via correlated
information shocks, correlated liquidity shocks, and via wealth effects are ruled out by
assumption, and even when the countries do not share common macroeconomic factors,
provided that both share at least one underlying macroeconomic risk factor with a third
country, through which portfolio rebalancing can take place. Their model, like the
rational herding model of Calvo and Mendoza (1998), has the empirical implication that
countries with more internationally-traded financial assets and more liquid markets
should be more vulnerable to contagion. Small, highly illiquid markets are likely to be
under-represented in international portfolios to begin with and, as such, shielded from
this type of contagion.
Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) focus on is the role of commercial banks in
spreading the initial shock. The behavior of foreign banks can exacerbate the original
crisis by calling loans and drying up credit lines, but can also propagate crises by calling
loans elsewhere. The need to rebalance the overall risk of the bank’s asset portfolio and

9
to recapitalize following the initial losses can lead to a marked reversal in commercial
bank credit across markets where the bank has exposure.

Other Explanations
The so-called “wake-up call hypothesis” (a term coined by Morris Goldstein,
1998) relies on either investor irrationality or a fixed cost in acquiring information about
emerging markets. In this story, once investors “wake up” to the weaknesses that were
revealed in the crisis country, they will proceed to avoid and move out of countries that
share some characteristics with the crisis country. So, for instance, if the original crisis
country had a large current account deficit and a relatively “rigid” exchange rate, then
other countries showing similar features will be vulnerable to similar pressures (see Basu,
1998, for a formal model).

Channels of Propagation: The Empirical Evidence
As discussed, some theoretical models emphasized trade linkages as a channel for
the cross-border propagation of shocks, while most models have looked to financial
markets for an explanation.
Perhaps because trade in goods and services has a longer history in the post World
War II period than trade in financial assets, or because of far better data availability, trade
links have received the most attention in the empirical literature on channels of
contagion. Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1996) find evidence that trade links help
explain the pattern of contagion in 20 industrial countries over 1959-1993. Glick and
Rose (1999), who examine this issue for a sample of 161 countries, come to the same

10
conclusion. Glick and Rose (1999) and Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) also study trade
linkages which involve competition in a common third market. While sharing a third
party is a necessary condition for the competitive devaluation story, Kaminsky and
Reinhart (2000) argue it is clearly not a sufficient one. If a country that exports wool to
the United States devalues, it is not obvious why this would have any detrimental effect
on a country that exports semiconductors to the United States. Their study shows that
third-party trade links is a plausible transmission channel in some cases but not for the
majority of countries recently battered by contagion. For example, at the time of the
Asian crisis, Thailand exported many of the same goods to the same third parties as
Malaysia. This, however, does not explain all the other Asian crisis countries. Bilateral or
third party trade also does not appear to carry any weight in explaining the effects of
Mexico (1994) on Argentina and Brazil. At the time of Mexico’s 1994 devaluation, only
about 2 percent of Argentina’s and Brazil’s total exports went to Mexico. Similarly,
Brazil hardly trades with Russia, as only 0.2 percent of its exports are destined for
Russian markets; yet in the weeks following the Russian default Brazil’s interest rate
spreads doubled and Brazil’s equity prices fell by more than 20 percent.
Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) compare countries clustered along the lines of
trade links versus countries with common bank creditors, and conclude that common
financial linkages better explains the observed pattern of contagion. Mody and Taylor
(2002), who seek to explain the comovement in an exchange market pressures index by
bilateral and third-party trade and other factors, also cast doubt on the importance of trade
linkages in explaining the propagation of shocks.

11
Conversely, in many cases of crises without contagion, there are strong trade
links. About 30 percent of Argentina’s exports are destined for Brazil, yet in the week
following Brazil’s devaluation, the Argentine equity market increases 12 percent.
Similarly, nearly 13 percent of Uruguay’s exports are bound for the Argentine market.
Yet, the main reason why the crisis in Argentina ultimately affected Uruguay was the
tight financial linkages between the two countries. Uruguayan banks have (for many
years) been host to Argentinean depositors, who thought their deposits safer when these
were denominated in U.S. dollars and kept across the Río de la Plata. At first, as the
crisis deepened in Argentina, many deposits fled from Argentine banks and found their
way to Uruguay. But when the Argentine authorities declared a freeze on bank deposits
in December 2001, Argentine firms and households began to draw down the deposits
they kept at Uruguayan banks. The withdrawals escalated and became a run on deposits
amid fears that the Uruguayan central bank would either run out of international reserves
or (like Argentina) confiscate the deposits.
Other studies focused primarily on financial channels of transmission. Frankel
and Schmukler (1998) and Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2000) show evidence to
support the idea that US-based mutual funds have played an important role in spreading
shocks throughout Latin America by selling assets from one country when prices fall in
another – with Mexico’s 1994 crisis the being a prime example. Caramazza, Ricci, and
Salgado (1999), Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000), and Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2000)
focus on the role played by commercial banks in spreading shocks and inducing a sudden
stop in capital flows in the form of bank lending, especially in the debt crisis of 1982 and
the crisis in Asia in 1997. Mody and Taylor (2002) link contagion to developments in the

12
US high yield or “junk” bond market. The common thread in these papers is that,
without the financial sector linkages, contagion of the fast and furious variety would be
unlikely.
Summing Up
Table 3 summarizes the some of the arguments about propagation of contagion
among the five fast and furious cases emphasized earlier: Mexico in 1982, the European
Exchange Rate Mechanism crises of 1992, Mexico’s currency devaluation in 1994,
Thailand’s devaluation in 1997, and Russia’s devaluation in 1998. 6 In each case, we
consider the possible trade channel, whether the affected countries shared similar
characteristics with the crisis country and with each other, and whether a common
creditor was present with the possible financial channel. Indeed, Table 3 lays the
foundation for our unholy trinity of financial contagion proposition, which the next
section discusses in greater detail. Several features summarized in Table 3 are worth
highlighting. In all five cases, a common leveraged creditor was present, making it
consistent with the explanations offered by Schleifer and Vishny (1997), Calvo (1998),
and discussed in Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000). In three of the five cases, the scope for
propagation via trade links is virtually nonexistent and in one of the two remaining cases
(Thailand) the extent of third party competition is with Malaysia, not the other affected
Asian countries. Lastly, with the exception of the countries that suffered most from
Russia/LTCM fallout, the affected countries tended to have large capital inflows and
relatively fixed exchange rates.

13

The Unholy Trinity: Capital Inflows, Surprises, and Common Creditors
Having summarized some of the key findings of the literature on contagion, we
now return to our central question of why contagion occurs in some instances but not in
others.
The Capital Flow Cycle
Fast and furious contagion episodes are typically preceded by a surge in capital
inflows which, more often than not, come to an abrupt halt or sudden stop in the wake of
a crisis. The inflow of capital may come from banks, other financial institutions, or
bondholders. The debt contracts typically have short maturities, which means that the
investors and financial institutions will have to make decisions about rolling over their
debts – or not doing so. With fast and furious contagion, investors and financial
institutions are exposed to the crisis country and often highly leveraged. Thus, the
investors can be viewed as halfway through the door, ready to back out on short notice.
This rising financial exposure to emerging markets is not present to nearly the
same extent in the crises without major external consequences. Financial crises that have
not set off major international dominos have usually unfolded against low volumes of
international capital flows. Given lower levels of exposure, investors and institutions in
the financial sector have a much lower need to adjust their portfolios when the shock
occurs. In many instances, because the shock is anticipated, portfolios were adjusted
prior to the event.
In all five of the examples from Table 1, the capital flow cycle has also played a
key role in determining whether the effects of a crisis have significant international
ramifications. For example, in the late 1970s, soaring commodity prices, low and

14
sometimes negative real interest rates (as late as 1978 real interest rates oscillated
between minus two percent and zero), and weak loan demand in the United States made it
very attractive for U.S. banks to lend to Latin America and other emerging markets—and
lend they did. Capital flows, by way of bank lending, surged during this period, as shown
in Figure 1. By the early 1980s, the prospects for repayment had significantly changed
for the worse. U.S. short-term interest rates had risen markedly in nominal terms (the
federal funds rate went from below 7 percent in mid 1978 to a peak of about 20 percent in
mid-1981) and in real terms (by mid-1981 real short-term interest rates were around 10
percent, the highest level since the 1930s.) Since most of the loans made had either short
maturities or variable interest rates, the effects were passed on to the borrower relatively
quickly. Commodity prices had fallen almost 30 percent between 1980 and 1982, and
many governments in Latin America were engaged in spending sprees that would seal
their fate and render them incapable of repaying their debts. In 1981, Argentina’s public
sector deficit as a percent of GDP was about 13 percent while Mexico’s was 14 percent;
during 1979-80 Brazil’s deficit was of a comparable order of magnitude. Prior to
Mexico’s default in August 1982, one after another of these countries had already
experienced currency crises, banking crises, or both. When Mexico ultimately defaulted,
the highly exposed and leveraged banks retrenched from emerging markets in general and
Latin America in particular.
During the decade that followed, there were numerous crises in Latin America,
including some severe hyperinflations (Bolivia in 1985, and Peru, Argentina, and Brazil
in 1990) and other defaults. Yet, these crises had minimal international repercussions, as

15
most of the region was shut out of international capital markets. The drought in capital
flows lasted until 1990.
Figure 1 shows net private capital flows for the contagion episodes of the 1990s,
while Table 4 provides complementary information on capital flows and capital flight for
the crisis country and those affected by it. Again, notice the common pattern of a run-up
in borrowing followed by a crash at the time of the initial shock and much inflows of
capital thereafter. Net private capital flows to Europe had risen markedly and peaked in
1992 before coming to a sudden stop after the collapse of the Exchange Rate Mechanism
crisis, in which the attempt to hold exchange rates within preset bands fell apart under
pressure from international arbitrageurs. The crisis in the European Monetary System in
1992-93 showed that emerging markets do not have a monopoly on vulnerability to
contagion, although they certainly tend to be more crisis prone.
In the case of Mexico, as the devaluation of the peso loomed close late in 1994,
capital flows were close to their 1992 peak after surging considerably. (As late as 1989,
Mexico had recorded net large capital outflows.) The rise in capital flows to the East
Asian Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand (shown in Figure 1) was
no less dramatic—especially after 1995, when Japanese and European bank lending to
emerging Asia escalates.
The bottom right panel of Figure 1 shows the evolution of capital flows to all
emerging markets and the progression of crises. The halcyon days of capital flows to
emerging markets took place during the first half of the 1990s and held up at least for a
short time after Mexican crisis and its contagious effects on Argentina. But the East
Asian crisis brings another wave of contagion along the marked decline in capital flows

16
in 1997. The Russian crisis of August 1998 delivers another blow from which emerging
market flows never fully recover in the 1990s. As shown in the right bottom panel of
Figure 1, this crisis is associated with the second major leg of decline in private capital
flows to emerging markets. Since Figure 1 is based on annual capital flow data, it
significantly blurs the stark differences in capital flows during the pre- and post-Russia
crisis. Figure 2, which plots weekly data on emerging market bond issuance before
(negative numbers) and after (positive numbers) the Russian default (dashed line) and,
for contrast, the Brazilian devaluation on January 1999 (solid line). The vertical line
marks the week of the crisis. It is evident that bond issuance collapses following the
Russian crisis and remains for over two months following the event; by contrast, the
Brazilian devaluation had no discernible impact on issuance, which actually increases
following the devaluation.
As Figure 1 highlights, the next three crises--the Brazilian devaluation of January
1999, the Turkish devaluation of February 2001, and the Argentine default at the end of
2001—take place during the downturn of the cycle and at levels of net capital inflows
that were barely above the levels of the 1980s drought. Indeed, the estimates of capital
flows to emerging markets in recent years shown in Figure 1, indeed, may actually be
overstated because total net flows include foreign direct investment, which held up better
than portfolio bond and equity flows.

Surprise Crises and Anticipated Catastrophes
Fast and furious crises and contagion cases have a high degree of surprise
associated with them while their quieter counterparts are more broadly anticipated. This

17
distinction appears to be critical when “potentially affected countries” have a common
lender. If the common lender is surprised by the shock in the initial crises country, there
is no time ahead of the impending crisis to rebalance portfolios and scale back from the
affected country. In contrast, if the crisis is anticipated, investors have time to limit the
damage by scaling back exposure or hedging their positions.
Evidence that quieter episodes were more anticipated than the fast and furious
cases is presented in Table 5. Standard and Poor’s credit ratings had remained
unchanged during the twelve months prior to of the Mexican and Thai currency crises. In
the case of Russia, the credit rating is actually upgraded as late as June 1998 when the
broader definition that includes Credit Watch (CW) status is used. The CW list lists the
names of credits whose Moody’s ratings have a likelihood of changing. These names are
actively under review because of developing trends or events which warrant a more
extensive examination. Two downgrades eventually take place prior to the crises on
August 13, 1998 and again on the 17th, the day before the default. By contrast, Argentina
has a string (five) of downgrades as it marched toward default, with the first one taking
place in October 2000, over a year before the eventual default. Likewise, Brazil and
Turkey suffered downgrades well before the eventual currency crisis.
As further evidence that markets anticipated some of the shocks and not others,
Figure 3 plots of the domestic-international interest rate differential for the Emerging
Market Bond Index (EMBI) and the EMBI+ for two of the contagious episodes (Mexico
and Russia, top panels) and for two crises without immediate international repercussions
(Argentina and Brazil, bottom panels). 7 The patterns shown in these four panels are
representative of the behavior of spreads ahead of anticipated and unanticipated crises.

18
(The vertical axis is measured in basis points, so a measure of 1000 means a gap of 10
percentage points between the domestic borrowing rate and the international benchmark.)
If bad things are expected to happen, risk increases and spreads should widen. The
overall message is that fast and furious episodes are accompanied by sharp spikes in yield
differentials – reflecting the unanticipated nature of the news -- whereas other episodes
have tended to be anticipated by financial markets.
The top left panel of Figure 3, which shows the evolution of Mexico’s spread in
the pre-crisis period is striking. In Mexico, spreads are stable at around 500 basis points
in the months and weeks prior to the December 21, 1994 devaluation. Indeed Mexico’s
spreads remained below 1,000 until the week of January 6, 1995. Russian spreads,
illustrated in the top right panel of Figure 3, show remarkable stability until a couple of
weeks prior to the announcement and default. In the case of Russia, the devaluation of
the ruble appears to have been widely expected by the markets, as evident on the spreads
on ruble-denominated debt. One can conjecture that it was either the actual default or the
absence of an IMF bailout (following on the heels of historically large bail-out packages
for Mexico and Korea) that took markets by surprise.
The data presented in Figure 3 bottom panel illustrates the fact that markets
foreshadowed turbulence in the cases of Argentina (2001) and Brazil (1999). The left
bottom panel of Figure 3 presents evidence for interest rate spreads for Argentina and
shows that the cost of borrowing began to rise steadily and markedly well before its
default on December 23, 2001. In effect, since the week of April 22,spreads began to
settle above 1,000 and since July 20 the never fell below 1,500. The bottom right panel of
Figure 3 shows Brazilian spreads. There is a run-up in spreads well before Brazil floats

19
the real on February 1,1999. This chart also reveals that Brazil—more so than
Argentina—was quickly and markedly affected by the Russian crisis.
In sum, we have provided suggestive evidence that anticipated crises are preceded
by credit ratings downgrades and widening interest spreads before the crisis while for
unanticipated crises the downgrades and widening of spreads come during the crisis or
after the fact.
Common Creditors
As noted, international banks played an important role in the transmission of
some of the crises of the 1980s and the 1990s. In the 1980s it was U.S. banks lending
heavily to Latin America while in the 1990s it was European and Japanese bank lending
to Asia, the transition economies and, in the case of Spanish banks, Latin America. In the
remainder of this section, we discuss the role that commercial banks and mutual and
hedge funds have played in the recent contagion episodes.
International bank lending to the Asian crisis countries grew at a 25 percent
annual rate from 1994 to 1997 (or at a pace of about US$40 billion inflow per year.) At
the onset of the crisis, European and Japanese banks’ lending to Asia was at its peak at
US$165 and US$124 billion, respectively, while the exposure of US banks was much
more limited. Japanese banks had the highest exposure to Thailand, which also accounted
for 26 percent of their total lending to emerging markets (the largest representation of any
emerging market country in their portfolio.) Collectively, the Asian crisis countries
(excluding the Philippines, which did not borrow much from Japanese banks), accounted
for 65 percent of the emerging market loan portfolio of Japanese banks. For European
banks, the comparable share was 23 percent. Following the floatation of the Thai baht on

20
July 2, 1997, the exposed banks retrenched quickly and cut credit lines to emerging Asia.
The bank inflows quickly became outflows of about US$47 billion.
As with Asia, lending to transition economies had accelerated in the mid-1990s.
In the three years before the Russian crisis, international bank lending to the region grew
at 14 percent per annum. German banks were more heavily exposed to Russia, with
lending to Russia averaging about 20 percent of all their lending to emerging economies.
As with earlier fast and furious contagion episodes, bank flows to the region, which
oscillated around US$28 billion per year in the years before the crisis, turned into a
US$14 billion dollar outflow in the year following the crisis. This retrenchment in
lending helps explain why other transition economies were affected by the Russian crisis.
However, it fails to explain why Brazil, Hong Kong, and Mexico come under significant
pressures at this time. To understand these and other cases, we need to turn our attention
to non-bank common creditors.
Equity and bond flows also declined sharply in the aftermath of the fast and
furious crises of the 1990s. For example, U.S.-based mutual funds specialized in Latin
America withdrew massively from the region following the Mexican crisis in 1994. As
discussed in Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2002), withdrawals from Latin America
oscillated around 40 percent in the immediate aftermath of the crisis. The countries most
affected were Argentina, Brazil, and (of course) Mexico, which were the countries to
which the mutual funds were most heavily exposed to in Latin America at the time of the
crisis. For example, if one examines the Latin American portfolio of mutual funds
specialized in emerging markets at around the time of the crisis, Brazil, Mexico, and

21
Argentina account for 37, 26, and 14 percent of their portfolio, respectively (i.e., three
countries accounted for 77 percent of the Latin American portfolio)!
The Thai crisis in 1997 also triggered equity outflows through mutual funds from
Asia. As discussed in Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2002), the countries most
affected by abnormal withdrawals were Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan, the
countries with the most liquid financial markets in the region. As was the case of the
Mexican crisis, these were the countries to which mutual funds were heavily exposed. Of
the portfolio allocated to Asia, 30 percent was directed to Hong Kong, 7 percent to
Singapore, and 13 percent to Taiwan. They estimate that abnormal withdrawals (relative
to the mean flow during the whole sample) oscillated at around 10 percent for the three
economies.
Similarly, highly leveraged funds seem to have had an important role in the
speculative attack against Hong Kong dollar in August of 1998 following the Russian
crisis see Corsetti, Pesenti, and Roubini (2001). According to the Financial Stability
Forum 2000 Report of the Market Dynamics Study Group of the FSF Working Group on
Highly Leveraged Institutions (2000), large macro hedge funds appear to have detected
fundamental weaknesses early and started to build large short positions against the Hong
Kong dollar. According to available estimates, hedge funds’ short positions in the HK$
market were close to 10 billion U.S. dollars (6 percent of Hong Kong’s GDP), but some
observers believe that the correct figure was much higher. Several large hedge funds also
took very large short positions in the equity markets, and these positions were correlated
over time. As reported in the FSF study, among those taking short positions in the equity
market were four large hedge funds, whose futures and options positions were equivalent

22
to around 40 percent of all outstanding equity futures contracts as of early August prior to
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) intervention. Position data suggest a
correlation, albeit far from perfect, in the timing of the establishment of the short
positions. Two hedge funds substantially increased their positions during the period of
the HKMA intervention. At end August, four hedged funds accounted for 50,500
contracts or 49 percent of the total open interest/net delta position; one fund accounted
for one third. The group’s meetings suggested that some large highly leveraged
institutions had large short positions in both the equity and currency markets.

Concluding Reflections
To date, what has distinguished the contagion episodes that happened from those
that could have happened seems to have had little to do with more “judicious” and
“discriminating” investors—nor with any improvements to boast of in the state of the
international financial architecture. If investors behaved in a more discriminating manner
in the recent crises where contagion could have happened but did not, it is because: i)
those crises tended to unfold in slow motion and were thus widely anticipated; and ii) the
capital flow bubble had been pricked at an earlier stage, when those same investors were
more “exuberant” and iii) hence, the “common creditor” we have stressed in our
discussion was less leveraged in these episodes. When looking back into history, one is
struck by an overwhelming sense of “déjà vu. It certainly seems a mystery why episodes
of financial crises and contagion recur, in spite of the major costs associated with crises
(this would seem to provide a sufficient motivation for avoiding them.) But based on
historical experience, there appears to be little hope that during the good times future

23
generations of sovereign borrowers or investors will remember that the four most
expensive words in financial history are “this time it’s different.”
If history is any guide, financial crises will not be eliminated—as Kindleberger
(1977) noted, they are hardy perennials. But it should be possible, based on the
understanding of what causes contagion and what does not, for countries to take steps to
reduce their vulnerability to international contagion.
Contagion appears to be linked to a substantial inflow of capital to a country. Of
course, the prospect of financial autarky as a way of avoiding fast and furious contagion
is not particularly attractive as a long run solution. In fact, it may not even be feasible
when countries have already liberalized the financial sector and the capital account. But
before turning to the issue of capital account restrictions, it is critical to remember that in
many crises (most of those discussed here and many others), the lead and largest
borrower in international capital markets during the boom periods are the sovereign
governments themselves. As Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003) observe, it is the
most debt intolerant countries with a history of serial default that can least afford to
borrow that usually borrow the most. Often the outcome is default.
So, as a first important step, the risk of contagion would be reduced if
policymakers in countries that are integrated with world capital markets remember that
many a surge in capital inflows often ends in a sudden stop—whether owing to homegrown problems or contagion from abroad. As a consequence, prudent policymaking
would at a minimum ensure that the government does not overspend and overborrow
when international capital markets are all too willing to lend, as most of those episodes
end in tears. In contrast, fiscal policy in emerging markets currently tends to be markedly

24
procyclical, with countries engaging in expansionary fiscal policy in good times and
contractionary fiscal policy in bad times (Talvi and Végh, 2000). Fiscal reforms aimed at
designing institutional mechanisms that would discourage such procyclical behavior
(particularly on the part of “provinces” or other autonomous entities) appear as an
essential ingredient in preventing future crises from building up. Such consistent self
discipline, however, on the part of governments has historically proved elusive.
As regards to curbing private borrowing from abroad, the issues are even more
complex. The best case for restrictions on international financial inflows would seem to
focus on debt contracts with short maturities that are denominated in a foreign currency–
which have been the trigger in many modern contagion episodes. But although such
policies may help in tilting the composition of capital flows toward longer maturities,
their overall long-term effectiveness is unclear. Curbing capital outflows, once
contagion and the ensuing sudden stop has occurred, is even more problematic.
Experience has shown that capital flight has been an endemic problem for countries that
have tried to turn the clock back and re-introduce tight capital account and financial
restrictions amidst economic turmoil. More fundamentally, pervasive capital controls
hardly seem likely to be the solution in the medium and long run to the contagion and
sudden stop problem.
As to new mechanisms in financial centers that could curb these periodic bouts of
lending and “irrational exuberance” and lessen the likelihood of unpleasant future
surprises, we remain very skeptical that there are easy or obvious solutions. Access to
more information may not lessen surprises when borrowers and lenders have often
shown themselves willing to downplay worrisome fundamentals that are in the public

25
domain in the late 1990s under the guise of having superior information. The economic
historian Max Winkler wrote:
“The over-abundance of funds, together with the difficulty of finding the most
profitable employment therefore at home has contributed greatly to the pronounced
demand for and the ready absorption of large foreign issues, irrespective of
quality...While high yield on a foreign bond does not necessarily indicate inferior
quality, great care must be exercised in the selection of foreign bonds, especially today,
when anything foreign seems to find a ready market...Promiscuous buying, however,
is destined to prove disastrous.”
The New York Tribune, March 17, 1927
In 1929 a wave of currency crises swept through Latin America—it was quickly
followed by a string of defaults on sovereign external debt obligations. At the time of
this writing, with investors searching for high yields quickly snapping up emerging
market bonds, Winkler’s warning rings as true now as it did then.

26
References
Banerjee Abhijit. 1992. “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
August, CVII:3, pp. 797-817.
Basu, Ritu. 1998. “Contagion Crises: The Investor’s Logic.” Mimeograph, University of
California, Los Angeles.
Bikhchandani Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch. 1992. “A Theory of Fads, Fashion,
Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades.” Journal of Political
Economy. 100:5, pp. 992-1026
Bikhchandani Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch. 1998. “Learning from the Behavior of
Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives. Summer, 2:3, pp. 151-170.
Bordo, Michael and Barry Eichengreen. 1999. “Is Our Current International Economic
Environment Unusually Crisis Prone?” International Financial System. Conference
Proceedings. (eds.) David Gruen and Luke Gower. Capital Flows and the Reserve Bank
of Australia. Sydney.
Bordo, Michael and Antu P. Murshid. 2000. “The International Transmission of Financial Crises
before World War II: Was there Contagion.” Mimeograph.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2003. “Smoothing Sudden Stops.” Journal of
Economic Theory, forthcoming.
Calvo, Guillermo. 1998. “Capital Market Contagion and Recession: An Explanation of the
Russian Virus.” Mimeograph.
Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza. 2000. “Rational Contagion and the Globalization of
Securities Markets.” Journal of International Economics. June 51:1, pp. 79-113.
Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart. 2000. “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden Stop:
Consequences and Policy Options” in Reforming the International Monetary and
Financial System, P. Kenen and A. Swoboda, eds. Washington DC: International
Monetary Fund, pp. 175-201.
Caramazza, Franceso, Luca Ricci, and Ranil Salgado. 2000. “Trade and Financial Contagion in
Currency Crises.” IMF Working Paper WP/00/55.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini. 2001 “The Role of Large Players in
Currency Crises.” NBER Working Paper 8303, May.
Dawson, Frank G. 1990. The First Latin American Debt Crisis. New Haven and London: Yale
University Press.

27

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos. 1984. “Latin American Debt: I Don’t Think We Are in Kansas
Anymore.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 2, pp. 335-403.
Doukas, John. 1989. “Contagion Effect on Sovereign Interest Rate Spreads.”, Economic Letters.
29, 237-241.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose, and Charles Wyplosz. 1996. “Contagious Currency Crises:
First Tests.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics. 98, pp. 463-484.
Frankel, Jeffrey and Sergio Schmukler. 1998. “Crises, Contagion and Country Funds: Effects on
East Asia and Latin America,” in Managing Capital Flows and Exchange Rates:
Perspectives from the Pacific Basin. Reuven Glick, ed. New York: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 232-266
Gerlach, S. and Frank Smets. 1996. “Contagious Speculative Attacks.” CEPR Discussion Paper
No. 1055.
Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose. 1999. “Contagion and Trade: Why Are Currency Crises
Regional.” Journal of International Money and Finance. August, 18:4, pp. 603-617.
Goldstein, Morris. 1998. The Asian Financial Crisis. Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics.
International Monetary Fund, Capital Markets Report. Various issues.
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook. Various issues.
Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart. 2000. “On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion.”
Journal of International Economics. June, 51:1, pp. 145-168.
Kaminsky, Graciela and Sergio Schmukler. 1999. “What Triggers Market Jitters? A Chronicle
of the Asian Crisis.” Journal of International Money and Finance. August,18:4, pp.
537-560.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Richard Lyons, and Sergio Schmukler. 2000. “Managers, Investors, and
Crises: Mutual Fund Strategies in Emerging Markets.” NBER Working Paper No. 7855.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Richard Lyons, and Sergio Schmukler 2002 “Liquidity, Fragility, and Risk:
The Behavior of Mutual Funds During Crises.” Mimeograph.
Kindleberger, Charles P., 1977, Manias, Panics, and Crashes. John Wiley & Sons, 4th edition.
Kodres, Laura, and Matthew Pritsker. 2002. “A Rational Expectations Model of Financial
Contagion.” Journal of Finance. April, LVII:2, pp. 769-800.

28
Lahiri, Amartya, and Carlos A. Végh. 2003. “Delaying the Inevitable: Optimal Interest Rate
Defense and BOP Crises,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Mody, Ashok and Mark Taylor. 2002. “Common Vulnerabilities.” Mimeograph.
Neal, Larry and Marc Weidenmeir. 2002. “Crises in the Global Economy from Tulips to Today:
Contagion and Consequences.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
9147. September.
Nurkse, Ragnar. 1944. International Currency Experience: Lessons of the Interwar Period,
Geneva: League of Nations.
Reinhart, Carmen M., Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Miguel A. Savastano. 2003. “Debt Intolerance.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 1, pp. 1-62..
Shleifer Andrei and Robert W. Vishny: The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance, vol. LII, no
1, March 1997, pp. 35-55
Talvi, Ernesto and Carlos A. Végh, 2000. "Tax Base Variability and Procyclical Fiscal Policy."
NBER Working Paper No. 7499.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder. 2000. “Financial contagion: Spillovers through
Banking Centers.” Mimeograph.
Winkler, Max. 1933. Foreign Bonds: An Autopsy. Philadelphia: Roland Swain Company.

29
Table 1
Financial Crises with Immediate International Repercussions: 1980-2000
Origin of the shock,
country and date

Nature of common external
shock, if any

Contagion mechanisms

Countries affected

On August 1982
Mexico defaults on its
external bank debt. By
December, the peso
had depreciated by 100
percent.

Between 1980 and 1985,
commodity prices fell by
about 31 percent. US short
term real interest rates rise
to about 10 percent, the
highest levels since the
depression.

U.S. banks, heavily
exposed to Mexico,
retrenched from
emerging markets

With the exception of
Chile, Colombia and
Costa Rica all countries in
Latin America defaulted.

On September 8, 1992
the Finnish markka is
floated and the ERM
crisis unfolds.

High interest rates in
Germany. Rejection by
Danish voters of the
Maastricht treaty.

Hedge funds.

All the countries in the
European Monetary
System except Germany.

On December 20, 1994
Mexico announced a
15 percent devaluation
of the peso. It sparked
a confidence crisis and
by March 1995 the
peso’s value had
declined by about 100
percent.

From January 1994 to
December, the Federal
Reserve raised the federal
funds rate by about 2 ½
percentage points.

Mutual funds sell off
other Latin American
countries, notably
Argentina and Brazil.
Massive bank runs and
capital flight in
Argentina.

Argentina suffered the
most, losing about 20
percent of deposits in
early 1995. Brazil was
next, while losses in other
countries in the region
limited to declines in
equity prices.

On July 2 1997,
Thailand announces
that the baht will be
allowed to float. By
January 1998 the baht
had depreciated by
about 113 percent.

The yen depreciated by
about 51 % against the US
dollar during April 1995
and April 1997. Given the
Asian currencies link to the
US dollar, this translated
into a significant
appreciation for their
currencies as well.

Japanese banks,
exposed to Thailand,
retrenched from
emerging Asia. As
Korea is affected,
European banks also
withdraw.

Indonesia, Korea,
Malaysia, and the
Philippines were hit
hardest. Financial
markets in Singapore and
Hong Kong also
experienced some
turbulence.

On August 18, 1998,
Russia defaults on its
domestic bond debt.
Between July 1998 and
January 1999, the
ruble depreciated by
262 percent. On
September 2, 1998, it
became public
knowledge that LTCM
had gone bankrupt.

With heavy exposure to
Russia and other high-yield
instruments, Long Term
Capital Management
(LTCM) is revealed to be
bankrupt.

Margin calls and
leveraged hedge funds
fueled the sell off in
other emerging and
high yield markets. It
is difficult to
distinguish contagion
from Russia and fear of
another LTCM.

Apart from several of the
former Soviet republics,
Hong Kong, Brazil, and
Mexico were hit hardest.
But most emerging and
developed markets were
affected.

Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, dates of the default or restructurings
are taken from Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003).

30
Table 2
Selected Financial Crises without Immediate International Repercussions:
1999-2001
Origin of the shock:
country and date

Background on the run-up
to the shock

Spillover mechanisms

Countries affected

On January 13, 1999
Brazil devalues the
real and eventually
floats on February 1.
Between early January
and end-February the
real depreciates by 70
percent.

The crawling peg exchange
rate policy (the Real Plan)
that was adopted in July
1994 to stabilize
inflation is abandoned.

There is an increase in
volatility in some of
larger equity markets
and Argentina spreads
widened. Equity
markets in Argentina
and Chile rallied. These
effects lasted only a few
days.

Significant and protracted
effect on Argentina, as
Brazil is Argentina’s
largest trading partner.

Turkey,
February 22, 2001
Devaluation and
floatation of the lira

Facing substantial external
financing needs, in late
November 2000, rumors of
the withdrawal of external
credit lines to Turkish banks
triggered a foreign exchange
outflows and overnight rates
soared to close to 2,000
percent.

On December 23,
2001, the president of
Argentina announces
intentions to default.

Following several waves of
capital flight, on December
1st capital controls are
introduced.

There has been some
conjecture that the
Turkish crisis may have
exacerbated the
withdrawal of investors
from Argentina but given
the weakness in
Argentina’s fundamentals
at the time, it is difficult
to suggest developments
owed to contagion.
Bank deposits fall by
more than 30 percent in
Uruguay, as Argentines
withdraw deposits from
Uruguayan banks.
Significant effects on
economic (trade and
tourism) activity in
Uruguay.

Uruguay and, to a much
lesser extent, Brazil

31
Table 3
Propagation Mechanisms in Episodes of Contagion
Episode

Trade

Common characteristic across
affected countries

Common creditor

Mexico,
August 1982

As the entire region was
affected, trade links are
significant, even though
there are low levels of
bilateral trade among most of
the affected countries.

Large fiscal deficits, weak
banking sectors, dependence on
commodity prices and heavy
external borrowing.

U.S. commercial banks.

Finland,
September 8,
1992--ERM
crisis

While bilateral exports to
Finland from the affected
countries are small, there are
substantial trade links among
all the affected countries.

Large capital inflows, common
exchange rate policy as part of
the EMS.

Hedge funds.

Mexico,
December 21,
1994

No significant trade links.
Bilateral trade with
Argentina and Brazil was
minimal. Only 2 percent of
Argentina’s and Brazil’s
exports were destined to
Mexico. Little scope for third
party trade story. Mexico’s
exports to the United States
were very different from
Argentine and Brazilian
exports.

Exchange rate based inflation
stabilization plans. Significant
real appreciation of the exchange
rate and concerns about
overvaluation. Large capital
inflows in the run-up to the
crisis.

Primarily US
bondholders, including
mutual funds.

Thailand,
July 2 1997

Bilateral trade with other
affected countries was very
limited. Malaysia exported
similar products to some of
the same third markets.

Heavily managed exchange rates
and large increase in the stock of
short-term foreign currency debt.

European and Japanese
commercial banks
lending to Thailand,
Korea, Indonesia, and
Malaysia. Mutual
Funds sell off Hong
Kong and Singapore.

Russia/LTCM,
August 18,
1998

Virtually no trade with the
most affected countries
(bilateral or third party.)
Exports from, Brazil, Mexico
and Hong Kong to Russia
accounted for 1 percent or
less of total exports for these
countries.

The most liquid emerging
markets, Brazil, Hong Kong and
Mexico were most affected.
These three countries accounted
for the largest shares of mutual
fund holdings.

Mutual funds and hedge
Funds

32
Table 4
Capital Flows and Capital Flight on the Eve of Crises
Episode
Exchange Rate Mechanism
Crisis:
Finland September 8, 1992

Tequila Crisis:
Mexico, December 21, 1994

Asian Crisis:
Thailand, July 2, 1997

Russian Crisis: August 18, 1998

Capital flow background in crisis
country
Fast and furious episodes
Net capital flows to Finland had
risen from less than $2 billion in
1988 to $9 billion at their peak in
1990. Portfolio flows, which
were about $3 billion in 1988,
however, hit their peak prior to
the crisis in 1992 at $8 billion.
In 1990 private net capital flows
were less than $10 billion (US
dollars) by 1993 flows had risen
to $35 billion. Estimates of
capital flight showed a
repatriation through 1994.
From 1993 to 1996 net capital
flows to Thailand doubled to
about $20 billion (US dollars). In
1997 capital outflows amounted
about $14 billion.
While total flows into Russia
peaked in 1996, foreign direct
investment peaked in 1998, rising
from about $0.1 billion in 1992 to
$2.2 billion in 1998.

Capital flow background in other
relevant countries 1
In 1989 private net capital flows
to the European Union (EU) were
about $11 billion (US dollars) in
1992, on the eve of the crisis
these had risen to $174 billion.
Net flows to the other major Latin
American countries had also risen
sharply, for Western Hemisphere
as a whole it went from net
outflows in 1989 to inflows of
$47 billion in 1994.
Flows to emerging Asia had risen
from less than $10 billion (US
dollars) to almost $80 billion in
1996.

Excluding Asia, which witnessed
a sharp capital flow reversal in
1997, capital flows to other
emerging markets remained
buoyant through 1997 and early
1998, having risen from about $9
billion in 1990 to $125 billion in
1997.
Cases without immediate international consequences
Brazil Devalues and Floats:
Repatriation of capital flight
At about $54 billion (US dollars)
February 1, 1999
amounted to about 3 percent of
in 1999,capital flows to Western
GDP in 1996. By early 1998 it
Hemisphere well below their
had reversed into capital flight.
peak ($85 billion) in 1997.
Yet net capital flows did not
change much between 1997 and
1999, currency crisis
notwithstanding.
Turkey floats the lira
While repatriation amounted to
Following the successive crises in
February 22, 2001
about 2 percent of GDP during
Asia (1997) and Russia (1998)
1997-1999, capital flight began in private capital flows to emerging
earnest in 2000.
markets had all but dried up by
2001. At a meager $20 billion in
2001, flows were $200 billion off
their peak in 1996.
Argentina Defaults:
Until 1998, capital abroad was
(see Turkey commentary)
December 23, 2001
being repatriated. By 1999,
however, capital flight amounted
to 5 percent of GDP. After
several waves of bank runs,
capital flight was estimated at 6
percent of GDP in 2001.

33
Table 5
Expected and Unexpected Crises:
Standard and Poor’s Sovereign Credit Ratings Before and After Crises
Country

Crisis Date

Change in rating
(including Credit Watch)
12 months prior to the
crisis

Change in rating
after the crisis

Fast and Furious Contagion Episodes
Mexico

December 21, 1994

None

Downgraded two
days after the crisis
December 23, 1994

Thailand

July 2, 1997

None

Russia

August 18, 1998

1 upgrade and
2 downgrades (on the
week of the crisis)

Downgraded in
August
1 further downgrade

Crises with Limited External Consequences
Brazil

February 1, 1999

2 downgrades

No immediate change

Turkey

February 22, 2001

1 upgrade and two
downgrades

I further downgrade
the day after the
crisis

Argentina

December 23, 2001

5 downgrades between
October 2000 and July
2001

Source: Standard and Poor’s, Sovereign Rating History Since 1975.
1

The international financial turmoil that followed Russia’s default was compounded in a

significant manner by another negative surprise announcement: on September 2, 1998 it
became public knowledge that Long Term Capital Management (LTCM), owing to its
large exposure to Russia and other high-yield assets, had gone bankrupt.
2

As Brazil is Argentina’s largest trading partner, the sharp depreciation of the real

(about 70 percent between January and end February) left the Argentine peso overvalued.

34

Similarly, through its extensive financial and trade links, Uruguay’s economy (as it has
through history) would be whiplashed by the Argentine crisis.

3

Of course, there are historical examples of fast and furious contagion before the last

few decades. Commonly cited examples of contagion include the first Latin American
debt crisis -- which began with Peru’s default in April 1826 -- and the international
financial crisis of 1873. Going back even further in time, Neal and Weidenmeir (2002)
also discuss the “contagion” dimension of the Tulip Mania of the 1630s and the
Mississippi and South Sea Bubbles of 1719-20. Two leading examples of financial crises
that did not lead to contagion include the well-documented Argentina-Baring crisis of
1890, and the United States financial crisis of 1907. For detailed accounts of historical
episodes of financial crises, see Bordo and Eichengreen (1999), Bordo and Murshid
(2000), Kindleberger (2000), and Neal and Weidenmier (2002.)
4

See Calvo and Reinhart (2000) for an empirical analysis of sudden stop episodes and

Caballero and Krishnamurthy. (2003) for a model that traces out the economic
consequences of sudden stops.
5

See Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1998) for a thoughtful discussion of this

literature.
6

For a detailed discussion of the evolution of these contagion episodes, the interested

reader is referred to IMF World Economic Outlook (January 1993) for the ERM crisis,
IMF International Capital Markets (August 1995) for the more recent Mexican crisis,
Nouriel Roubini’s home page http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~nroubini/ for an excellent
chronology of the Asian crisis, and IMF World Economic Outlook and International

35

Capital Markets Interim Assessment (December 1998) for Russia’s default and LTCM
crisis. Diaz Alejandro (1984) provides a compelling discussion of the debt crisis of the
early 1980s.
7

The Emerging Market Bond Index Plus (EMBI+) tracks total returns for traded external

debt instruments in the emerging markets. While the EMBI covers only Brady bonds, the
EMBI+ expands upon the EMBI, covering three additional markets: (1) Eurobonds, (2)
U.S. dollar local markets, and (3) loans. The country coverage of the EMBI+ varies over
time, currently including 19 members Current members are: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Colombia, Ecuador, Egypt, Mexico, Malaysia, Morocco, Nigeria, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Russia, Turkey, Ukraine, Venezuela, and South Africa. The selection
of countries and instruments follow four eligibility criteria imposed by JP Morgan Chase:
(1) a minimum balance in outstanding, (2) rating, (3) remaining maturity, and (4) ability
for international settlement. In order to construct the index of a specific country, a daily
total return of each instrument is first computed, and then aggregated by marketcapitalization-weight.

Figure 1. Net Private Capital Flows, 1985 - 2003
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

European Union

Western Hemisphere 1/

200

50

150

40

100

Mexican crisis
(1995)

30

50
20
0
10

-50

ERM crisis
(1992-93)

-100

0

-150

-10
1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

1985

2003

1987

Asia 2/

1989

1991

250
Asian crisis
(1997)

60

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Emerging Market Economies

100
80

1993

Mexican
crisis
(1995)

200
150

40
20

100

Asian
crisis
(1997)

Turkey
devaluation
(2001)

Russian
crisis
(1998)
Brazil
devaluation Argentine
(1999)
default
(2002)

0
50

-20
-40

0
1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

1985

1/ Includes Argentina and Mexico.
2/ Includes Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.
Note: If the crisis occurred in the second half of the year, the vertical line is inserted in the following year.

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Figure 2. Emerging Market: Bond Market Issuance Around Crises 1/
(In billions of U.S. dollars; weekly data, centered three-week moving average)
3.6
3.2
2.8

After Brazilian devaluation

2.4
2
1.6
1.2
0.8

After unilateral Russian
debt restructuring

0.4
0
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Weeks Relative to Crisis Week (Week 0)
1/ Data prior to Russian default exclude the July 1998 Russian debt exchange.
Source: IMF staff calculations based on data from Capital Data.

Figure 3. Emerging Market Bond Yield Spreads, 1992 – 2002 1/
Mexican
crisis

2500

Russian
crisis

7000

Mexico

Russia

6000

2000

5000
1500

4000
3000

1000

2000
500

1000
0

0
92
8000

93

94

95

98

96

99

00

01

2500

Argentina

Argentina
crisis

7000
6000
5000

Brazil

Brazil
devaluation

2000

02

1500

4000
1000

3000
2000

500

1000
0

0
98

99

00

01

02

1/ Emerging market bond index plus (EMBI+) spreads are plotted.
Source: JP Morgan Chase.

98

99

00

01

02

