                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MASS SECONDARY SCHOOLING AND THE STATE:
                            THE ROLE OF STATE COMPULSION
                            IN THE HIGH SCHOOL MOVEMENT

                                              Claudia Goldin
                                              Lawrence Katz

                                          Working Paper 10075
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10075


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




Presented at the AEA Meetings, Sunday, January 5, 2003, 10:45AM, session on “Educational Quantity and
Quality: Historical and Recent Perspectives on Current Policy Issues.” We gratefully acknowledge the
financial support of the Spencer Foundation, Major Grant no. 200200007 on our book, The Race between
Education and Technology: Interrelationships between the Economy and Human Capital in U.S. History (in
progress) of which this is a small part. Adriana Lleras-Muney generously made available all the data from
her work on compulsory schooling and child labor. Similarly, Joshua Angrist and Daron Acemoglu kindly
provided their coding of the laws. Stefanie Schmidt did the same several years ago and also photocopied for
us the complete set of sources she used. We thank them all. We are also grateful to Ed Glaeser, Robert Willis,
and participants in the Harvard labor seminar for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Mass Secondary Schooling and the State:
The Role of State Compulsion in the High School Movement
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 10075
November 2003
JEL No. N3, I2

                                            ABSTRACT

In the three decades from 1910 to 1940, the fraction of U.S. youths enrolled in public and private
secondary schools increased from 18 to 71 percent and the fraction graduating soared from 9 to 51
percent. At the same time, state compulsory education and child labor legislation became more
stringent and potentially constrained secondary-school aged youths. It might appear from the timing
and the specifics of this history that the laws caused the increase in education rates. We evaluate the
possibility that state compulsory schooling and child labor laws caused the increase in education
rates by using contemporaneous evidence on enrollments. We also use micro-data from the 1960
census to examine the effect of the laws on overall educational attainment. Our estimation approach
exploits cross-state differences in the timing of changes in state laws. We find that the expansion
of state compulsory schooling and child labor laws from 1910 to 1939 can, at best, account for 5
percent of the increase in high school enrollments and can account for about the same portion of the
increase in the eventual educational attainment for the affected cohorts over the period.

Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu

Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu
        From 1910 to 1940 the fraction of youths enrolled in public and private U.S. secondary

schools increased from 18 to 71 percent. The fraction graduating nationwide soared from 9 to 51

percent (see Figure 1) and the increase was even greater in most northern and western states (see

Figure 2 for U.S. regional data). Such increases are as large as those achieved in the recent

histories of nations undergoing mass secondary schooling. South Korea between about 1954 and

1984, for example, underwent an extremely rapid increase in the education of its citizens when

the fraction graduating from upper secondary school increased from 25 percent to 88 percent.1

        An important difference between the experience of the United States in mass secondary

schooling from 1910 to 1940 and that of other countries in the post-World War II era is the role

played by government, especially the central government. In most other nations, such as South

Korea and Great Britain, the central or federal government largely coordinated the

transformation. In the United States, it did not.2

        The U.S. educational bureaucracy was, and largely is, decentralized, diffuse, and diverse.

The federal government is a relatively minor player in K-12 education, and within each of the

states the various school districts have had considerable freedom regarding regulations, taxes,

1
  The increase for males was from 41 to 90 percent, but that for females was 10 to 86 percent. See OECD
(1998), tables A1-2a and A1-2b. The figures are for individuals in two age groups in 1996: 55 to 64 years
old and 25 to 34 years old. If graduation occurred around 18 years old, these data would approximately
refer to the years from 1954 to 1984.
2
  In the case of South Korea, for example, a U.S.-style educational system was imposed in 1949.
Schooling was of the 6-3-3 variety, with six-year elementary schools, three-year middle schools, and
three-year senior high schools. Compulsory education in Korea was just six years until 1969 when it was
expanded to nine years.
         In Britain compulsory schooling laws are frequently given credit for increasing secondary school
attendance, in part because the most important of them, the Education Act of 1944, was accompanied by
an extension of public funding to provide broader access to some form of free secondary schooling
(Ringer 1979). The historic 1944 Education Act increased the age of compulsory education (the school
leaving age) in England, Scotland and Wales from 14 to 15 in 1947 and appears to have been rigorously
enforced. The fraction of those leaving school at age 14 declined from 57 percent in 1945 to less than 10
percent in 1948 (Oreopoulos 2003a). Although the Education Act of 1936 intended to raise the schooling
leaving age from 14 to 15 in 1939, World War II delayed the operation of the Act. More important,
perhaps, was that secondary education became fully funded after 1944, whereas it had previously been on
a tuition basis making it inaccessible to students from families with modest means except for the small
share awarded merit scholarships.
and expenditures.3 School districts, moreover, are exceptionally numerous. Today there are

about 15,000 school districts. But in 1932, when the federal government first made a count of

the nation’s school districts, they numbered almost 130,000. Although the great majority were

tiny common school districts of the “open country,” about 20 percent contained a high school.4

Despite the large number of school districts in the United States and the absence of strong federal

control, the “state” (and here we mean the various states) did mandate and coordinate various

details concerning secondary school education.

        Early in the period of the high school movement various states required that every district

provide for the public high school education of its citizens (through the establishment of “free

tuition” laws), just as states in the nineteenth century had required that all districts provide a

common school education. States coordinated secondary education across the various districts

by setting standards for what constituted a high school, which credentials were required of high

school teachers, and what performance was demanded for grade advancement and high school

graduation. Each of these laws and regulations compelled districts to take a particular action.

Some states even passed legislation compelling the state university to accept the state’s high

school graduates without further preparation.

        State governments were also involved in a host of ways that effectively decreased the

supply price of secondary schooling to certain individuals and districts. Some states gave grants

to poorer districts for teacher salaries, high school buildings, textbooks, and transportation.

States often offered financial incentives for the consolidation of districts to increase the scale of

3
  The fraction of total K-12 revenues accounted for by the federal government has never exceeded 10
percent in any year. In the 1920s less than 0.5 percent of total revenue came from the federal
government. With the passage of the National Defense Education Act of 1964, the federal role increased
from 4.4 to 7.9 percent. Although it increased again in the late 1970s, it has subsequently decreased. See
U.S. Department of Education (1993, table 21).
4
  The Office of Education also reported in 1932 that there were 26,409 public secondary schools. At
most, therefore, 21 percent of all school districts had a public secondary school, whereas the rest
contained only elementary or common schools.

                                                           Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 2
secondary schools and for high school buildings. But of all the ways in which state legislation

might have advanced secondary schooling, compulsory education and child labor laws have

received the most attention.

        Compulsory education and child labor laws were first passed in the United States in the

mid-nineteenth century. Massachusetts, in 1852, was the earliest state to have a compulsory

schooling law. By 1890 27 states (out of the 48 that would eventually exist by 1912) had already

passed a compulsory schooling law and in 1918, with the passage of a law by Mississippi, all 48

states (plus the territories of Hawaii and Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia) had a law.5

        But it was not until the early twentieth century that compulsory education and child labor

laws could have had a direct impact on secondary schooling. The ages that the laws were

intended to constrain, the bureaucracy allotted to enforce them, and the coordination of the

education and labor portions of the laws changed in the early twentieth century and gave the laws

new bite to constrain the behavior of youth of secondary school age.

        The federal government was effectively removed from legislating against child labor

until 1938. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled unfavorably on two federal child labor acts—the

Keating-Owen Child Labor Bill of 1916, which it struck down in 1918, and the Child Labor Tax

Law of 1918, which was to replace Keating-Owen but which was similarly struck down in

1922.6 A child labor constitutional amendment failed to be ratified by the states in 1925. Not

until the National Industrial Recovery Act (passed in 1933 but declared unconstitutional in 1935)

and later the Fair Labor Standards Act (1938), upheld by the Supreme Court in 1941, did the

federal government have a role in legislating against child labor. The states, in the meantime,

were quite active.

5
 For a timeline of compulsory education laws see, for example, Steinhilber and Sokolowsi (1966).
6
 The ages covered by federal legislation before 1938 were those to 14 years. The Keating-Owen Bill, for
example, prohibited the interstate commerce of the products of children under 14 years and those of older
children in specific industries.

                                                          Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 3
        What was the role of state compulsion in the expansion of secondary schooling from

1910 to 1940? It would appear from the timing of the laws and the “high school movement” that

compulsion could have mattered a great deal. The laws became more effective and constrained

youths in the secondary school ages just as youths were entering and graduating from high

schools in considerably greater numbers. This coincidence has led many to assert that state legal

changes spurred the increase in high school enrollments.7

        In previous work we explored the reasons for the expansion of secondary school

enrollment and graduation using a simple supply-demand framework for a quasi-public good.8

We found, using repeated cross-sections and panel data on states in reduced-form models, that

high school graduation and enrollment rates increased with income or wealth per capita,

decreased with greater opportunities for youthful employment, and increased with greater

homogeneity of community and lower inequality of income. We relied on the findings of other

researchers to support our sense that changes in compulsory schooling and child labor laws could

not account for anything more than a relatively small fraction of the increase in enrollments and

graduation rates. The studies on which we have relied (including Acemoglu and Angrist 2000;

Schmidt 1996; and Lleras-Muney 2002) used micro-data from the U.S. census data to explore the


7
  David Tyack, for example, in his widely cited volume The One Best System states: “Attendance in high
schools increased [from 1890 to 1918] … The curve of secondary school enrollment and graduation
continued to soar: in 1920, 61.6 percent of those fourteen to seventeen were enrolled … in 1930, the
[figure was] 73.1 percent … As these statistics suggest, during the first two decades of the twentieth
century compulsory schooling laws were increasingly effective” (Tyack 1974, p. 183). Selwyn Troen, in
his well-received history of the St. Louis public school system, presents a table giving the fraction of
youths at various ages who attended school at some time during the census year. The fractions attending
in the 7 to 13 year range increased from 1880 to 1910, from 1910 to 1920, and again from 1920 to 1930
(although Troen reports that all fractions in 1930 are 97.7 percent!). He concludes: “As Table 12
demonstrates, the legislation was very effective. Due to vigorous enforcement, nearly all children were in
school continuously from age six or seven until fourteen by the 1910s” (Troen 1976, p. 202). Because
Troen uses decennial census data, his evidence does not necessarily indicate that children were at school
“continuously” in the ages considered. Each could have attended school for just one day. The point,
however, is simply that many fine historians accord compulsory schooling and child labor laws an
enormous role in the large increase of school enrollment and attendance during the Progressive Era.
8
  See, for example, Goldin and Katz (1999; 2003, forthcoming).

                                                           Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 4
effects of compulsory schooling and child labor laws in effect in the state of birth of native-born

adults when these adults would have been constrained by the laws (at age 14).

       Our first objective in this paper is to uncover the effect of state compulsory schooling and

child labor laws from 1910 to 1939 on secondary schooling using contemporaneous evidence on

enrollments that we compiled for our work on the high school movement. In addition, and in a

manner similar to others who have addresses these issues, we estimate the impact of the laws on

the overall educational attainment of birth cohorts reaching high school age from around 1910 to

1939 (those born from 1896 to 1925) using micro-data from the 1960 Census of Population. We

use corrected information on the laws and a somewhat different (and we believe more accurate)

coding of the legal variables that highlights the features of the laws most likely to have

constrained school attendance choices. Our estimation approach exploits cross-state differences

in the timing of changes in state laws and controls for state fixed effects, birth cohort (or year)

fixed effects, and other time-varying state level determinants of secondary schooling.

       We find that changes in state compulsory schooling and child labor laws from 1910 to

1939 had a detectable positive impact on schooling but that the effect was modest, at best,

especially in comparison with the increase in high school enrollments and overall educational

attainment. The potential endogeneity of law changes to other (unmeasured) determinants of

increased schooling suggests our approach is likely to overestimate the “causal” impacts of law

changes. Nevertheless, it is always possible that enforcement increased even when the laws did

not change and that there may be more room in the history of education for state compulsion.

Compulsory Schooling and Child Labor Laws

       What were the laws?

       The typical compulsory schooling law set down the ages during which youths had to be

in school. That is, the typical law included a minimum age and a maximum age. But the laws


                                                        Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 5
began to be more complicated in the early twentieth century when maximum ages increased in

many states. The typical law was then altered to include a level of education that would exempt

a youth from the maximum age of compulsory schooling. The grade needed for exemption, not

the maximum age, became the binding constraint in most states. But that was not always the

case, particularly for some foreign-born children who could not meet the grade standard before

reaching the maximum age. Almost all laws also included exemptions for those with mental or

physical impairments and some states exempted youths with impoverished parents or who lived

far from the closest school.

       Child labor laws modified the compulsory schooling laws in various ways. They

generally exempted the older youths who were constrained by the compulsory schooling law so

they could work. They set down the method by which youths could obtain a work permit and

they often contained a minimum level of schooling required to do so. (The minimum amount of

school required to work was almost always lower than the level of schooling that exempted a

child from attending school.) Youths who worked at home and in agriculture were freed from

many of the usual constraints concerning work permits.

       When the two laws were viewed together, as they generally were by the authorities, the

child labor law was almost always the binding constraint, not the maximum age of compulsory

schooling or the educational requirement for school exemption. Another important change in the

early twentieth century was the better articulation of the two laws and of the inclusion of the

child labor laws in the compulsory schooling legislation in some states.

       Another important change in these laws during the Progressive Era was the addition of

statutes mandating or enabling continuation (also known as part-time) schools. Continuation

schools were established to educate the youth who had left school to work but who was still




                                                       Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 6
below the maximum age of compulsory schooling.9 The legislation typically required that

youths attend the continuation school for four to eight hours per week and that these hours

extend during the usual workday. The schools were to be established in municipalities having a

sufficient number of school-aged youths (often more than 20) who had work permits. These

laws increased the cost to employers of hiring such youths since they would have to be excused

from work during part of an afternoon each week or up to an entire day each week.10

        The child labor portion of the laws generally contained more complex provisions than did

the compulsory schooling portion. They often listed occupations that youths could not enter and

the times they could not be employed. Child labor laws often had complicated procedures to

ensure compliance. For example, children who wanted to obtain a work permit had to find

employment, have their prospective employer fill out a form, prove that they were above some

required age, and be certified by a physician to be healthy. Their work permit remained with

their employer who was to surrender it when the youth left voluntarily or was fired.11

        Some writers have interpreted the compulsory education and child labor laws as being

inconsistent because the binding constraint was often the child labor law rather than the age of

compulsory education or the education required for exemption. But the laws were not in

conflict. In fact, the laws were often sections of identical legislation.12 The so-called

inconsistencies were deliberate ways of compelling youths to be either at school or at work.

9
  Continuation schools often gave a combination of academic and vocational courses.
10
   Emmons (1926, p. 134) contains a summary of the required attendance each week in continuation
schools. Of the 23 states having a mandatory continuation school law in 1925, eight required up to 8-
hours per week, nine required 4-hours, and six were at the 5- or 6-hours level.
11
   Bermejo (1923) has a step-by-step description of how youths could obtain employment status in states
with effective child labor laws.
12
   See, for example, Stambler (1968) and numerous contemporaneous studies, often by advocates,
including Clapp and Strong (1928) on Massachusetts and Gibbons (1927) on Indiana. In California, for
example, the 1931 general laws of the states included Act 7519 (“school code”), which contained separate
articles on compulsory education and on work permits. Other states had separate laws passed by the
legislature often at separate times. One reason for the greater connection in some states is that the
superintendent of schools was responsible for issuing work permit to certain minors.

                                                         Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 7
       Child labor and compulsory education laws were, in large measure, consistently written

and were designed to ensure that youths were not idle. Consider the modal law in the 1920s. It

had a minimum age of 7 years, a maximum age of 16 years, an educational standard for

exemption of 8 years of school, and a work permit age of 14 years, as long as the youth had

completed 6 years of school. A youth who dropped out of school at 14 years old and had

finished just 6 years of school would be deemed a truant unless he had a job (and a work permit).

In order to avoid both school and work, a youth would have to complete 8 years of school,

making him 15 years old at the time of school leaving (assuming that such a youth was advanced

a grade during each year of school). Compulsory schooling and child labor acts in most states

were anti-truancy and anti-vagrancy laws rather than strongly pro-active education laws. The

laws were, nevertheless, “pro-child” and made youth employment more costly through

limitations on their hours, industries, and occupations. The political opposition to state

compulsory schooling laws tended to emphasize that such laws interfered with the personal

liberty and rights of parents although some anti-compulsion advocates argued that education was

not valuable and relevant to many youths (Deffenbaugh and Keesecker 1935; Reed 1927).

       Specific aspects of the laws from 1910 to 1939

       We have compiled information on seven aspects of these laws for all states for each year

between 1910 and 1939 (see Data Appendix). The variables are:

   1. Minimum age of compulsory schooling, known as the school entrance age (also compiled
   for 1902 to 1909);
   2. Maximum age of compulsory schooling (also compiled for 1902 to 1909);
   3. Education for exemption from maximum age rule;
   4. Age at which youth can obtain a work permit (for work during normal school hours);
   5. Education required to receive a work permit (for work during normal school hours);
   6. Whether state has mandatory continuation schools; and



                                                        Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 8
     7. Maximum age of continuation school attendance (state permits municipalities to establish
     continuation schools).

These details of the laws do not exhaust all possible variables pertaining to child labor and

compulsory schooling laws. They are, however, the most important and are among those that

can be obtained for most of the years under consideration.13

        Figure 3 contains graphical depictions of the seven legal variables. The maximum age

(2) continued to increase to around 1930 when 42 states set their maximum age at 14 years or

higher. The minimum age (1), on the other hand, decreased throughout the period.14 At the start

of the period shown, 60 percent of the states with compulsory schooling laws had a minimum

age of entry set at 8 or more years. At the end, however, almost 75 percent had a minimum age

of 7 or fewer years. The minimum age of entry served to constrain school districts to provide

classrooms and teachers for youngsters and may have enabled teenagers to accumulate an

additional year or two of schooling before they exited from the system, often around puberty.

        The level of schooling required to be exempt from the maximum age of compulsory

education (3) is somewhat complicated because it had to be consistent with the maximum age.

At the start of the period, for example, 31 or almost two-thirds of the states did not have such a

provision in their laws and only 13 states required 8 years or more for the exemption. By 1925

only six states did not have such a provision and 35 states required 8 years of more. The change,

however, is of less importance than it might appear. Because the maximum age of compulsory

education in most of the states with an 8-year exemption had increased to 16 years, the



13
   Other variables of importance are: excluded occupations and industries, restrictions on hours of work
for minors, exemptions for other factors and court interpretations of them, the state (or municipal)
apparatus for enforcing the laws (e.g., number of attendance officers, quality of the school census).
14
   In our estimation of the impact of the laws on school enrollment, graduation, and educational
attainment we use minimum ages to 1902 because a youth who was 14 years old in 1914, for example,
would have, most likely, entered school in 1908 if the minimum age of school entry were 8.

                                                           Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 9
requirement that youths remain in school for 8 years meant that most would have been 15 or 16

years old at the time of school leaving.

       The age at which youths could get a work permit (4) contains two periods of change:

around the First World War and after 1935. The eight states that did not have work permit

regulations in 1910 adopted them from 1915 to early 1920s and by 1925 all states had at least a

14-year old rule for work permits. The slow early movement to later ages for work permits

rapidly changed around 1935 with 11 states increasing the age to at least 16 years.

Complementing the work permit age is the education required to obtain the permit (5).

Sometimes expressed in years of schooling and other times as a grade, it increased primarily in

the 1920s. By 1930 18 states had a requirement of eighth grade (or 8 years of school) and 31 had

at least a sixth grade (or a 6 year) requirement. But seven states still had no requirement in 1930

and seven others had only a basic literacy requirement. In 1939 ten states still had no

requirement or simple literacy.

       The final two variables (6 & 7) depicted concern continuation or part-time school.

Continuation schools—generally housed within the community’s public high school—were

intended to educate the youth who had exited the system to work before the maximum age of

compulsory schooling or in some cases the legal age of majority. These schools were similar to

other types of continuing education schools, such as night, adult, and vocational schools, but they

differed in requiring the youth to attend school during the usual workday. In this respect,

mandating attendance at these schools increased the cost to an employer of hiring a youth below

the maximum age of compulsory schooling. Wisconsin, the home of the Progressive Party’s

Robert LaFollette, was the first state to approve mandatory continuation schools in 1911. As is

obvious in Figure 3 (6 & 7), the vast majority of states joined the continuation school bandwagon




                                                      Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 10
during or directly following the First World War.15 By 1921 21 states had mandatory

continuation school attendance and an additional four states allowed municipalities to establish

compulsory attendance at continuation schools.

Impact of Compulsory Schooling and Child Labor Laws on Schooling and Educational

Attainment

       Previous findings and empirical strategies

       Our work is most closely related to that of Lleras-Muney (2002) and Schmidt (1996),

both of whom link the eventual schooling of individuals to the laws that existed in their state of

birth when they were 14 years old. Both authors exploit the complexity of the laws and focus on

the 1915 to 1939 period.16 Lleras-Muney uses the 1960 U.S. census micro-data files to estimate

the impact of the laws on educational attainment, whereas Schmidt uses the 1940 census.

Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) also estimate the impact of the laws using fewer features of the

laws, but expanding the time period to cover youth cohorts educated through the 1960s.

       These and other studies of compulsory schooling laws in the United States find impacts

on educational attainment that are positive but modest at best and small in comparison with the

change in attainment during the period. There are some differences among the findings in terms

of the aspects of the laws that matter. Lleras-Muney, for example, finds that the implied years of


15
   In Britain, which had long had various types of continuation schools, the Education Act 1918 (known
as the Fisher Act) and the Education Act 1921 mandated part-time attendance at continuation schools by
those who left school between ages 14 and 18. See http://catalogue.pro.gov.uk/Leaflets/ri2131.htm.
16
   Margo and Finegan’s (1996) study of compulsory education laws using the 1900 census micro-data
files and a methodology similar to that in Angrist and Krueger (1991) also uses the complexity of the
laws to uncover why youths in certain states were more constrained by compulsory schooling laws. They
find that the combination of child labor laws with compulsory education laws made the latter more
effective. See also Eisenberg (1988) on the complexity of nineteenth century compulsory schooling laws.
Other previous studies of the effects of compulsory schooling laws in the United States include Landes
and Solmon (1972), who explored the impact of late nineteenth century compulsory schooling laws using
state cross-section differences and decadal changes for the 1870 to 1890 period; Edwards (1978), who
examined the impact of compulsory schooling laws on enrollment from 1940 to 1960; and Lang and
Kropp (1986), who examined compulsory schooling laws and the enrollment of 16 and 17 year olds using
population census data from 1910 to 1970.

                                                        Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 11
schooling (the difference between the work permit age and the minimum compulsory schooling

or school entry age) matters and that more stringent legal constraints reduce educational

inequality in the affected cohorts. Relative to the change in educational attainment over the

period, however, the effects are small.

       All three studies, as well as ours, use an empirical strategy that includes state and cohort

fixed effects, thereby taking out main levels and trends and thus identifying the effect of the laws

off law changes within states.17 The identification strategy has virtues, but it also has some

drawbacks. The cohort effects, for example, will absorb factors that are common shocks to all

states. For example, the reduction in the labor force in agriculture and domestic service and the

decrease in industrial homework should have strengthened the impact of compulsory schooling

laws by reducing employment in uncovered sectors and in workplaces that had costly

surveillance. Furthermore, changes in enforcement, not changes in the laws, may have mattered,

and we (as well as the others mentioned) have not yet secured a variable that captures

enforcement expenditures and efforts for all states during the period of interest.18 We have

compiled some relevant information on enforcement that we report at the end of this paper.

       Although we have not yet circumvented the problems just mentioned, we can sidestep

several others in the literature. In previous studies, the linkage of individuals to their state of

birth probably caused attenuation bias because of geographic mobility. Similarly, linkage to

state of birth has meant that the foreign born had to be excluded, although their children need not

have been.



17
   Oreopoulos (2003b) uses a similar methodology in a parallel study of the impact on educational
attainment in Canada of changes in provincial compulsory schooling laws. Oreopoulos finds larger
impacts on years of schooling of changes in Canadian compulsory schooling laws than we, and others, do
for the United States.
18
   On the impact of enforcement resources on the effectiveness of compulsory schooling laws in New
York State, see Schmidt (1996).

                                                        Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 12
        Our more novel contribution to this literature is to analyze the effects of the state laws

using contemporaneous data on secondary school enrollments that we have collected for our

study of the high school movement.19 By doing so, we do not have to restrict the analysis to the

native born and we do not have to rely on matching individuals to their state of birth.20 The

contemporaneous data we use include enrollments in grades 9 to 12 in both public and private

schools, including the preparatory divisions of colleges and universities, and grade 9 when a

public junior high school was in existence.

        Another contribution of ours concerns the coding of the laws. We have compared several

independent compilations of the laws (including our own), reconciled differences among them,

and corrected various coding errors.21 We have, in addition, extended all aspects of the laws

back to 1910 and the minimum age back to 1902. We did the latter to correct the definition of

two key variables in most of the studies—the difference between the age at which a youth could

obtain a work permit and the minimum age of compulsory school attendance and the analogous

difference between the maximum and minimum ages of compulsory school attendance. The

minimum age should reflect the laws in existence about 8 years prior to when the youth could

drop out of school to work, although previous studies mistakenly used the same year for both

laws. Because of our changes to the laws and the definitions of some variables, we have also re-

estimated the effects of the laws on educational attainment using 1960 micro-level census data.

        Compliance and constraints, 1910 and 1920

        Before we examine the effects of compulsory schooling and child labor laws, it is useful

to ask what fraction of youths would have been constrained by the laws and what fraction were

19
   See Goldin (1994, 1998) for example. The public school data are drawn from the annual reports from
1910 to 1918 and then from the biennial reports of the Office of Education, but the coverage in the early
period is incomplete and the data set can best be described as being biennial.
20
   With the exception of Schmidt’s (1996) work on New York State, we know of no other study of U.S.
compulsory schooling that has used contemporaneous administrative data on high school enrollments.
21
   See Data Appendix.

                                                          Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 13
in compliance with existing laws. We can address these questions for 1910 and 1920 using the

micro-level data of the U.S. population censuses.

       Both the 1910 and 1920 censuses requested information on the school attendance (for any

length of time) of individuals during the preceding year. Individuals could, in addition, have

listed an occupation. We define “full-time” school attendance as attending school but not listing

an occupation and “part-time” attendance as attending school and listing an occupation. The

information in the census does not reveal when the youth worked during the year. Therefore, it

is impossible to determine whether the work was done in the summer, after school hours, or

during vacation, all of which were legal work periods even within the constrained ages (often

requiring a work permit, however). It is also impossible to know whether the youth attended

school at the start of the school year and then dropped out to take a job. For youths older than

ten years we give the results both for any school attendance and for full-time attendance.

       Table 1 contains the fractions of youth attending school at various ages arrayed by the

ages given by the laws existing in their current state of residence. We examine two laws: the

minimum compulsory schooling age (part A) and the age at which a youth could obtain a work

permit (part B). We also give the number of states that fall into each category.

       With respect to compliance in states having a minimum age of 7 and 8 years, more than

85 percent of children attended some school at those ages and a somewhat greater fraction did in

1920 than in 1910. Although the fraction of children in a state who attended school in 1910 and

1920 was rarely above 95 percent the small shortfall was likely due to several possibilities,

including small rates of misreporting and exemptions for young children due to distance to the

closest school and various handicaps. Compliance, by and large, appears to have been the norm.

Moreover, the fraction who would have been constrained had the law been more stringent is

relatively low for states with a minimum age of 8. In 1910 the fraction attending school at age 7


                                                      Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 14
in states with a minimum age of 8 was just 9 percentage points lower than it was at age 8. In

1920 it was just 6 percentage points lower.

       In both 1910 and 1920 the vast majority of states granted work permits to 14 year olds.

In both years the fraction of youth who attended school at all (“full-time” plus “part-time”

attendance) was extremely high. Decreased attendance between ages 13 and 14 was about 7

percentage points. Put differently, only about 7 percent of all youths who attended school at age

13 dropped out by age 14. The effect is somewhat greater using the “full-time” definition of

school attendance, for which about 10 to 12 percent of 13 year olds dropped out between ages 13

and 14 in states that granted work permits to 14 year olds.

       Although these data afford only a rough sense of compliance, they appear to indicate that

the vast majority of youth were in compliance. Furthermore, a large fraction of youths in the

unconstrained ages were already attending school. Changes in the laws could still have made a

difference, but the effects could not have been as large as they were in countries, like Great

Britain, where youths in the unconstrained ages were largely not attending school at all.

       Effects of law changes using contemporaneous evidence on enrollment

       We examine the effects of state child labor and compulsory schooling laws on

contemporaneous high school enrollment during the period of the high school movement using

data on public and private enrollments in grades 9 to 12 (divided by the number of 14 to 17 year

olds in the state) for even numbered years from 1910 to 1938.22 A standard panel data model is

estimated including state and year fixed effects, state law variables, and other state time-varying

economic and demographic control variables. The state fixed effects capture unmeasured time-

invariant state characteristics that could have affected the adoption of schooling laws and


22
  Goldin (1994, 1998) constructs state public and private secondary school enrollment rates for 1910,
1911, 1913, and all even years from 1914 to 1950. We have imputed the rates for 1912 as the average of
1911 and 1913. See Goldin (1994, 1998) on the construction of the data.

                                                        Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 15
enrollment rates. The year effects capture aggregate trends driving high school enrollment rates.

Thus, our identification of the effects of state child labor and compulsory schooling laws is

driven by differential law changes across states conditional on a range of time varying state

controls.

       Our regression specifications are of the form

        ENR st = L stδ + Zst β + α s + γ t + ε st ,

where ENRst is the high school enrollment rate for state s in year t, Lst is a vector state child

labor and compulsory schooling law variables, Zst is a vector of state time-varying covariates, αs

are state fixed effects, and γt are year fixed effects. The state control variables include those

found by Goldin and Katz (1999, 2003) to have substantial effects on high school enrollment and

graduation rates during the time period considered here. We include basic demographic controls

for age structure (fraction young, fraction old), nativity (fraction foreign born), and race (fraction

black). We also include several time varying economic controls: automobile registrations per

capita and manufacturing employment per capita. Automobile registrations per capita, in this

early period in the history of the car, represent a crude proxy for state wealth (or income) and

their distributions. The variable is a measure of the “middle class” share of the state population

after conditioning on state demographics and urbanization. We include, as well, a full set of

census division linear time trends in our basic specification, and we assess the sensitivity of our

results to the inclusion of state-specific linear time trends. We report robust standard errors

clustered by state to account for serial correlation in the residuals (as suggested by Bertrand,




                                                       Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 16
Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004, and Kézdi 2001). All regressions are weighted by the

contemporaneous number of 14 year olds in the state.23

        Regression estimates for different specifications of the state child labor and compulsory

schooling law variables affecting high school age youth are presented in Table 2. The national

high school enrollment rate (for the 48 states in the sample) increased by more than 50

percentage points during the sample period, rising from 18.7 percent in 1910 to 69.1 percent in

1938. In all the specifications, we include a dummy variable for a “permissible” state

continuation school law, meaning one that mandated that municipalities establish continuation

schools or permitted them to do so. Both laws set a maximum age below which working youths,

who were below some educational standard, could be required to attend. The number of states

with “permissible” continuation school laws increased from 2 in 1910 to 28 in 1938. The share

of the high school age population covered by continuation school laws increased from 9 percent

to 69 percent from 1910 to 1938.

        The first column of Table 2 follows Lleras-Muney (2002) who summarizes the effects of

the laws by a variable defined as the number of years a child would be compelled to attend

school had he entered school at the compulsory entry age, given in year t, and had he left

precisely when he could obtain a work permit, also given in year t. Since youths of secondary

school age would have been affected by age of entry laws when they were about 7 or 8 years old,

we construct our variable in a slightly different manner. We use the difference in the work

permit age at time t and the school entry age prevailing in their state in year t – 8. The variable

ranges from 0 to 10 years with a sample mean of 6.07 years; the most stringent school attendance

requirement in 1910 using this definition was 7 years and 14 states required 8 or more years by


23
  The regression results are not sensitive to weighting. In all cases, unweighted regressions yield
estimates that are quite similar to the reported estimates. The results are also almost identical if, for each
year, a state’s share of all 14 year olds is used as the weight.

                                                            Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 17
1938. We also allow for discrete (nonlinear) effects of the introduction of child labor and

compulsory schooling laws by including dummy variables indicating no child labor law or no

compulsory school attendance age.

        The estimates in column (1) of Table 2 show modest (and statistically significant)

positive effects of both the continuation school law indicator and the variable that summarizes

the work permit age and the entry age. The adoption of a continuation school law is associated

with slightly more than a 2-percentage point increase in the high school enrollment rate. An

increase of a year in the summary variable of child labor laws raises the high school enrollment

rate by around 1 percentage point.24

        The summary variable of the laws that we just defined (work permit age – entry age) does

not account for other potentially important constraints that were part of the state child labor and

compulsory school laws. Many state laws mandated a minimum amount of schooling, in

addition to the age requirement, to receive a work permit. In some cases the mandated number

of years was greater than the difference between the work permit age and the age of school entry.

Thus, following Acemoglu and Angrist (2000), we define a more accurate measure of the

mandated number of school years as follows:

        Child Labor School Yearsst = max {(education required for work permit)st,
                                     (work permit agest – school entrance ages, t-8)}

A read and write requirement for a work permit is coded as the equivalent of requiring 4 years of

completed schooling.25 The (population weighted) mean of child labor school years increased

from 4.5 years in 1910 to 7.8 years in 1938. Only one state (Washington) required 8 years of



24
  We also find (consistent with Goldin and Katz 1999, 2003) a substantial and positive effect of auto
registrations per capita and significant impacts of the state’s age structure at the upper and lower ends.
25
   The inclusion of a separate dummy variable for a read and write requirement yields a small and
statistically insignificant coefficient and does not detectably affect the other estimated effects.

                                                           Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 18
schooling for a work permit in 1910 and no state required more. By 1938, the majority of states

required 8 to 10 years of schooling for a work permit.

       The estimates in column (2) of Table 2 include this more accurate variable for measuring

the constraints on schooling of child labor laws. The impacts of both the continuation law

indicator variable and the child labor law measure, however, are quite similar to those in column

(1). The coefficient on the variable for child labor school years measures the (intensive) effect

on the high school enrollment rate of a one-year increase in mandated schooling. The significant

positive coefficients on dummy variables for no child labor law and no compulsory schooling

law indicate that the (extensive) effect of introducing a law is smaller than the implied effect

from intensive margin changes in the laws.

       We next look at the discrete effects of child labor law requirements that were stringent

enough that they could have impacted high school enrollment decisions. We focus on state child

labor law provisions requiring 8 or more years of schooling to get a work permit. In column (3),

we divide the column (1) child labor law control variable (work permit age – school entry age)

into dummies variables for 8 years and 9 or more years (fewer than 8 years is the omitted

variable). We also include a dummy variable for a state requirement of 8 years to get a work

permit, which was the maximum adopted over the period. The estimates in column (3) reveal

rather substantial effects of work permit and school entry ages that implicitly mandate 8 or more

years of schooling. The high school enrollment rate increases by 3.7 percentage points when 8

years is implicitly required and by 6.5 percentage points when 9 or 10 years is required.

       The specification in column (4) includes a summary measure of the minimum number of

school years required by the state’s compulsory schooling laws:

       Compulsory School Yearsst = min {(education for exemption)st,
                          (maximum age of compulsory schoolingst – entry ages, t-8)}



                                                      Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 19
In constructing this variable, we follow the procedure mentioned before and code an education

exemption for read and write as 4 years of schooling. If in state s at year t there was no

educational exemption, then Compulsory School Yearsst is given by (maximum age of

compulsory schoolingst – entry ages, t-8). The mean of “compulsory school years” is 6.9 over the

sample and ranges from 0 to 12. The estimates in column (4) show small but statistically

significant effects of “compulsory school years” on high school enrollments with the same child

labor and continuation school controls as in the core specification in column (2). A one-year

increase in “compulsory school years” is associated with 0.45 percentage point rise in the high

school enrollment rate as compared with a 0.78 percentage point rise from a one year increase in

“child labor school years.”

       The effect of the “compulsory school year” variable is not robust to controlling for state

and census division (or region) trends. In column (5), we replace the census division trends with

a full set of state-specific linear time trends. The impact of the continuation law variable remains

about the same and is robust to other controls. But the effect of “compulsory schooling years” is

eliminated by the state trends, and the effect of “child labor school years” is much weakened.

       In summary, changes in state child labor and compulsory schooling laws appear to have

had some impact on high school enrollment rates from 1910 to 1938. But the impacts are modest

relative to the rapid rise in secondary schooling rates during the era of the high school

movement. Continuation school laws, possibly because they imposed costs on the employers of

high school age youth, have the most consistently positive effects on enrollment rates. Other

child labor law requirements had some impacts, especially those that required 8 or more years of

schooling for a work permit since permit rules typically undermined compulsory schooling laws.

       How large was the contribution of child labor and compulsory schooling laws to the 50.4

percentage point increase in the high school enrollment rate from 1910 to 1938? We take the


                                                      Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 20
coefficient from the specification in column (4) of Table 2, which includes controls for

continuation laws, child labor laws, and compulsory schooling laws, to predict the effects of the

laws on high school enrollment rates using the change in the mean of the law variables from

1910 to 1938. There was a 60 percentage point increase in the share of students in states with

continuation school laws and that can explain a 1.5 percentage point increase in the high school

enrollment rate. The combined effects of changes in child labor and compulsory schooling laws

(both the years and existence of the laws) add 1.8 percentage points. About a 3.3 percentage

points or 5 to 6 percent of the overall increase in the high school enrollment rate from 1910 to

1938 can therefore be accounted for by changes in child labor and compulsory schooling laws.

In contrast, the estimates in column (4) imply that the crude proxy from improved economic

status represented by the increase in automobiles per capita from under 0.01 in 1910 to 0.22 in

1938 can explain a 19 percentage point rise in the high school enrollment rate.

       Effects of law changes using census data on educational attainment

       We next examine the effects of state compulsory schooling and child labor laws on the

ultimate educational attainment of the birth cohorts who were of high school age during the high

school movement era. We focus on the 1896 to 1925 birth cohorts, who reached high school

entry age (14 years of age) between 1910 and 1939. Overall educational attainment increased

rapidly for the cohorts affected by the high school movement in the first half of the twentieth

century. Estimates from the 1960 federal population census for U.S.-born individuals indicate a

rise of 2.45 in mean years of schooling, increasing from 8.59 years for the birth cohort of 1896 to

11.04 years for the birth cohort of 1925. The increase in the high school grades (9 to 12)

accounts for the majority (1.42 years or 58 percent) of the rise in schooling over this time period.

       Our empirical approach is to link our data on state laws and other state-level covariates to

individual level data on educational attainment, state of birth, and individual demographics (race,


                                                      Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 21
sex, and parent’s nativity) for the U.S.-born in the birth cohorts of 1896 to 1925 from the 1960

Census of Population IPUMS. We match each individual to the state child labor and compulsory

schooling requirement that prevailed in their state of birth at the relevant ages. Thus, we use the

school entrance age law existing in their state of birth when they were 7 years old and the other

components of the laws prevailing when they were 14 years old.

        The census micro-data allow us to estimate the impact of the laws on the long-run

educational attainment of the affected cohorts, although there are some disadvantages with this

approach as we previously mentioned. For example, we have information on each individual’s

state of birth and not on their state of residence when they were of school age. Interstate

migration (about 14 percent of 14 year olds in 1920 were living in state different from their state

of birth) can lead to modest attenuation bias from standard measurement error, but it could also

generate more subtle biases from non-random migration from states with different patterns of

law changes. In addition, we cannot measure the effects of the laws on foreign-born children and

they were about 5 percent of high school age youth in 1920.26 We focus our analysis on the 1960

census because it contains large samples for all the relevant cohorts with a consistent measure of

years of schooling.27

        Our basic regression specifications for analyzing the effects of state laws on years of

schooling are:

26
   Estimates of the interstate migration rates of families with youth and of the share foreign born of 14 to
17 years olds in 1920 are from the 1920 Census of Population IPUMS.
27
   We have also performed a similar analysis for the educational attainment of the same birth cohorts
measured at similar ages (from 40 to 49 years of age) using data from the 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970
censuses. The results are similar but less precisely estimated than the estimates using the 1960 census.
The disadvantage of this approach is smaller sample sizes for the earlier cohorts since the 1940 census
only provides information on parents’ nativity (a key control variable) for sample-line individuals and the
1950 census only provides educational attainment information for sample-line individuals. There are also
some differences in the measures of educational attainment available in the different census years. The
educational variable in the 1940 census does not distinguish whether the highest grade attended was
actually completed, and the 1940 and 1950 census educational attainment data are top coded at 17 years
as opposed to 18 years in the 1960 census.

                                                          Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 22
        E ics = X ics β + L csδ + Zcsπ + α s + γ c + µics ,

where Eics is the years of completed schooling of individual i from birth cohort c and state-of-

birth s, Xics are individual level demographic controls (race and sex dummies and an indicator

variable for foreign born parents), Lcs is the vector of state child labor and compulsory schooling

law variables affecting those born in state s from cohort c, Zcs are time-varying state covariates,

αs are state fixed effects, and γc are birth cohort fixed effects. We also include controls for

census division linear time trends (or for census region-year fixed effects). The state law

variables are the same as those from our core specification for high school enrollment rates from

column (4) of Table 2. We give robust standard errors clustered by state of birth to account for

any state-level serial correlation in the residuals.

        The key results on educational attainment for the entire sample and for various sub-

samples (whites versus blacks, males versus females) are presented in Table 3. The core

specification for the full sample is shown in column (1). The state law variables have modest but

statistically significant effects on educational attainment. The introduction of a continuation

school law is associated with a 0.13-year increase in schooling for the affected cohorts. Similar

to our findings for contemporaneous high school enrollment rates, we estimate larger effects of

child labor school years than for compulsory schooling law years. State manufacturing

employment tends to have a depressing effect on educational attainment possibly reflecting

higher opportunity costs of schooling due to youth employment in certain industries.28 In

regressions we do not report here, we have decomposed the impact of the laws into the effects on

years of high school and on other years of schooling. The introduction of a continuation school


28
   Also, the “automobiles per capita” variable that has large effects on contemporaneous high school
enrollment rates has small and statistically insignificant effects on overall years of schooling. But we do
find (in unreported regressions) that the automobiles per capita variable has large and statistically
significant positive effects on years of high school and the probability of completing 9 or more years for
the same sample.

                                                              Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 23
law increased completed high school by 0.06 years (almost half of the effect of a continuation

school law on years of schooling) and virtually all of the small estimated effect of compulsory

schooling years came from the increase in years of high school. In contrast, we find that only

one-fourth of the effect of child labor school years came from the impact on years in high school.

        Our qualitative findings with respect to the effects of state laws on educational attainment

are similar to Lleras-Muney (2002). But we estimate somewhat larger effects of continuation

school laws and compulsory schooling year and modestly smaller effects of years of child labor

labor law years.29 The estimates in column (2) show slightly larger effects of child labor school

years and slightly smaller effects of continuation school laws when controls for linear time trends

for the nine census divisions are replaced with a full set of region × cohort fixed effects for the

four census regions.

        The estimates in columns (3) to (6) of Table 2 show statistically significant and rather

similar effects of continuation school laws on educational attainment of whites and blacks and

males and females. The other aspects of child labor and compulsory schooling laws do not have

significant effects on blacks, although the estimates for blacks are rather imprecise. As would be

expected given differences in labor force opportunities, the effects of continuation laws are larger

for males than for females but the effects of compulsory schooling laws are estimated be larger

for females. The negative effects of manufacturing employment on educational attainment are

more substantial for blacks than whites and larger for males than females.

        The central message from the estimates in Table 3 is that state compulsory schooling and

child labor laws, despite their expansion, appear to have played only minor roles in the growth of

29
  The differences in the estimates from Lleras-Muney (2002) arise from our expansion of the sample to
cover earlier cohorts (those born 1896 to 1900), our “improvements” in the coding of and specification of
the effects of state laws, slight differences in treatment of regional trends, and some tiny data entry errors
affecting the control variables for several observations in Lleras-Muney’s published regressions. A
corrected version of Lleras-Muney’s data set is available on her web site:
http://www.princeton.edu/~alleras/papers.htm.

                                                            Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 24
educational attainment for youths from 1910 to 1939 (the birth cohorts of 1896 to 1925). For

youths born in 1896, 9 percent lived in states with continuation school laws, 33 percent faced no

compulsory schooling law at age 7, 14 percent had no child labor law, and mean years of

schooling from child labor laws and compulsory schooling laws were 4.6 and 4.9 years

respectively. In contrast, for youths born in 1925, 69 percent lived in states with continuation

school laws, all states had child labor law and compulsory schooling laws, and the mean years of

binding schooling requirements from child labor and compulsory schooling laws had both risen

to 8.0 years.

       Our core estimates in column (1) of Table 3 imply that changes in state laws can explain

an increase in educational attainment of 0.13 years with 0.08 years coming from the adoption of

continuation laws and 0.05 years coming from the strengthening of other child labor and

compulsory schooling law requirements. Thus, about 5 percent of the 2.45-year increase in

schooling from the 1896 to 1925 birth cohorts can be attributed to changes in child labor and

compulsory schooling laws. The estimated proportional contribution of these laws to the growth

of overall educational attainment is almost identical to our estimate of their contemporaneous

effects on the high school enrollments for these same cohorts.

Enforcement of Compulsory Schooling Laws

       We have, thus far, used the details of compulsory schooling and child labor laws but not

information on their enforcement. The reason we have not is that the degree to which these laws

were enforced, as we previously noted, is difficult to measure for each of the states over time. In

the various volumes and documents we have used to compile the laws, there is scant information

on enforcement procedures. One reason is that enforcement was not always at the same

governmental level as were the laws. It often resided in municipalities. The expenditures on

enforcement, moreover, were not always part of one particular agency or governmental unit,


                                                      Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 25
such as the school district. Rather, the expenditures on compulsory schooling were occasionally

at the school district level or resided in various other entities such as the courts. The same was

true of child labor laws.

        Deffenbaugh and Keesecker, two noted contemporaries of the period who together and

separately produced many government documents about compulsory schooling from 1914 to the

mid-1930s, noted that “school censuses are found wherever compulsory education laws are fully

carried out” (1935). Thus, to get a sense of the change in enforcement over the high school

movement era we have gathered information on which states had laws requiring a school census

be taken and with what frequency. The “school census” was a survey, generally taken by the

attendance officer (also known as the “truant” officer) of the school district or in small districts

by the teachers themselves, which was intended to include all children within the ages of

compulsory education and often those younger and those older up to the age of majority.30 By

knowing which children should be in school within the district, the enforcement of compulsory

education laws was made more likely.

        We have found four fairly comprehensive lists of school censuses covering much of the

period we explore: 1913, 1928, 1935, and 1945 (listed by the approximate last year of the laws

reported). Because every state had a school census by 1928, we compare 1914 and 1928.31

These years are interesting for our purposes because they cover much of the period of the high

school movement prior to the Great Depression and they also cover the years of the greatest

expansion of compulsory education laws (see the various parts of Figure 3).


30
   School censuses were also used by various states, both before and after the passage of compulsory
schooling laws, to apportion state school funds.
31
   The lists that we have not used here are: Deffenbaugh and Keesecker (1935, p. 25) and Proffitt and
Segel (1945, table 1). Between these two dates the following states curtailed their state school censuses:
Arizona (annually), California (every third year), Delaware (biennially), Indiana (annually), Nevada
(annually or as deemed necessary by the superintendent), and New Jersey (quinquennially), where the
mandate as of 1935 is in parentheses. Most other states kept the requirement the same as in 1935.

                                                          Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 26
        The 1913 compilation (U.S. Office [Bureau] of Education 1914, table II, p. 39) of

compulsory school laws reported that all but four states having a compulsory education law

required a school census. Some required the census only of the larger cities and some may have

not required an annual census.32 The four states that did not have a census (California, Illinois,

Louisiana, and Michigan) are a mixed group and contain several that were leaders in education.

Michigan may actually have required a census since the Office of Education report (1914) noted

that teachers’ reports of absence in Michigan required that “the last school census shall be

compared with the enrollment.”

        The 1928 compilation (Keesecker 1929, part I, p. 20) reported that 39 states required an

annual school census, 5 states required one biennially, 1 state required one every four years, 3

states required a census quinquennially, and 1 (Nevada) required a school census at the judgment

of the State board.33 By 1928 the vast majority of states had an annual school census and all had

some type of census.

        From 1913 to 1928 the largest change in states having a school census was for those that

did not previously have a compulsory education law. Among the states with a law predating

1913, enforcement was potentially enhanced by having a state-wide mandate rather than one

covering only the larger cities and a requirement to have an annual census. Increased

enforcement through the provision of a school census does not appear to have been as great has

some have presumed.




32
   The 1913 compilation does not list whether the census had to be annual, biennial, or on another
timetable.
33
   The “states” include the District of Columbia. California, included by Keesecker in the “annual” group,
did not require a school census but, rather, required that parents register children of school age with the
authorities. The tabular material appears to contain an error: D.C. and Florida should be “annual” rather
than “biennial.”

                                                          Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 27
Conclusions

       The secondary school enrollment rate of U.S. youth expanded enormously (by over 50

percentage points) during the “high school movement” period of 1910 to 1940. Changes in child

labor laws and compulsory schooling laws motivated by Progressive Era campaigns to reduce

child labor, eliminate youth idleness and delinquency, and expand schooling have been credited

by many observers as playing a major role in the rapid rise of U.S. secondary schooling of the

first half of the twentieth century. This paper finds that changes in child labor and compulsory

schooling laws had statistically detectable but relatively modest effects on U.S. secondary

schooling rates. Continuation school requirements that may have increased the costs of teen

labor to employers had somewhat larger effects on schooling than did other components of child

labor and compulsory schooling laws. Our estimates imply that increases in the restrictiveness of

state continuation school, child labor, and compulsory schooling laws can account for only

around 5 percent of the increase in secondary school enrollments and ultimate educational

attainment of U.S youth from 1910 to 1939.

       Compulsory schooling laws were expanded and increasingly enforced in many countries

in the mid-twentieth century. Such laws were apparently effective in countries such as Great

Britain where they were accompanied by large increases in educational access and spending.

But in the United States, schools (even secondary schools) were already largely available and

free for most students who could have been affected by compulsory schooling laws. The

enormous expansion of U.S. secondary school enrollment was due largely to factors such as the

substantial pecuniary returns to a year of school, increased family wealth, and greater school

access. The constraints imposed on youth, employers, and local government by child labor and

compulsory schooling laws were far less important.




                                                     Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 28
                                         References


Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist. 2000. “How Large Are Human Capital Externalities?
   Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000 15: 9-
   59.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Krueger, Alan B. 1991. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
   Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (November): 979-1014.

Bermejo, F. V. 1923. The School Attendance Service in American Cities. Menasha, WI: George
   Banta Publishing Co.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We
   Trust Differences in Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119
   (February), forthcoming.

Clapp, Mary A., and Mabel A. Strong. 1928. The School and the Working Child: A Study of
   …Fifty School Departments of Massachusetts. Boston, MA: Massachusetts Child Labor
   Committee.

Deffenbaugh, Walter S., and Ward W. Keesecker. 1935. Compulsory School Attendance Laws
   and their Administration. U.S. Office of Education Bulletin, 1935, no. 4. Washington, D.C.:
   GPO.

Edwards, Linda Nasif. 1978. “An Empirical Analysis of Compulsory Schooling Legislation,
   1940-1960,” Journal of Law and Economics 21 (April): 203-22.

Eisenberg, Martin J. 1988. “Compulsory Attendance Legislation in America, 1870 to 1915.”
   Ph.D. dissertation. Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

Emmons, Frederick Earle. 1926. City School Attendance Service. Teachers College, Columbia
  University Contributions to Education, no. 200. New York: Teachers College, Columbia
  University.

Gibbons, Charles E. 1927. School or Work in Indiana? New York: National Child Labor
   Committee.

Goldin, Claudia. 1994. “Appendix to: How America Graduated from High School: An
   Exploratory Study, 1910 to 1960.” NBER-Historical Working Paper, No. 57 (June).

Goldin, Claudia. 1998. “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of
   Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Economic History 58 (June):
   345-74.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1999. “Human Capital and Social Capital: The Rise of
   Secondary Schooling in America, 1910 to 1940,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History XXIX
   (Spring): 683-723.

                                                   Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 29
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2003, forthcoming. “Why the United States Led in
   Education: Lessons from Secondary School Expansion, 1910 to 1940.” In D. Eltis, F. Lewis,
   and K. Sokoloff, eds., Factor Endowments, Labor and Economic Growth in the Americas.
   New York: Cambridge University Press.

Keesecker, Ward W. 1929. Laws Relating to Compulsory Education. Bureau of Education
   Bulletin, 1928, no. 20. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Kézdi, Gábor. 2001. “Robust Standard Error Estimation in Fixed-Effects Panel Models.”
   Unpublished paper, University of Michigan, July.

Landes, William M., and Lewis C. Solmon. 1972. “Compulsory Schooling Legislation: An
   Economic Analysis of Law and Social Change in the Nineteenth Century,” Journal of
   Economic History 32 (March): 54-91.

Lang, Kevin, and David Kropp. 1986. “Human Capital Versus Sorting: The Effects of
   Compulsory Attendance Laws,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (August): 609-24.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2002. “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws Effective?
   An Analysis from 1915 to 1939,” Journal of Law and Economics 45 (October): 401-35.

Margo, Robert A., and T. Aldrich Finegan. 1996. “Compulsory Schooling Legislation and
   School Attendance in Turn-of-the-Century America: A ‘Natural Experiment’ Approach,”
   Economics Letters 53 (October): 103-10.

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2003a. “Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? Evidence from Changes in
   School-Leaving Laws.” Unpublished paper, University of Toronto, March.

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2003b. “The Compelling Effects of Compulsory Schooling: Evidence from
   Canada.” Unpublished paper, University of Toronto, March.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 1998. Education at a
   Glance: OECD Indicators, 1998. Paris: OECD Press.

Proffitt, Maris M., and David Segel. 1945. School Census, Compulsory Education, Child Labor:
   State Laws and Regulations. U.S. Office of Education, Bulletin, 1945, no. 1. Washington,
   D.C.: GPO.

Reed, Anna Yeomans. 1927. Human Waste in Education. New York, NY: The Century
   Company.

Ringer, Fritz K. 1979. Education and Society in Modern Europe. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
   University Press.

Schmidt, Stefanie. 1996. “School Quality, Compulsory Education laws, and the Growth of
   American High School Attendance, 1915-1935.” Ph.D. dissertation. Department of
   Economics, M.I.T.

                                                  Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 30
Stambler, Moses. 1968. “The Effect of Compulsory Education and Child Labor Laws on High
   School Attendance in New York City, 1898-1917,” History of Education Quarterly 2
   (Summer): 189-214.

Steinhilber, August W. and Carl J. Sokolowsi. 1966. State Law on Compulsory Attendance. U.S.
    Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Circular no. 793. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Troen, Selwyn K. 1975. The Public and the Schools: Shaping the St. Louis System, 1838-1920.
   Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press.

Tyack, David B. 1974. The One Best System: A History of American Urban Education.
   Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

U.S. Department of Education. 1993. 120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Portrait.
   Washington, D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Office [Bureau] of Education. 1914. Compulsory School Attendance. Bulletin no. 2. Walter
   S. Deffenbaugh. Washington, D.C.: GPO.




                                                   Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 31
                                                                                   Figure 1
                                              Public and Private Secondary School Enrollment and Graduation Rates, 1890 to 1970
  Public and private secondary school rates




                                              0.8



                                              0.6
                                                                      Enrollment rate


                                              0.4
                                                                                           Graduation rate


                                              0.2



                                              0.0
                                                    1890   1900    1910    1920     1930      1940    1950    1960    1970



Source: U.S. Department of Education (1993) and Goldin (1994, 1998) for graduation rates from
1910 to 1930.

Notes: Enrollment figures are divided by the number of 14 to 17 year olds; graduation figures are
divided by the number of 17 year olds. Data include males and females in public and private
schools (excluding preparatory departments of colleges and universities). Year given is end of
school year.




                                                                                            Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 32
                                                                                          Figure 2
Public and Private Secondary School Graduation Rate    Public and Private High School Graduation Rates for Four Regions, 1910 to 1970




                                                      0.8
                                                                   Pacific
                                                                   New England
                                                                   West North Central
                                                                   M iddle Atlantic
                                                      0.6




                                                      0.4




                                                      0.2




                                                      0.0
                                                        1900    1910      1920      1930     1940        1950      1960     1970



Sources: State-level high school graduation data set from various sources; see Goldin (1994,
1998).

Notes: Includes males and females in public and private schools (including preparatory
departments of colleges and universities). The number of graduates is divided by the
approximate number of 17 year olds in the state. Constant growth rate interpolations of
population data are made between decennial census years.




                                                                                                    Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 33
                                                                                         Figure 3
                                                            Aspects of Compulsory Schooling and Child Labor Laws: 1910 to 1939

1. Minimum age of compulsory schooling (0 or number of years)




                                              30
No. States with Min. Age, O or no. yrs.




                                                     8 or 9 years

                                              25


                                              20
                                                      7 years
                                              15


                                              10
                                                         No min. age

                                               5
                                                                                                       6 years

                                               0

                                                     1910           1915   1920   1925   1930   1935         1940


2. Maximum age of compulsory schooling (0 or greater than or equal to given number of years)



                                              48
                                                         12 years
                                              42
  No. States with Max. Age, O or  no. yrs.




                                                    14 years
                                              36

                                              30

                                              24
                                                    16 years
                                              18

                                              12
                                                       No maximum age
                                              6
                                                    18 years
                                              0
                                                     1910           1915   1920   1925   1930   1935         1940




                                                                                                   Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 34
3. Education for exemption from maximum age rule (greater than or equal to given number of
years)


                                                       48
No. States with Schooling Exemption, 0 or  no. yrs.




                                                                                                                      4 years
                                                                                                                      6 years
                                                       42
                                                                                                                       8 years
                                                       36

                                                       30

                                                       24

                                                       18

                                                       12
                                                                                                                      10 years
                                                        6                                                             12 years
                                                                                                                      0 years
                                                        0
                                                            1910         1915   1920      1925   1930   1935         1940


4. Work permit age (greater than or equal to given number of years)


                                                       48
                                                             12 years
   No. States with Work Permit Age,  no. years




                                                       42

                                                       36
                                                                 14 years         13 years

                                                       30

                                                       24
                                                                                                                 15 years
                                                       18

                                                       12

                                                        6
                                                                                                                16 years

                                                        0
                                                            1910         1915   1920      1925   1930   1935         1940




                                                                                                           Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 35
5. Education required to obtain a work permit (none or greater than or equal to years given)


                                                              48
 No. States with Work-Schl Requirement,  no. years




                                                                                                       read & write
                                                              42

                                                                                                                                 4 years
                                                              36                                                               5years
                                                                                                                             6 years
                                                              30
                                                                                                                              7 years
                                                              24
                                                                                                                            8 years
                                                              18

                                                              12

                                                              6
                                                                                                no requirement

                                                              0
                                                                   1910   1915   1920    1925        1930        1935          1940




6. & 7. Continuation School Mandatory or Permissible




                                                                                        Continuation School Permissible
                                                              30
                    No. States with Continuation School Law




                                                              25

                                                                                           Continuation School Mandatory
                                                              20


                                                              15


                                                              10


                                                               5


                                                               0

                                                                   1910   1915   1920    1925        1930        1935         1940




Sources: See Data Appendix.




                                                                                                                       Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 36
                                         Table 1
                       School Attendance by Age for White Youths,
          by State Compulsory Schooling and Child Labor Law Ages: 1910 and 1920

A. Minimum Compulsory Schooling Age
Child’s        Minimum Age, 1910                                    Minimum Age, 1920
  Age    None       7          8               9              7            8            9
   6     0.334    0.675     0.523            0.417          0.738        0.624        0.644
   7     0.611    0.844     0.775            0.741          0.886        0.847        0.867
   8     0.747    0.902     0.865            0.886          0.921        0.904        0.974
   9     0.819    0.925     0.897            0.976          0.941        0.926        0.948
# states   7       16         24               1             21           26            1

B. Work Permit Age
Youth’s Work Permit Age, 1910                         Work Permit Age, 1920
  Age    None        12        14       None      12       13       14      15              16
                         Full-Time or Part-Time School Attendance
   11    0.894     0.925     0.958      0.932 0.904      0.986    0.965   0.976           0.915
   12    0.847     0.901     0.943      0.929 0.902      0.964    0.961   0.973           0.893
   13    0.854     0.893     0.934      0.946 0.877      0.925    0.953   0.972           0.912
   14    0.803     0.828     0.868      0.846 0.843      0.820    0.883   0.938           0.882
   15    0.723     0.704     0.721      0.793 0.736      0.611    0.739   0.806           0.778
   16    0.617     0.568     0.517      0.586 0.588      0.329    0.506   0.526           0.646
   17    0.454     0.384     0.354      0.476 0.441      0.263    0.345   0.358           0.445
                                Full-Time School Attendance
   11    0.661     0.825     0.923      0.932 0.841      0.973    0.950   0.969           0.870
   12    0.606     0.789     0.900      0.912 0.810      0.959    0.938   0.959           0.843
   13    0.583     0.713     0.874      0.913 0.782      0.890    0.921   0.953           0.830
   14    0.494     0.637     0.759      0.838 0.727      0.775    0.825   0.912           0.792
   15    0.467     0.504     0.589      0.724 0.620      0.578    0.671   0.760           0.677
   16    0.360     0.354     0.400      0.560 0.482      0.276    0.433   0.467           0.550
   17    0.280     0.249     0.263      0.427 0.352      0.220    0.287   0.315           0.370
# states   8         7        33          2       4         1       36       4              1

Sources: See Data Appendix for sources on compulsory schooling and child labor laws. School
enrollment data are from the IPUMS of the U.S. federal population census for 1910 and 1920.

Notes: “School attendance” in the U.S. censuses of 1910 and 1920 means that the youth had been
in a school for at least one day during the previous year. Respondents could list an occupation in
addition to school attendance. We define “full-time school attendance” as attendance but no
occupation. “Full-time and part-time school attendance” means that the youth was listed as
attending school but also could have an occupation. Youths who listed an occupation and stated
that they had attended school during the year could have worked during the summer, school
vacation, or after school hours. But they also could be youths who dropped out of school to
work during the year or worked and attended school on a limited basis.



                                                     Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 37
                                           Table 2
                 Impact of State Compulsory Schooling and Child Labor Laws
           on Secondary School Enrollment Rates, 1910 to 1938 (Biennially, 48 States)

                        Dependent variable: Fraction of state’s 14 to 17 year olds
                     enrolled in public and private secondary schools (mean = 0.441)

                                              (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

Continuation school law                      0.0210      0.0252      0.0245       0.0249     0.0244
                                           (0.00874)   (0.00936)   (0.00846)    (0.00940)   (0.0112)
(Work permit aget) –                         0.0128
(school entrance aget-8)                   (0.00397)
(Work permit aget) –                                                 0.0371
(school entrance aget-8) = 8                                       (0.00920)
(Work permit aget) –                                                 0.0649
(school entrance aget-8) ≥ 9                                        (0.0165)
Child labor school yearsa                               0.00889                  0.00777     0.00437
                                                       (0.00246)                (0.00265)   (0.00347)
No child labor law                           0.0111      0.0247                   0.0217    -0.00339
                                            (0.0158)    (0.0138)                 (0.0185)    (0.0291)
No compulsory schooling law                  0.0816      0.0307                   0.0563     0.00979
                                            (0.0239)    (0.0137)                 (0.0167)    (0.0249)
Compulsory school yearsb                                                         0.00453    0.000239
                                                                                (0.00209)   (0.00297)
Education required for work permit = 8                              0.00139
                                                                    (0.0101)
Autos per capita                             0.879       0.921        0.816       0.865      0.995
                                            (0.183)     (0.210)      (0.173)     (0.187)    (0.277)
Manufacturing employment per capita         -0.0414     -0.0230      -0.108       0.134     -0.0223
                                            (0.401)     (0.400)      (0.403)     (0.409)    (0.463)
Fraction ≥ 65 years                           2.91        2.76         2.93        3.06       3.58
                                             (1.43)      (1.46)       (1.35)      (1.39)     (2.66)
Fraction ≤ 14 years                          -1.97       -1.97        -1.85       -2.10      -2.04
                                            (0.569)     (0.595)      (0.496)     (0.583)    (0.917)

Other state demographic controlsc             yes         yes          yes         yes        yes
State dummies                                 yes         yes          yes         yes        yes
Year dummies                                  yes         yes          yes         yes        yes
Census division trends                        yes         yes          yes         yes        no
State trends                                  no          no           no          no         yes

R2                                           0.978       0.978       0.979       0.978       0.984
Standard error                              0.0320       0.0322      0.0313      0.0321      0.0286
Number of observations                        720         720         720         720         720




                                                       Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 38
a
  Child labor school yearst = max{(education required for work permitt), (work permit aget –
school entrance aget-8)}
b
  Compulsory school yearst = min{(education for exemptiont), (maximum age of compulsory
schoolingt – entry aget-8)}
c
  Includes fraction black, fraction foreign born, fraction urban.

Sources: Secondary school enrollments, see Goldin (1994, 1998); compulsory school and child
labor laws, see Data Appendix; data on percent black, percent foreign born, and percent urban
were provided by Adriana Lleras-Muney and are from the 1910, 1920, 1930, and 1940 Censuses
of Population (linearly imputed in intervening years); other variables, see Goldin and Katz
(2003, forthcoming).

Notes: All regressions have been weighted by the number of 14 year olds in the state. The
numbers in parentheses are robust standard errors clustered by state. The 1912 enrollment rate is
the average of that in 1911 and 1913.




                                                    Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 39
                                         Table 3
 The Impact of State Compulsory Schooling and Child Labor Laws on Educational Attainment,
                              1896 to 1925 U.S. Born Cohorts

              Dependent variable = Completed Years of Schooling (Mean = 10.01)
                                 (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)                (6)
                                 All       All     Whites      Blacks    Males             Females
Continuation school law         0.133    0.0780      0.124     0.189      0.151              0.115
                              (0.0462) (0.0398) (0.0505) (0.0974) (0.055)                  (0.0468)
Child labor school yearsa      0.0296    0.0385     0.0304    0.00295    0.0223             0.0378
                              (0.0140) (0.0139) (0.0160) (0.0182) (0.0147)                 (0.0165)
Compulsory school yearsb       0.0136    0.0104     0.0109    0.00244    0.0104             0.0157
                             (0.00781) (0.0108) (0.00685) (0.0203) (0.0113)                (0.0103)
No child labor law              0.156     0.220      0.146     0.153     0.0972              0.210
                               (0.146)  (0.136)    (0.168)    (0.160)   (0.135)             (0.165)
No compulsory schooling         0.198     0.218     0.207     0.0221      0.254              0.139
law                           (0.0852) (0.0742) (0.0860) (0.163) (0.0958)                  (0.0991)

Autos per capita                  0.363       -1.43      0.394        1.86       0.136       0.601
                                 (0.728)     (0.850)    (0.689)      (2.25)     (0.805)     (0.789)
Manufacturing employment          -3.23       -2.26      -2.38        -6.25      -5.28       -1.23
per capita                        (1.55)      (2.33)     (1.50)      (2.79)      (1.79)      (1.62)

State demographic controls        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Person demographic controls       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
State of birth dummies            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Birth cohort dummies              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Census division trends            Yes         No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Census region*cohort effects      No          Yes         No          No          No          No

R2                                0.160        0.160       0.099      0.160       0.172   0.152
Standard error                     3.19        3.19         3.14       3.53        3.36    3.01
No. of observations             536,628 536,628 483,993              50,912      260,884 275,744
a
  Child labor school yearst = max{(education required for work permitt), (work permit aget –
school entrance aget-7)}, where t is the year at which the individual is 14 years old
b
  Compulsory school yearst = min{(education for exemptiont), (maximum age of compulsory
schoolingt – entry aget-7)}, where t is the year at which the individual is 14 years old

Sources: IPUMS of the 1960 federal population census. See Data Appendix for state
compulsory schooling and child labor laws. The sources of the other variables are given in the
notes to Table 2.
Notes: State demographic controls are fractions foreign born, black, urban, greater than 64 years
old, and less than 15 years old. Individual demographic controls include dummy variables for
female, black, other race, and parents foreign-born. Robust standard errors are in parentheses
clustered by state of birth. The school entrance law refers to that in existence in the individual’s
state of birth at age 7, whereas all other law variables are for age 14.



                                                       Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 40
                 Data Appendix to “Mass Secondary Schooling and the State:
                 The Role of State Compulsion in the High School Movement”
                            Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz

    Construction of State-Level Compulsory Education and Child Labor Laws, 1910 to 1939



       The compilation of state-level compulsory education and child labor laws, from 1910 to
1939, contains the following seven variables:

   1. Minimum age of compulsory schooling, know as the school entrance age (also compiled
   for 1902 to 1909);
   2. Maximum age of compulsory schooling (also compiled for 1902 to 1909);
   3. Education for exemption from maximum age rule;
   4. Age at which youth can obtain a work permit (for work during normal school hours);
   5. Education required to receive a work permit (for work during normal school hours);
   6. Whether state has mandatory continuation schools; and
   7. Maximum age of continuation school attendance (state permits municipalities to establish
   continuation schools).

These are summary variables of complex laws. The first 3 variables concern compulsory
education laws and the last 4 are child labor laws. Compulsory education and child labor laws
were often two sides of the same coin. They have appeared to latter-day observers to have been
inconsistent because the maximum age of compulsory education was often higher than the age at
which a work permit could be obtained. But the laws were generally part of the same piece of
legislation and had a set of similar goals.

        The binding constraint for much of the period we consider was the age at which a youth
could obtain a work permit or the education required to receive a work permit. Take, for
example, a state with a maximum age of compulsory education of 16 years, but in which a youth
of 14 can receive a work permit for work during normal school hours if the youth had already
completed 8 years of school. In that case, the binding constraint would be, most likely, the age
needed for the work permit. But if the education required were no more than being able to “read
and write,” the binding constraint would be the education required to get a work permit. Many
states also had a minimum education level to excuse a youth from the maximum age of
compulsory education. In certain states and at certain times, this would have been the binding
constraint.

        Finally, many states adopted laws requiring school districts to establish “continuation
schools.” The continuation school idea caught on after World War I, although it was first
adopted in 1911 by Wisconsin. A mandatory state continuation school law (variable 6) meant
that school districts, with a large enough number of working youths under some age, had to
establish a continuation school. Youths who did not meet a minimum education standard were
required to attend the school for some number of hours per week (for example, one afternoon of
four hours) and the employers were often responsible to excuse the youths from work during
their school time. Many states, however, did not have a mandatory law but, rather, had a law


                                                    Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 41
setting the maximum age for youths to be in such a school if one existed. That is, variable (6)
would be 0 but variable (7) would be some age. If a municipality had a continuation school, the
maximum age given in the state law would be binding.

         The compulsory education and child labor laws contain numerous complexities that make
their coding difficult. Most states, for example, had several exemptions for compulsory
education and a detailed knowledge of court decisions is required to assess their importance. For
example, “mental defectives” were almost always exempt from compulsory education laws.
Similarly, children of impoverished families were often exempt from the education requirement
for a work permit. The definition of “defective” and “impoverished” was up to the courts. There
is also the difficult issue of enforcement.

        Another complexity is that state laws occasionally had different ages for cities and towns
than for the rest of the state or for the largest city versus all other places. Our coding used that
for the majority of the population. In other cases, the state left the details of compulsory
education laws to the school districts and municipalities. Finally, these seven variables omit the
details concerning child labor laws, such as the number of hours they could labor and the
occupations that were banned for youths of various ages and by sex.

        The data on these laws are primarily derived from 12 contemporaneous compilations (see
References) most often commissioned by the U.S. Office of Education or the Children’s Bureau
of the U.S. Department of Labor. When a law changed between two of the compilations, the
actual state laws were consulted to find the precise date of change or, when available,
information on changes to state laws published by the Office of Education. In some cases we
could not locate the precise date of change. In such cases, the law is generally extrapolated back
in time (e.g., if a law changes between 1921 and 1924, the 1924 details are assigned to 1922 and
1923). Because we have major compilations for 1910, 1914, 1915, 1917/18, 1921, 1924, 1927,
1928, 1929, 1935, 1939, and 1945, as well as minor compilations for several other dates, the
change dates that we have imputed are probably not too different from the actual ones.

        The interpretation of the state laws was often difficult and some compilations were
clearly wrong in some of the details. In certain cases, the state laws are difficult to code because
they did not apply in uniform ways throughout the state. For example, in some cases the law
applied to just the largest city (e.g., Wilmington DE, New Orleans LA, Baltimore MD). In these
cases, we have coded the state law rather than that of the city because the majority of the state’s
population did not live in the largest city. But when the law applied to all cities and town (say
above 2,500 population) we have coded the city laws rather than those applying to only rural
areas in the state. In some cases, there was no state law and localities were given discretion to
write their own law. In these cases, we coded the state as not having a law. In a few instances
the law applied differently to boys than to girls and we have used the restrictions that applied to
the former.

        The data set is the result of many individual labors. It was begun independently by
Claudia Goldin (in 1993) and by Adriana Lleras-Muney (in her Ph.D. dissertation). Stefanie
Schmidt took Goldin’s initial coding and added others. Stefanie Schmidt’s work covered almost
the same years that Lleras-Muney’s did (1915 to 1935 for Schmidt and 1915 to 1939 for Lleras-
Muney). Both used similar sources in most years, but there were some differences. Schmidt
relied on state legal documents for the years between the compilations to pinpoint state law

                                                      Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 42
changes. Lleras-Muney used more published compilations than did Schmidt and thus
encountered fewer changes that had uncertain dates.

        We cross-checked these two compilations (and another by Angrist and Acemoglu, which
also covers years after 1940 but contains less detail for the 1915 to 1940 period), checked them
against the original documents used, and rectified the differences, as best we could. In addition
we extended the Lleras-Muney and Schmidt series back to 1910.




                                                     Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 43
                                  Data Appendix References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist. 2000. “How Large Are Human Capital Externalities?
Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000 15: 9-59.

Bender, John F. 1928. “Criticisms of Attendance Laws,” American School Board Journal 76
(February): 43-44.

Bonner, H.R. 1923. “The Conviction of Legislators,” American School Board Journal 66
(February): 45-48.

§ Deffenbaugh, Walter S., and Ward W. Keesecker. 1935. Compulsory School Attendance Laws
and their Administration. U.S. Office of Education Bulletin, 1935, no. 4. Washington, D.C.:
GPO.

Ensign, Forest Chester. 1969 [reprint of 1921 ed.]. Compulsory Education Laws and Child
Labor. New York: Arno Press.

§ Keesecker, Ward W. 1929. Laws Relating to Compulsory Education. Bureau of Education
Bulletin, 1928, no. 20. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2002. “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws Effective?
An Anlysis from 1915 to 1939,” Journal of Law and Economics XLV (October): 401-35.

Merritt, Ella Arvilla. 1940. “Trends of Child Labor, 1937 to 1939,” Monthly Labor Review
(January).

National Child Labor Committee. 1927. Twenty-Third Annual Report of the National Child
Labor Committee for … 1927. New York: National Child Labor Committee.

§ National Child Labor Committee. 1928. Child Labor Laws and Child Labor Facts: An Analysis
by States (November 1927). New York: National Child Labor Committee.

No author. 1937. “Child Labor: Compulsory School-Attendance Provisions Affecting
Employment of Minors in the United States, 1936,” Monthly Labor Review (February).

No author. 1938. “Labor Laws, State Labor Legislation, 1937,” Monthly Labor Review
(January).

Proffitt, Maris M. 1933. Report on 206 Part-Time and Continuation Schools. Office of
Education Pamphlet no. 38. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

§ Proffitt, Maris M., and David Segel. 1945. School Census, Compulsory Education, Child
Labor: State Laws and Regulations. U.S. Office of Education, Bulletin, 1945, no. 1.
Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Schmidt, Stefanie. 1996. “School Quality, Compulsory Education Laws, and the Growth of
American High School Attendance, 1915-35.” M.I.T. Ph.D. Dissertation.

                                                   Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 44
§ Segel, David, and Maris M. Proffitt. 1942. Pupil Personnel Services as a Function of State
Departments of Education. U.S. Office of Education Bulletin, 1940 no. 6. Washington, D.C.:
GPO.

§ Sumner, Helen L., and Ella A. Merritt. 1915. Child Labor Legislation in the United States.
U.S. Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau Publication no. 10. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

§ U.S. Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau. 1921. State Child-Labor Standards, January 1,
1921. Chart series no. 1. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

§ U.S. Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau. 1921. State Compulsory School Attendance
Standards Affecting the Employment of Minors, January 1, 1921. Chart series no. 2.
Washington, D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau. 1923. Standards and Problems Connected with
the Issuance of Employment Certificates. Bureau Publication no. 116. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

§ U.S. Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau. 1924. State Compulsory School Attendance
Standards Affecting the Employment of Minors, September 15, 1924. Chart series no. 1.
Washington, D.C.: GPO.

§ U.S. Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau. 1930. Child Labor: Facts and Figures. U.S.
Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau Publication no. 197. (October 1929) Washington, D.C.:
GPO.

§ U.S. Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau. 1935. State Compulsory School Attendance
Standards Affecting the Employment of Minors: State Child Labor Standards. Washington,
D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau. 1938. Child-Welfare Legislation, 1937. Bureau
Publication no. 236. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Federal Board for Vocational Education. 1920 Compulsory Part-Time School Attendance
Laws. Bulletin no. 55. Trade and Industrial Series no. 14. (August) Washington, D.C.: GPO.

§ U.S. Office [Bureau] of Education. 1910. Education Report, 1910. [Annual Report of the
Commissioner of Education]. “Compulsory Education and Child-Labor Laws.” Washington,
D.C.: GPO.
Also Education Report, 1920

§ U.S. Office [Bureau] of Education. 1914. Compulsory School Attendance. Bulletin no. 2.
Walter S. Deffenbaugh. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Office [Bureau] of Education. 1925. Important State Laws Relating to Education Enacted in
1922 and 1923. Bulletin, 1925, no. 2. Compiled by William R. Hood. Washington, D.C.: GPO.



                                                    Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 45
U.S. Office [Bureau] of Education. [various years] Report of the Commissioner of Education for
the Year Ended [year]. [Annual Report] Washington, D.C.: GPO.
Various years including 1918.

U.S. Office [Bureau] of Education. [various years] Biennial Survey of Education, [various
years]. Washington, D.C.: GPO.
§ 1916/18 (1917/18 compendium)
also 1920/22, 1922/24, 1928/30, 1930/32

State law documents including titles such as “School Codes of [State],” “Act of [State]
Legislature,” “[State] Board of Education,” and “Biennial Reports of [State].”

§ denotes one of the major compilations of compulsory education and/or child labor laws.




                                                     Goldin and Katz, Schooling and the State 46
