NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DETERMINANTS OF LABOR DEMAND IN COLOMBIA: 1976-1996
Raquel Bernal
Mauricio Cardenas
Working Paper 10077
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10077
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003

Forthcoming in “Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean”, edited by James
Heckman and Carmen Pagés. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Raquel Bernal and Mauricio Cardenas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Determinants of Labor Demand in Colombia: 1976-1996
Raquel Bernal and Maurico Cardenas
NBER Working Paper No. 10077
November 2003
JEL No. J23, O15, O54
ABSTRACT
Colombia’s unemployment rate rose to 20% during the late 1990s from less than 8% in 1994. This
paper argues that this has been the result of high non-wage labor costs embodied in the legislation.
The estimated own-wage labor demand elasticity is around –0.5, which implies that a reduction in
those costs, while politically costly, can have a significant payoff in terms of equity and efficiency.
We also find that adjustment costs of changing employment as well as wage elasticities were not
affected by changes in the regulations regarding severance payments and dismissal costs. In this
sense, structural reforms did have an impact on labor demand through its effect on relative prices
alone. Finally, we conclude that the wage elasticity of labor demand increases (in absolute terms)
during contractions. Hence, the increase in prices and the beginning of a recession had a significant
effect on employment.
Mauricio Cardenas
Fedearrollo
Calle 78 No. 9-91
Bogota, Colombia
mcardenas@fedearrollo.org.co
Raquel Bernal
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
rbernal@northwestern.edu

2

1. INTRODUCTION
In spite of a labor reform introduced in 1990, as part of a reform package that liberalized
the economy in many dimensions1, Colombia’s urban unemployment reached an unprecedented
20% by the end of that decade. The 1990 reform made labor contracts more flexible, including a
reduction in job security provisions. The most significant change took place in relation to
severance payments with the introduction of a system of individual accounts managed by
specialized private funds. Under the old system, employers managed the funds and employees
were allowed to make partial withdrawals at any time. At the time of separation, those
withdrawals were debited in nominal terms, adding to the costs faced by employers. In practice,
the new system implied a reduction in the level and uncertainty of severance payments for firms.
In fact, the initial effect of the reform was to lower non-wage labor costs to 42.9% of the basic
wage, from 47.1% during the late 1980s. However, the reform did not deal with other important
areas of labor legislation, especially payroll taxation2.
The reform package also included a Social Security law, enacted in 1993, which raised
employers’ mandatory contributions for health and pension programs. From the viewpoint of the
labor market, this reform had important implications resulting from the significant increase in
non-wage labor costs. In fact, by 1996 non-wage labor costs had risen to 52% of the basic salary,
an increase of nearly 10 percentage points relative to their level in 1991.
This paper analyzes the combined effect of these two reforms on labor demand3. The

1

The reforms of the early 1990s were introduced mainly as a result of low growth during the 1980s, combined with an
election turnout that gave President César Gaviria, a convinced reformist, a significant majority in congress.
2
The reform kept a 9% payroll tax earmarked for labor training by SENA (2%), social welfare programs for the
unprotected childhood by ICBF (3%), and family subsidies provided by the privately managed Cajas de Compensación
(4%).
3
Kugler (in this volume) analyzes the effects of changes in job security provisions, such as severance payments and
other dismissal costs, on labor turnover.

3
results indicate that the increase in labor costs resulting from the pension and health reform had a
negative impact on labor demand. Thus, the paper calls for a new generation of labor market
reform in Colombia, aimed at reducing non-wage labor costs.
The paper is structured in the following way. Section 2 discusses the institutional and
regulatory framework governing the labor market, with special attention to the changes
introduced in the 1990 and 1993 reforms. Particular emphasis is placed on measuring the nonwage costs implied by the regulation. Section 3 shows the main stylized facts in the labor market
between 1976 and 1996. Section 4 deals with the incidence of payroll taxation on wages in a
framework that analyzes the possible endogeneity of wage and non-wage labor costs. More
specifically, the section tests whether higher non-wage costs faced by employers have been
transferred to workers in the form of lower basic wages. The results suggest that firms do not
lower wages when facing higher non-wage labor costs resulting from the legislation. The paper
then moves to the analysis of labor demand. Section 5 estimates standard labor demand
equations with the time series data. The emphasis of the estimation is placed on the measurement
of the own-wage elasticities, as well as the elasticities of substitution between different factors of
production. It also tests for possible changes in the value of those elasticities, associated with the
reform package of the early 1990s4. Section 6 presents the results of estimating the determinants
of labor demand in a dynamic framework that considers explicitly the impact of the regulations
on the path of employment adjustment. Sections 7 and 8 present the results of labor demand
estimations based on panels of manufacturing establishments and sectors, respectively. Section 9
concludes.

4

Trade liberalization was an essential part of the package. As is well known, trade liberalization can make labor demand
more elastic by making output markets more competitive and by making domestic labor more substitutable with foreign
factors. Or in the words of Hicks (1964, p. 242), “the demand for anything is likely to be more elastic, the more elastic is
demand for any further thing which it contributes to produce”.

4
The main conclusions of the paper are the following. First, labor demand elasticities in Colombia
are around –0.5, a value that is not low5 (in absolute terms) by international standards. Ceteris
paribus, the increase in labor costs has resulted in a significant reduction in labor demand. The
message is that the payoff, in terms of greater employment, of a reduction in payroll taxes is
considerable. Second, adjustment costs of changing employment as well as wage elasticities
were not affected by changes in the regulations regarding severance payments and dismissal
costs. In this sense, structural reforms did have an impact on labor demand through its effect on
relative prices alone. Finally, we conclude that the wage elasticity of labor demand increases (in
absolute terms) during contractions. Hence, the increase in prices and the beginning of a
recession had a significant effect on employment.

2. LABOR LEGISLATION: RECENT CHANGES
As mentioned in the introduction, the regulation of the labor market in Colombia saw
important changes during the 1990s. This section summarizes key aspects of the 1990 labor
reform and the reform to the social security system that was enacted in 19936.
• Severance pay was the highest non-wage labor cost under the pre-1990 regime. Employees
were entitled to one-month salary per year of work (based on the last salary). Partial
withdrawals were allowed and deducted in nominal terms from the final payment, implying a
form of “double retroactivity” (with an estimated cost of 4.2% of the total wage bill)7. The
new legislation eliminated this extra cost in all new labor contracts and introduced a monthly
contribution (9.3% of the basic salary) to a capitalized fund in the workers’ name accessible in
the event of separation or retirement. Thus, the reform effectively reduced the level and
uncertainty of the costs associated with severance payments.
5
6

Assuming that all the increase in taxes and contributions implied an increase in labor costs.
See Lora and Henao (1995), Cárdenas and Gutiérrez (1996), Lora and Pagés (1997), and Guash (1997).

5
• The reform increased the indemnity paid to workers dismissed without “just cause”. Workers
with less than a year of tenure on the job receive 45 days' wages. Workers with more than one
year of tenure receive 45 days for the first year plus an additional amount for each extra year,
which implied an increase relative to the old regime. For example, in the event of separation,
a worker with more than 10 years of tenure on the job used to receive 30 days for each extra
year (after the first). As can be seen in Table A1, the new legislation increased the indemnity
to the equivalent of 40 days' wages per additional year8. Although the legal definition of “just
cause” was widened, the reform increased the costs of dismissal.
• However, the right of workers with more than 10 years tenure to sue for reinstatement was
eliminated. Prior to the reform, successful plaintiffs could oblige firms to rehire workers with
back pay.
• Workers earning more than 10 minimum wages were allowed to opt for a new contract
(“integral salaries”) with higher wages instead of severance pay and other mandatory benefits
(such as the especial bonus or ‘prima’). However, in a survey conducted by Fedesarrollo in
1994, manufacturing firms reported that less than 2% of the employees had this type of
contract.
• Labor contracts for less than one year were allowed (renewable up to three times under the
same terms9), provided that all benefits are paid in proportion to the duration of the contract.
• Legal restrictions on the creation of labor unions were lifted. In particular, the Ministry of
Labor lost discretionary powers in this regard. Also, it became unlawful for employers to
discourage the creation of labor unions. A minimum of 25 workers is still necessary to form a
union.

7

Apart from tenure, the real cost of termination of employment increased with the frequency of partial withdrawals,
uncertain to the employer.
8
Based on the highest salary during the last year of employment.
9
The fourth renovation has to be made for at least one year. See Farné and Nupia (1996).

6
• The 1993 social security and health reform (Law 100) increased total contributions for health
from 7% of the basic salary (until 1994) to 8% in 1995 and 12% afterwards. One-third of the
total contribution has to be paid by the employer (same proportion as in the old system).
• The same law increased pension contributions to 13.5% in 1996 (14.5% for workers that earn
more than four minimum wages) from 8% of the basic salary in 1993. The increase was
implemented gradually. Contributions were first raised to 11.5% in April 1994 and then to
12.5% in 1995. Employers currently pay 10.1 percentage points of the total contribution, as
opposed 4.3 before the reform10.
Figure 1 summarizes the effects of labor and social security reform on non-wage labor
costs. Total non-wage labor cost paid by the firm (as a percentage of the basic salary) rose to
52% after the 1993 pension reform from 42.9% after the 1990 labor reform. For the purpose of
the analysis, we divide non-wage costs into three relatively arbitrary categories: First, “deferred
wages” which include vacations, extra bonuses, pension and health contributions. In theory,
deferred wages affect the total labor cost but do not have an impact on the path of employment
adjustment. Second, severance payments, which in addition to the direct impact on labor costs,
affect the dynamics of employment adjustment11. Third, payroll taxes that fund programs with
benefits that cannot be fully internalized by the employee (e.g., ICBF, SENA, and Cajas)12. The
economic response to these three types of non-wage costs may be different. In the case of
deferred wages the employer can offset part of the cost by adjusting the wage. This may not be
the case of payroll taxes earmarked for the provision of public goods. In the fourth section we
analyze the possible effect of deferred wages on current wages by estimating a Mincer-type
10

Law 100 (1993) eliminated the monopoly of the Social Security Institute (ISS) in the provision of health and pensions.
The coverage of health services was extended to the whole family and to low-income groups that were unattended under
the previous system. In relation to the pension system, employees were given the option of choosing between the old
pay-as-you-go system or the new fully funded system provided by private pension funds.
11
Strictly speaking, severance payments are also deferred wages.

7
income equation. The hypothesis is that the employer may transfer non-wage costs to workers
through lower wages.
The upper panel of Figure 1 shows the evolution of severance payments, as well as health
and pension contributions for an average worker as percentage of the basic wage between 1976
and 199613. The middle panel shows the evolution of payroll taxes. These taxes increased by one
percentage point in 1982 (earmarked to SENA) and again by an equal amount in 1989
(earmarked for ICBF). Vacations and extra bonuses have remained constant throughout the
period. The bottom panel adds all these costs together. The cumulative effect shows an
increasing trend until 1990. After the 1990 labor reform, non-wage labor costs fell as a result of
the changes introduced to the legislation related to severance payments. However, since 1994
these costs have increased sharply as a result of the 1993 health and pension reforms.

3. STYLIZED FACTS
Figure 2 displays the unemployment rate for the period 1976-1998. After reaching a peak
in March 1986 (14.6%), unemployment rates declined steadily until 1994 when they were under
8%. Unemployment rates have increased sharply since 1995. The figure for September 2000
(20.5%) is the highest in the modern Colombian economic history. Although much of the
explanation of greater unemployment is related to significant increases in labor supply, this paper
argues that labor demand cannot be ignored. In fact, the increase in the cost of labor -combined
with a relatively high own wage elasticity- had a negative impact on labor demand. However,
this is not the only explanation. The 1990 labor reform has also caused greater employment

12

Of course, if the linkage between payroll taxes is weak or if the external benefits of social security programs are
significant, then partial or complete finance by general revenues may be appropriate. See Kesselman (1995).
13
Workers under “integral salaries” are excluded. After 1991 we ignore workers under pre-1990 contractual terms.

8
volatility in response to economy-wide shocks. This has been the result of greater flexibility in
the creation and destruction of jobs. Kugler (in this volume) addresses this issue in detail.
This paper uses mainly data on output, employment (skilled and unskilled) and wages for
Colombia’s seven largest cities. These variables are available for seven sectors: (1)
manufacturing, (2) electricity and gas, (3) construction, (4) retail, restaurants and hotels, (5)
transportation and communications, (6) financial services, and (7) personal and government
services. The data come from the quarterly National Household Survey (NHS), which has been
conducted uninterruptedly since 1976. Output data come from the quarterly GDP series
processed by DNP.

Employment and Production
Table 1 displays some basic descriptive statistics on urban employment for the period
1976-1996. Manufacturing and personal and governmental services provide 29% and 25% of the
urban jobs, respectively. We use information only for wage earners, which account for 64% of
the total urban workers (62% before the 1990 labor reform). However, there are sharp
differences across sectors. In manufacturing, 76% of the workers earn a monetary wage, while in
retail and restaurants only 50% of the workers do.
We use a measure of skill that includes high school graduates plus all of those with some
tertiary education (all workers with 12 or more years of schooling). By using this definition, the
group of more educated workers represented 23% of urban employment on average between
1992 and 1996. According to Figure 3, this group’s share in total urban employment has
increased steadily since 1976, reflecting the greater educational attainment of the population.
Indeed, average years of schooling have increased continuously during the past two decades. As

9
can be seen in Table 1, skilled workers represent more than 30% of total employment in public
utilities, financial services, and personal and government services. These shares have increased
significantly since 1992.
Figure 4 describes the evolution of employment and production in the Colombian urban
sector. It is interesting to note that after 1991 skilled employment has grown faster than unskilled
employment is most sectors. This has been particularly true in the case of manufacturing, where
employment of unskilled workers has fallen in absolute terms since 1993. The same trend is
observed in the construction sector after 1994. These two sectors combined employ
approximately 35% of the unskilled wage earners in the urban regions.

Factor Prices
Information about labor income received by wage earners (skilled and unskilled) comes
from the National Household Survey. Given that this is not necessarily equal to the total labor
cost paid by the employer (which is the relevant price in the estimation of labor demand) it is
then necessary to quantify non-wage labor costs and construct a measure of the total labor cost.
We do that by using the information contained in Figure 1, which summarizes all non-wage labor
costs, expressed as a percentage of the basic salary. This includes severance payments, payroll
taxes, and contributions for health and pensions on the part of the employer.
It is not entirely clear whether income reported by the individuals surveyed in the NHS
includes benefits such as vacations, mandatory bonuses and severance payments. Nonetheless, it
is probably safe to assume that individuals report their basic pre-tax salary, without benefits. In
order to obtain the total labor cost we add all the non-wage labor costs measured in Figure 1 to
the basic salary reported in the NHS. Implicitly, this means assuming the independence of wage

10
and non-wage costs. We do this based on the results of the next section, which support the idea
that employees do not transfer higher non-wage costs imposed by the legislation through lower
basic salaries. Finally, the overall cost is then deflated using the Producers Price Index. The
procedure is identical for skilled and unskilled workers14. For completeness, we also report the
user cost of capital measured according to a standard methodology described in Cárdenas y
Gutiérrez (1996)15.
Figure 5 shows the evolution of real factor costs by sector. There are three key insights
for the 1990s: First, the cost of labor increased significantly; second, the cost of labor increased
faster than the cost of capital; third, the cost of skilled relative to unskilled labor rose during this
period. In fact, the user cost of capital decreased considerably during the period 1992-1994 as a
result of the reduction in the interest rate and the real currency appreciation. As shown in Table 2
the average annual growth in real labor costs between 1992 and 1996 was 11.4% for skilled
workers and 8.4% for unskilled workers. These rates are substantially higher than the average for
the pre-reform period. In sum, labor costs increased in an unprecedented way after 1990,
especially in the case of skilled workers.

4. Endogeneity of Wage and Non-wage Costs.
As mentioned above, we need to support our assumption that wage and non-wage costs
can be added together ignoring the incidence of payroll taxation on wages. Several authors have
warned against this assumption, arguing that wages and non-wage costs are endogenously
determined. This is the case of Newell and Symons (1987) for the European context and in
14

As mentioned in Section 2, workers with high remuneration (over 10 minimum wages) under ‘integral salaries’
contracts have much lower non-wage costs (33.8% of the basic salary vs. 52% in contracts with full benefits). However,
the NHS survey does not provide information on the contract type so we assume that all workers are paid full benefits.

11
Gruber (1995) for Chile. Their view is that ignoring this issue can be misleading when making
policy recommendations.
There are different ways to deal with this potential endogeneity. Some authors estimate
an equation of the wage rate as a function of the payroll tax rate and a constant. If the coefficient
on the payroll tax rate variable is equal to –1, then they conclude that taxes are fully shifted into
wages. This is the procedure used by Gruber (1995).
Here we adopt a somewhat different procedure. We estimate the determinants of wages
based on information from the National Household Surveys. Every two years (in June) the NHS
includes a special module on informality where workers report whether they are covered by the
social security system. We use the data from the June 1988, 1992 and 1996 surveys (including
the special module) to estimate a Mincer-type income equation. The regressions are based on
data for each one of the surveyed workers and allow us to understand whether an individual's
wage, given certain personal characteristics, is negatively affected when the individual
contributes to the social security system16.
Our assumption is that if employers transfer the non-wage labor cost to employees, then
workers that are registered in the social security system would have lower wages (after
controlling for other personal characteristics that may affect wages) than those that are not
registered in the social security system17. In particular, we estimated the following equation:
ln wt = β o + ∑ β i pers + β 5 dumss + β 6 mw + β 7 dumss * mw + ∑ β i sec+ ∑ β i city + ε t
i

i

(1)

i

where pers is a vector of personal characteristics that include average years of schooling, gender,
and experience; dumss is a dummy variable which takes a unitary value when the individual is
15

Our measure of the user cost of capital is higher than the one obtained by Pombo (1997), who estimates the
depreciation rates (and the corresponding tax deductions) for different asset types in the manufacturing sector.
16
The percentage of workers with health coverage rose to 60% in 1996 from 50% in 1988.

12
registered in the social security system (i.e. the employer pays social security contributions); mw
is a dummy variable that controls for individuals that earn the minimum wage18 (payroll taxes
cannot be transferred to these workers in the form of lower wages); sec is a vector of dummy
variables that account for 9 economic sectors and city is a vector of dummy variables for each of
the seven main cities.
Table 3 presents the results of estimating equation (1). The adjustment of the regression
is high (R-squares are around 0.55) given the total number of observations (approximately
25.000 depending on the year). The personal characteristics variables appear with the correct
sign and are statistically significant. In particular, returns to education are positive (but low) and
the coefficient is highly significant. The positive coefficient of the dummy variable for gender
indicates that given other personal characteristics, labor income is relatively higher for men. In
turn, experience has a positive but decreasing impact on wages. According to the sign of the
coefficient, individuals that earn the minimum wage have lower incomes than what would be
predicted by their personal characteristics. The dummy variables that account for the economic
sectors and the city of location also come out significant.
Turning to the variables of interest for this exercise, for a given set of personal
characteristics, workers covered by the social security system have higher wages than uncovered
workers. This is of interest because it suggests that employers might not transfer social security
contributions to workers in the form of lower wages. However, it is possible that social security
contributions are proxying for self-selection and unobserved characteristics of the workers,
biasing the results. Thus, it is unclear whether the results of this section provide the necessary
support in order to use our measure total labor costs, which is simply the sum of wage and non-

17
18

Ribero and Meza (1997) and Sánchez and Núñez (1998) have estimated Mincer-type income equations for Colombia.
For the purpose of this exercise, the minimum wage in 1988 was $28.000, in 1992 $72.000 and in 1996 $155.000.

13
wage costs (self-selection may be hiding the true effect of endogeneity bias). We take a
pragmatic approach and estimate the labor demand equations with only wages, and compare the
results with regressions that include both wages and non-wage costs added together.

5. STATIC LABOR DEMAND
The purpose of this section is to measure the own wage elasticities of the demand for
labor, as well as the elasticities of substitution between different factors of production19. The
literature is rich in terms of functional forms that can be used for the estimation. If changes in the
elasticity of substitution are of interest, the Generalized Leontief (GL) function is a common
choice. The GL specification is also normally used when information is available for more than
two factors of production20.
The derived factor demands from a GL cost function (see Appendix 1) can be written as:
1

 p jt  2
x it
 + α i yt + γ i t .
= ∑ bij 

yt
j
 p it 

(2)

where xit is the quantity of factor i used in period t, yt is output in period t, pit is the price of input
i in period t, and t is a time trend. Changes in the input-output ratio can be the result of: (a)
changes in relative factor prices; (b) changes in the scale of production (if the production
function is not homothetic); and (c) technological change. Diewert (1971) has shown that the GL
cost function corresponds to a fixed coefficients technology (no factor substitution) if bij = 0 for
all i ≠ j. Also, the production function exhibits constant returns to scale if αi = 0 for all i (i.e., the
function is homothetic). Clearly, factor-augmenting technological change does not occur if γi = 0

19

Defined as the effect of a change in relative factor prices on relative input use of the two factors, holding output and
other factor prices constant.
20
See Hamermesh (1986).

14
for all i. Based on the estimated bij’s, we then calculate the own wage elasticity for factor i (ηii)
as:
y ∑ bij ( p j / p i )

1/ 2

η ij = −

j ≠i

.

2 xi

(3)

In turn, the Hicks-Allen partial elasticities of substitution between input i and input j (σij = σji)
can be easily calculated. The appropriate expressions in the case of the GL technology are (sj is
the cost share of input j):
 pj
y
bij 
2 xi  p i
σ ij =
sj

1

2

 ,

(4)

for all i ≠ j. In this case, the elasticity of substitution is not constant across time. In fact, as can be
observed in equation (4), its value depends on the inputs quantities and prices. Finally, the
elasticity of input i with respect to output is given by:

εi =1+

αi y2
xi

.

(5)

Thus, when the technology exhibits constant returns to scale the output elasticity is equal to one.

RESULTS
This section summarizes the main results of the estimation of static labor demand
equations with quarterly data from the urban Household Surveys. The estimation is carried out
first with data for the manufacturing sector alone, based on a system of two equations for the
demand of skilled and unskilled labor. The equations use the number of hours worked as the
dependent variable. We then turn to the data for the seven largest metropolitan cities, using a

15
similar framework but dropping capital as a factor of production. In both cases we deal with
specifications that use relative input prices (skilled and unskilled labor), so the effects of non
wage labor costs vanish (percentage-wise their impact is identical for each type of labor).

MANUFACTURING
Table 4 presents the results on the factor demands for skilled and unskilled labor.21
According to the GL specification, the system of two equations describing the behavior of the
input-output ratios was estimated using a (Gauss) Full Information Maximum Likelihood
Procedure (FIML). In order to correct for first order serial autocorrelation of the error the lagged
residuals were added to each equation (AR1).
The system was estimated with and without the symmetry restrictions (bij = bji).
Conveniently, Theil has shown that minus twice the log of the likelihood ratio (i.e. maximum of
the likelihood function imposing symmetry over the maximum of the likelihood function in the
unconstrained case) has a Chi-square (χ2) distribution (with degrees of freedom equal to the
number of restrictions imposed)22. The test rejected the null hypothesis of symmetry. Also, in the
estimations the coefficient γi came out not significantly different from zero rejecting the
hypothesis of factor-augmenting technological progress.
The estimated bij’s (excluding the trend term from the equations) are significantly
different from zero, rejecting the existence of a fixed proportion technology (a Leontief
production function). Importantly, the signs of the coefficients indicate that the two types of
labor are substitutes. The hypothesis of constant returns to scale is also rejected at high levels of
significance. The estimated αi coefficients are all positive and significant. This implies that both
21
22

In this case, we are using total labor costs as the relevant price, i.e., salary plus non-wage costs.
See López (1980).

16
employment/output ratios increase as the scale of production is expanded (i.e. the production
function is non-homothetic).
Based on the estimated bij’s we then compute the relevant elasticities that, according to
the formulae, are time dependent. We report the elasticities for four periods: 1976-1981, 19821985, 1986-1991, and 1992-1996. The two types of labor show a decreasing degree of
substitutability. Own wage elasticities are negative.23 For the 1992-1996 period their value is
around –0.35 for skilled workers and –0.4 for unskilled workers. This means that a 10%
reduction in wages is related to a 3.5-percent increase in the demand skilled and 4-percent
increase in the demand for unskilled labor24. Output elasticities are positive during the whole
period but seem to have decreased with time. In particular a 1-percent increase in production is
related to a 2% increase in skilled labor demand and a 1-percent increase in unskilled labor
demand.25.

SEVEN METROPOLITAN AREAS
Table 5 shows the results of the estimation in the case of the demand for hours worked by
skilled and unskilled labor (without capital) in the seven largest metropolitan areas.26 Besides
changes in relative prices, we added a demand shifter in the equation. In particular we introduced
the investment rate for the urban economy into equation (2), in order to assess any possible
changes in labor demand holding constant relative prices.
23

The change in the wage elasticies over the four periods of time considered here is statistically significant at 95%
confidence level.
24
The results using a CES function are somewhat different. In this case, a 10% decrease in wages is related to a 0.8%
increase in skilled labor demand and a 1.7% increase in unskilled labor demand respectively. Again, the two types of
labor show increasing substitutability, just as in the case of capital and unskilled labor. On the other hand skilled labor
and capital are complements. These results are available upon request.
25
The results when splitting up into two subsamples (after and before the reform) are statistically insignificant.

17
Again, the Wald test rejected the null hypothesis so we estimated the bij's without
symmetry restrictions. The coefficients turned out significantly different from zero, rejecting the
existence of a fixed proportion technology. The estimated αi coefficient for skilled employment
is positive and significant. This implies that skilled employment/output ratio increases as the
scale of production is expanded (i.e. the production function is non-homothetic). Based on the
estimated bij's we computed the relevant elasticities. The two types of labor show a decreasing
degree of substitutability as can be seen in Figure 6. On average, the elasticity of substitution
between skilled and unskilled employment was 0.93 between 1976 and 1996.
Own-wage elasticities are higher in this case than in the manufacturing sector. In
particular, a 10% decrease in wages is related to a 4.5% increase in skilled labor demand and a
5.1% increase in unskilled labor demand.27 In the case of unskilled labor, the own-wage elasticity
has increased in absolute value during the post-reform period to 0.51 from 0.46 in the pre-reform
period. On the other hand, output elasticities are positive. A one-percent increase in output is
related to a 1,8% increase in skilled labor demand and a one-percent increase in unskilled labor
demand. Higher investment rates increase both skilled and unskilled labor demand. Yet, this
effect has been slightly higher in the case of skilled employment.
Finally, we estimated equation (1) adding a dummy for the post reform period (alone and
interacted with the relative prices). The coefficients on these variables did not turn out
significant. This means that the effects of the reforms are already captured in the changes in
relative prices or in the demand shifter that was added to the equation. The results (not reported)
on these regressions are available upon request.
26

Table 5 shows the results in which total labor costs (salary plus non-wage costs) are used as the relevant price.
However the same exercise was performed using wages only, i.e., excluding non-labor costs. In this case, results are
fairly similar.

18

6. DYNAMIC LABOR DEMAND
The existence of adjustment costs of changing employment (net changes) and changes in
firing and hiring (gross changes) implies that firms do not adjust instantly to changes in the
variables mentioned in the previous section. To capture this issue, we estimated a dynamic labor
demand equation that is derived in Appendix 2:
nt = c + α 0 yt + α1 y t −1+ β 0 [ wt + nwt ] + β1 [ wt −1 + nwt −1] + γ t nt −1 + ut

(6)

where n is employment, y is a rolling autoregression forecast of production, w is a rolling
autoregression forecast of basic wages, nw are non-wage labor costs that do not affect the path of
employment adjustment, and u is an error term. Non-wage labor costs include vacations,
bonuses, health and pension contributions and payroll taxes (all added as % of basic wage).
Alternatively, we also estimate equation 6 ignoring non-wage labor costs. In turn, γt is a measure
of the costs of adjustment, which depends on the regulations that affect the path of employment.
Following Burgess and Dolado (1989) we interact different types of regulation with nt-1. In
particular, we assume that:

γ t = γ 0 + γ 1 R1t + γ 2 R 2 t

(7)

where R1 denotes severance payments (expressed as a percentage of the basic salary) and R2
denotes dismissal costs (indemnity for dismissal without just cause expressed in terms of the
number of monthly wages for workers with 10 or more years in the firm28). As mentioned in
Section 2, severance payments fell as a result of the 1990 labor reform, while the indemnity for

27

The corresponding own-wage elasticities in the case in which wages (excluding non-wage costs) are used as the
relevant price are 4.3% and 5.0%.
28
This variable is taken as a proxy for dismissal costs for all workers. Although desirable, we were unable to redefine the
dependent variable in order to measure employment of workers with 10 or more years in their current job only.

19
unjust dismissal increased29. These two changes in the regulation should have had opposite
effects on the costs of adjustment. The reduction in severance payments should have reduced the
costs of adjustment (a reduction in γt), while the increase in dismissal costs should have worked
in the opposite direction. Importantly, the 1993 pension and health reform increased labor costs
but should not have affected the costs of adjustment.
This formulation is useful in order to assess the impact of a one-unit increase in the costs
of regulations on the level of employment (the β’s) and that of this increase in the cost per
worker on the path of employment adjustment (the γ’s). In the former case, we can infer the
impact or short-run multiplier coefficient (β0) and the long or equilibrium multiplier (β0 + β1)/(1-

γt). Moreover, we can test whether these multipliers changed as a result of the structural reforms.
This can be done as a quasi-natural experiment by including a post-reform dummy interacted
with wages and the lagged employment measure.

6.1. Econometric Results
Table 6 presents the results of the estimation of equation (6) with aggregated quarterly
data from the urban household surveys. In order to avoid potential endogeneity in the shocking
variables, we used rolling-regression (i.e. continuously updated) forecasts of the product demand
and wages instead of their actual values. In the case of output, the forecast is based on fourth
order autoregression. Wages are forecasted with a third order autoregression30.
The first three columns show the results of estimating (6) for total urban employment.
Unfortunately, we cannot include R1 and R2 in the same regression due to collinearity of the

29

However, the elimination of the right to sue for reinstatement with back pay should have reduced the expected firing
costs.
30
In both cases we chose the highest order with a significant coefficient.

20
variables. The results are of interest. The first three columns indicate that the product elasticity of
employment is 0.57, while the wage elasticity is zero in the short run (impact) but –0.37 in the
long run. The same regression was performed ignoring non-wage costs (available upon request).
The estimated elasticities are practically identical. The results also suggest that the changes in the
regulations did not have an impact on adjustment costs. In fact, the coefficient on lagged
employment indicates that quarterly changes in employment are on average only 40% of the
desired adjustment, irrespective of the changes in the regulation.
The remaining regressions separate skilled and unskilled employment. The results
suggest that output and price (in absolute value) elasticities are larger for skilled workers (also in
the regression without non-wage costs). The costs of adjustment were not affected by changes in
the regulations regarding severance payments and dismissal costs for either type of worker.
Moreover, when a post-reform dummy was interacted with the wage variables the estimated
coefficient did not come out significant. This result gives support to the point made in the
previous section, suggesting that structural reform did not affect the price elasticity of labor
demand. In this sense, structural reforms did have an impact on labor demand through its effect
on relative prices alone31.
In sum, the results of this section suggest that regulations add to static labor costs rather
than to the dynamics of employment adjustment. Therefore, in the next two sections we will
revisit the static labor demand estimations, using micro data. Before we move in that direction
we present the results of some simulation exercises based on the dynamic labor demand
estimation. The simulations are illustrative of the effects of different changes that could be
introduced to labor legislation.

21
6.2. Simulations
In this section, we perform a simulation exercise in order to assess how changes in
payroll taxes and labor costs affected employment growth in Colombia. For this purpose, we
used equations (3), (4) and (5) in Table 6 to estimate what would have happened to employment
had health and pensions contributions not been increased during the 1993 labor reform.
Figure 7 shows the fitted value of employment according to the dynamic labor demand
specifications presented in Table 6. Panel A shows the results in terms of total employment,
while panel B and C report unskilled and skilled employment, respectively. As employment is in
logs, the difference between the two lines represents the percentage change. According to this
information also presented in Table A2, during the last quarter of 1996 total employment would
have been 1.3% higher if health and pensions contributions had not changed during 1993.
Similarly, unskilled employment would have been 1.85% higher and skilled employment 2.2%
higher.
Figure 8 depicts the results of a similar exercise. In this case we simulate what would
have occurred if the 9% payroll tax had been eliminated in 1993. In this case, employment would
have been 1.3% higher during the last quarter of 1996, compared to what actually happened. The
figures for unskilled and skilled employment are 1.8% and 0.9%, respectively.

7. LABOR DEMAND IN A PANEL OF MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENTS
This section presents some results of the estimation of a homogeneous labor demand
equation with a balanced panel of Colombian manufacturing firms. The panel was obtained from

31

Slaughter (1997) has found that labor demand has been growing less elastic over time in the U.S.

22
the Annual Manufacturing Survey (EAM) and includes 2570 firms throughout the period 1978199132. The total labor cost was obtained directly for the surveys by adding wages and other
benefits (prestaciones). In the specification of the model we follow Bentolila and Saint Paul
(1992). In particular, we estimate:

nit =α 0+α1ni ,t −1 + α 2 wit + α 3 pit + α 4 k it + α 5 dyit + α 6t + ε it

(8)

where nit is the log total employment by firm i at time t, wit is the log of wage paid by the firm
(including benefits) deflated by the producers’ price index (common to all firms), pit is the log of
the price of intermediate goods consumed by the firm (also deflated by the producers’ price
index), kit is the log of stock of capital, dyit is the growth rate in gross production by the firm, and

t is a time trend.
The results are reported in Table 7. The first and second columns show the results of the
estimation with least squares and instrumental variables, respectively. In the latter, we use the
lagged values of employment and intermediate goods’ prices as instruments (both at time t-2), as
well as the contemporaneous growth rate in government consumption and the stock of capital.
The results confirm the negative but low value (in absolute terms) of the short-run wage
elasticity of labor demand in the manufacturing sector (around -0.05). However, the long-run
value of this elasticity is substantially higher in absolute terms (-2.27). The long-run elasticity
with respect to other inputs’ prices is positive (1.36), suggesting labor and intermediate goods are
substitutes in production.
Growth in gross output seems to have a statistically significant effect on employment.
Indeed, the results of the estimation indicate that a one-percentage point increase in the rate of
output growth results in a 0,24-percentage growth in employment. This result is in line with the

32

The dataset consists of annual observations at the firm level.

23
time series evidence of the previous section. In order to correct heteroskedasticity problems we
controlled for fixed effects by adding 28 sectorial dummy variables to the equation. The results
remained virtually unchanged.
Finally, we interacted the list of regressors with a dummy variable that captures
differential responses to the business cycle. The dummy variable takes a unitary value when
output growth for the firm is over 4% and zero when growth is below 2%. If the growth rate is
between 2% and 4%, the assigned value at time t depends on growth at t-1.
The results suggest that the wage elasticity of labor demand decreases (in absolute terms)
during expansions, while the elasticity with respect to the price of intermediate inputs increases.
Thus, an increase in the cost of intermediate goods induces greater substitutability vis-à-vis labor
during expansions than during recessions. Lagged employment shows the expected result, lower
inertia in expansion, and the coefficient is highly significant. Lastly, the results suggest an
asymmetric labor demand response to the business cycle conditions. The impact of output
growth on employment is larger during recessions than during expansions.
In sum, labor demand elasticities derived from establishment data are lower (in absolute
value) than the ones obtained with aggregate data for the manufacturing sector. This is true both
in the case of own wage and output elasticities. The results of this section also indicate that the
demand for labor is more elastic in downturns than during expansions. This could explain why
unemployment rates rise very rapidly but take a long time to fall, a pattern that has been found in
Colombia.

8. LABOR DEMAND IN A PANEL OF 92 MANUFACTURING SECTORS

24
This section estimates equation (8) using data from 92 industrial sectors (corresponding
to the 4-digit CIIU classification) from 1978 to 1995. In this case, the log of value added replaces
the growth rate in gross production. Total labor costs (wages plus non-labor costs) are used as
the relevant price variable.33 The results are presented in Table 8 were all the variables are in
logs. The first column presents the basic equation estimated by ordinary least squares. The
second column corrects fixed effects and the third column uses instrumental variables, where
lagged values of employment, intermediate goods' prices (both at time t-2) and the stock of
capital (at time t-1) as well as the contemporaneous values of the stock of capital and wages are
the instruments.
The estimated real wage elasticity is higher (-0.6)34 in absolute terms than the value
estimated with the firm-level data. Using IV the long-run wage elasticity is –1.43. The elasticity
with respect to input prices is on average -1.2 depending on the method of estimation. Contrary
to the firm-level results, the negative sign suggests that labor and intermediate goods are
complements in production. Value added has a positive and statistically significant effect on
employment. According to these results, a one-percent increase in value added results in a 0.45
percentage growth in employment.
Finally, the last three columns in Table 8 show the results when the basic equation is
interacted with a dummy variable equal to 1 from 1992 to 1995 (and 0 otherwise) in order to
assess for possible changes in the coefficients after the implementation of structural reform. The
coefficient on lagged employment indicates that employment has been more flexible since 1992
(lower inertia).

33

The same exercise was performed using wages only as the relevant price. Results are virtually identical and are
available upon request.
34
This elasticity is equal to -0.61 in the case in which non-labor costs are excluded from labor costs.

25
On the other hand, the elasticity with respect to total wage seems to have decreased (in
absolute value) after 1991. Similarly, the response of employment to changes in value added
virtually disappeared during the post-reform period. The elasticity with respect to material prices
turns out to be positive during the post-reform period, indicating that labor and intermediate
goods are substitutes in production. Interestingly, the positive response of employment to the
capital stock increased significantly after the new labor regulation was implemented.

9. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has analyzed the determinants of the demand for labor in Colombia’s urban
sector (seven largest metropolitan areas) using different sources of data. The main focus of the
paper is to estimate the own-wage elasticities of labor demand in order to quantify the effects of
payroll taxation on employment generation. This is a critical area for policy design, given the
abnormal levels of unemployment that the country is facing.
Some have argued that the relevant elasticities are low, discouraging policymakers from
undertaking major reforms. The common belief is that the efficiency gains associated with labor
reform are relatively weak while the political costs of changing current labor legislation are very
high. This paper argues that, quite on the contrary, the payoff of reducing labor costs is
substantial.
In order to reach that conclusion, the paper analyses the impact of recent changes in the
costs of employment and measures their impact on labor demand. The estimated wage elasticities
are summarized in Table 9. Using the more reliable quarterly time series obtained from the
National Household Surveys these elasticities range from –0.45 to –0.52, depending on the type

26
of labor. However, the elasticities fall (in absolute terms) when the estimation uses a dynamic
framework. In this case, the long run own-wage elasticity is –0.37.
In the case of the manufacturing sector the elasticities are somewhat lower. Using the
time series data they range between –0,35 (skilled) and –0.40 (unskilled). In a panel of 91
manufacturing sectors the estimated value is –0.6 (in the short run) and –1.43 (in the long run).
These results change dramatically in a regression that uses establishment data. In this case the
short run elasticity is only –0.05, although its long-run counterpart is –2.27.
Output elasticities are larger. In the static labor demand framework the estimates are
close to 2 for skilled workers and 1 for unskilled labor. In the dynamic specification they are 1
for skilled and 0.6 for unskilled employment. Again, the elasticities fall when panel data is used.
The paper also analyses the impact of changes in the regulations on adjustment costs. The
conclusion is that changes in severance payments and costs of dismissal, associated with the
1990 labor reform, did not affect the path of employment adjustment. Using this framework, we
also conclude that structural reforms did not change the relevant elasticities. This means that the
main effect of regulatory changes affected labor demand though their direct impact on labor
costs. Since these costs have increased it is likely that the net effect of labor, health and pension
reforms has been a reduction in employment generation. According to the estimated elasticities
in the dynamic framework, an elimination of the 9% payroll taxes could result in a 1,3% increase
in employment in the urban areas. Of course, the impact is much greater when the elasticities
derived from the static exercise are used. In this case, a 10% reduction in labor costs could result
in a 5% increase in labor demand.
Using a panel of manufacturing establishments we also concluded that the wage elasticity
of labor demand increases (in absolute terms) during contractions. The impact of output growth

27
on employment is also larger during recessions than during expansions. In this sense, we found
an asymmetric labor demand response to the business cycle conditions. Lastly, we did not find
evidence of a significant effect of structural reforms (i.e. trade liberalization) on the relevant
labor demand elasticities. We conclude that the effects of reforms on labor demand were the
result of changes in relative prices alone.

28
Acknowledgments
This paper was mostly written while the authors were affiliated with Fedesarrollo in Bogotá,
Colombia. We are grateful to Juan Mauricio Ramirez, Daniel Hamermesh, Carmen Pagés,
Giuseppe Bertola, James Heckman and an anonymous NBER reviewer for comments and
suggestions. Finally we would like to acknowledge Jairo Núñez for his help in processing the
data for this project.

29

REFERENCES
Bentolila, S., and G. Saint-Paul (1992) “The Macroeconomic Impact of Flexible Labor
Contracts, with an Application to Spain”, European Economic Review, Vol. 36, 10131053.
Bernal, Raquel, M. Cárdenas, J. Núñez, and F. Sánchez (1997) “Macroeconomic Performance
and Inequality in Colombia: 1976-1996” Fedesarrollo, Working Papers Series, Number 1.
Blanchflower, D. and A. Oswald (1994). The Wage Curve. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Burda, M. (1991) “Monopolistic Competition, Costs of Adjustment, and the Behavior of
European Manufacturing Employment”, European Economic Review, Vol 35, pp. 61-79.
Burgess, S. and Juan Dolado (1989) "Intertemporal Rules with Variable Speed of Adjustment:
An Application to U.K. Manufacturing Employment", The Economic Journal (June), pp.
347-365.
Cárdenas, M. and Olivera, M. (1995) “La Crítica de Lucas y la Inversión en Colombia: Nueva
evidencia,” Ensayos sobre Política Económica, June.
____, Andrés Escobar and Catalina Gutiérrez (1995a) "La Contribución del Infraestructura a la
Actividad Económica en Colombia, Ensayos Sobre Política Económica, December,
1995.
____, Andrés Escobar and Catalina Gutiérrez (1995b) “Productividad y Competitividad en
Colombia: 1950-1994” mimeo, Fedesarrollo.
____, and Catalina Gutiérrez, (1996) “Impacto de las reformas estructurales sobre la eficiencia y
la equidad: la experiencia colombiana en los noventa”, en Coyuntura Económica, XXVI,
4, December.
Diewert, W. E. (1971) “An Application of Shephard Duality Theorem: A Generalized Leontief
Production Function,” Journal of Political Economy, 79, 481-507.
Gonzaga, Gustavo (1997) “The Effects of Openness on Industrial Employment in Brazil” in M.
Cárdenas (Editor) Empleo y Distribución del Ingreso en América Latina: ¿Hemos
avanzado?, forthcoming.
Gruber, Jonathan (1995) “The Incidence of Payroll Taxation: Evidence from Chile”, Working
Paper Series No. 5053, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, March.
Farné, Stefano y Oskar A. Nupia (1996) “Reforma Laboral, Empleo e Ingresos de los
Trabajadores Temporales en Colombia”, Coyuntura Social, No. 15, Bogotá, Noviembre.

30

Guash, J. Luis (1997) “Labor Reform and Job Creation: The Unfinished Agenda in Latin
American and Caribbean Countries”, mimeo, The World Bank, Washington, April.
Hamermesh, D. S. (1986) "The Demand for Labor in the Long-Run", in Handbook of Labor
Economics, eds. O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, Vol. 1. North Holland.
____, (1993) Labor Demand, Princeton: Princeton, NJ.
____ and Gerard A. Pfann (1996) “Turnover and the Dynamics of Labour Demand”, Economica,
Vol. 63, No. 251, pp. 359-367, August.
Hicks, John R. (1963) The Theory of Wages, New York: St. Martin´s Press.
Kesselman, Jonathan R. (1995) “A Public Finance Perspective on Payroll Taxes”, mimeo,
Department of Economics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, December.
Kugler, Adriana D. and Mauricio Cárdenas (1998) “The Effects of Firing Costs on Turnover:
The Colombian Labor Market Reform as a Natural Experiment”, mimeo, Fedesarrollo.
Lancaster, Tony (1990) The Econometric Analysis of Transitional Data, Econometric Society
Monographs, 17, Cambridge University Press.
Layard, Richard, Nickel S., y Jackman R (1994) “Unemplyment. Macroeconomic Performance
and the Labour Market”, Oxford University Press.
Lora, Eduardo and Martha L. Henao (1995) “Efectos Económicos y Sociales de la Legislación
Laboral”, Coyuntura Social, No. 13, Bogotá, Noviembre.
Lora, Eduardo y Carmen Pagés (1997) “La Legislación Laboral en el Proceso de Reformas
Estructurales de América Latina y el Caribe”, in M. Cárdenas (Editor) Empleo y
Distribución del Ingreso en América Latina: ¿Hemos avanzado?, forthcoming.
Newell, A. and Symons, J. S. V. (1987) “Corporatism, Laissez-faire, and the Rise in
Unemployment” European-Economic-Review; 31(3), April, pages 567-601.
Nickell, Steve (1986) “Dynamic Models of Labor Demand”, Chapter 9, Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol. II, pp. 473-522.
Ocampo, José Antonio (1987) “El regimen prestacional del sector privado” in J. A. Ocampo and
Manuel Ramírez (eds.) El Probelam Laboral Colombiano, Informe de la Misión Chenery,
Contraloría General de la República-DNP.
Pombo, Carlos (1997) “How high is the user cost of capital for the Colombian industrial
entrepreneur?” mimeo, University of Illinois.

31
Ribero, Rocío and Claudia Meza (1997) "Ingresos laborales de hombres y mujeres en Colombia:
1976-1995", Archivos de Macroeconomía, documento # 62. Departamento Nacional de
Planeación.
Sánchez, Fabio and Jairo Núñez (1998) "La Curva de Salarios para Colombia. Una Estimación
de las Relaciones entre el Desempleo, la Inflación y los Ingresos Laborales, 1984-1996",
Archivos de Macroeconomía, documento # 80. Departamento Nacional de Planeación.
Schaffner, Julie A. (1996) “Urban Job Stability in Developing Countries: Evidence from
Colombia”, mimeo, Department of Economics, Stanford University, October.
Slaughter, Matthew J. (1997) “International Trade and Labor-Demand Elasticities” NBER
working paper # 6262.

Appendix 1. Generalized Leontief (GL) Cost Function
The GL cost function can be written as:
(A1)

C ( P, Q, t ) = Q ∑∑ bij p1i / 2 p1j / 2 + Q 2 ∑αi pi + Qt ∑ γ i pi
i

j

i

i

where Q denotes output and pi is the price of input i (t is time). The function is homogeneous of
degree one in prices and does not impose symmetry, concavity or homotheticity. Assuming
price-taking behavior in factor prices and using Shephard’s Lemma one can derive costminimizing input demand functions:
(A2)

Xi =

∂C
= ∑ bij p j / pi
∂Pi
j

1/ 2

Q + α i Q 2 + γ i Qt

where Xi is the quantity demanded of input i. Factor demands can be expressed in terms of inputoutput ratios:
(A3)

X ti
= ∑ bij p jt / pit
Qt
j

1/ 2

+ α i Qt + γ i t + µ it .

Appendix 2. Analytical Framework for the Dynamic Labor Demand Estimations
A Cobb-Douglas production function can be written as:

(A4)
Yt = ANtα Kt(1−α )
where A denotes a technological parameter, L the level of total employment, K the capital stock
and α the proportion of employment in production.
First order conditions can be written as:

32

Wt =

(A5)

δ Yt
= α ANt*α −1Kt1−α
δ Nt

Expressing equation (A5) in logarithms:

ln Wt = ln α A − (1 − α ) ln Nt* + (1 − α ) ln Kt

(A6)
Rearranging terms:

(A7)
ln Wt = ln Yt + ln α A + ln A + α ln Nt* − (1 − α ) ln Nt
If lowercase letters denote logs, then (A7) is equivalent to:
c + yt + wt
nt* =
(A8)
(1 − α )
nt* = c + α yt + β wt

(A9)

An adjustment equation satisfies:
nt − nt −1 = (1 − λ )(nt* − nt −1) + ε t −1

(A10)
Rearranging terms:

ε
n − nt −1
+ nt −1 − t −1
nt* = t
(1 − λ )
(1 − λ )

(A11)
Substituting (A9) into (A11):
(A12)
Rearranging terms:
(A13)

εt
nt − nt −1
+ nt −1 −
= c + α yt + β wt
(1 − λ )
(1 − λ )

nt = (1 − λ )c + α (1 − λ ) yt + (1 − λ ) β wt + λnt −1 + ε t

We now suppose firms have rational expectations and nte satisfying the following condition:
(A14)

nte = (1 − λ )nt + λ nte−1

where superscript e denotes expectations. Substituting recursively for ete− s , we can obtain:
(1 − λ )
nte =
nt
(A15)
(1 − λ L)
where L is the lag operator. Then (A13) can be rewritten as:
(A16)
nt = (1 − λ )c + α yt − α λ yt −1 + β wt − λ β wt −1 + λ nt −1 − λ 2nt − 2 + ε t − λ ε t −1
which is the estimated equation.

Table 1

Urban employment shares
Sector

Share in total
employment
1976 - 1991 1992 - 1996

Share of wage-earners
in total employment
1976 - 1991
1992 - 1996

Share of skilled workers
in total employment
1976 - 1991
1992 - 1996

Skilled / Unskilled
employment
1976 - 1991 1992 - 1996

Manufacturing

29.75

27.57

76.10

76.53

10.45

13.96

0.118

0.162

Electricity and gas

1.08

0.97

98.90

98.81

23.87

33.62

0.329

0.514

Construction

6.46

6.31

64.21

58.84

9.46

12.45

0.106

0.143

Retail, restaurants and
hotels

19.65

21.15

50.35

52.80

10.96

15.81

0.126

0.188

Transportation and
Communications

7.12

7.03

70.03

68.12

11.09

14.69

0.127

0.173

Financial services

8.48

9.47

77.36

79.23

30.10

37.95

0.443

0.615

Personal and Govt. Services

25.83

25.73

56.14

59.41

30.17

38.27

0.441

0.622

Total

98.36

98.23

62.66

64.06

17.63

23.28

0.218

0.304

Source: NHS

Table 2
Annual Average Growth in Total Real Labor Cost (%)
Sector

Unskilled Employment (less than 12 years of education)
1977-1985 1986-1991
1992-1996
1977-1996

Manufacturing

1.80

-1.45

8.09

2.40

Electricity and gas

1.73

-0.20

10.93

3.45

Construction

3.03

-1.16

9.89

3.49

Retail, restaurants and
hotels

2.03

-1.08

8.08

2.61

Transportation and
Communications

2.23

-0.97

8.28

2.78

Financial services

1.11

-1.84

7.49

1.82

Personal and Govt. Services

1.58

-1.38

8.85

2.51

Total urban

1.65

-1.34

8.36

2.43

Sector

Skilled Employment (12 years of education or more)
1977-1985 1986-1991
1992-1996
1977-1996

Manufacturing

-1.96

-2.78

11.85

1.25

Electricity and gas

3.58

-2.34

15.58

4.81

Construction

-0.32

0.55

13.41

3.37

Retail, restaurants and
hotels

-1.68

-0.59

10.04

1.58

Transportation and
Communications

0.73

-0.11

10.79

3.00

Financial services

-1.38

-0.56

12.83

2.42

Personal and Govt. Services

-1.14

-1.61

11.81

1.95

Total urban

-1.63

-1.71

11.36

1.59

Table 3
Mincer Income Equation

1988

1992

1996

Constant

10.0354
(576.90)

11.2707
(624.09)

12.0258
(670.16)

Education

0.044
(52.01)

0.0182
(30.54)

0.0181
(31.91)

Gender

0.1671
(23.45)

0.1688
(22.11)

0.1585
(20.18)

Experience

0.019
(24.37)

0.0185
(21.57)

0.0172
(20.36)

Experience2

-0.0002
(-20.53)

-0.0003
(-21.43)

-0.0002
(-18.80)

Dummy health
coverage

0.0628
(6.84)

0.1421
(13.93)

0.1838
(18.63)

Health coverage*
minimum wage

0.2848
(20.48)

0.2342
(15.52)

0.1320
(8.31)

-1.0045
(-107.65)

-1.1018
(-106.29)

-1.0907
(-99.55)

Agriculture

0.1267
(5.08)

0.1114
(3.73)

0.4358
(1.28)

Mining

0.1865
(4.13)

0.4505
(3.73)

0.2378
(3.90)

Electricity

0.0547
(1.45)

0.0398
(0.92)

0.1868
(4.32)

Construction

0.0874
(5.73)

0.0602
(3.64)

0.0733
(4.48)

-0.0095
(-1.02)

0.0367
(3.61)

0.0449
(4.20)

Communications

0.0463
(3.14)

0.0751
(4.65)

0.0742
(4.66)

Financial Serv.

0.0951
(6.28)

0.1564
(9.78)

0.1545
(9.85)

Government Serv

-0.0003
(-0.00)

-0.0009
(-0.09)

0.0413
(3.97)

Other Services

-0.1665
(-0.43)

0.1180
(0.70)

0.4188
(2.38)

Barranquilla

-0.0083
(-0.77)

0.0193
(1.72)

0.0374
(3.17)

Bucaramanga

0.0065
(0.55)

-0.0504
(-4.05)

-0.0662
(-5.23)

Manizales

0.0264
(1.59)

-0.0646
(-3.67)

-0.1159
(-6.77)

Medellin

0.0594
(6.63)

-0.0256
(-2.50)

-0.0018
(-0.18)

Cali

0.0508
(4.77)

0.0250
(2.15)

0.0189
(1.52)

-0.1405
(-9.22)

-0.1943
(-12.38)

-0.0781
(-4.87)

29476
0.5504

26900
0.5526

25887
0.5269

Log (Wages)

Minimum wage

Retail

Pasto
No. observations
R2

Table 4
FACTOR DEMANDS: GL Specification
MANUFACTURING SECTOR
1977:1-1996:4
Constant

Skilled employment
Unskilled employment

-0.7736
(-3.06)
1.2058
(8.66)

Relative
prices

***
***

0.7984
(2.72)
-0.2495
(-2.24)

Production

***
***

1.0133
(6.38)
0.0670
(1.15)

R2

D.W.

0.79

2.04

0.23

1.94

***

PRICE, INCOME AND SUBSTITUTION ELASTICITIES
1976-1981

1982-1985

1986-1991

1992-1996

Own-wage elasticities
ηee

-0.593

-0.523

-0.431

-0.350

ηoo

-0.487

-0.409

-0.390

-0.400

Elasticity of substitution
σeo

3.850

2.876

2.498

1.979

Output elasticities
εey

2.204

2.008

1.986

1.968

εoy

1.050

1.049

1.060

1.068

o -unskilled employment, e -skilled employment, y -production
Employment in number of hours.

Table 5
FACTOR DEMANDS: GL Specification
TOTAL
1977:1-1996:4
Constant

Skilled employment
Unskilled employment

-0.8864
(-3.41)
1.3739
(8.27)

Relative
prices

***
***

0.9243
(3.80)
-0.485
(-3.43)

Production

***
***

0.7152
(11.57)
-0.026
(-0.62)

Demand
Shifter

***

0.0882
(2.68)
0.0665
(2.66)

PRICE, INCOME AND SUBSTITUTION ELASTICITIES
1976-1981

1982-1985

1986-1991

1992-1996

Own-wage elasticities
ηee

-0.755

-0.642

-0.507

-0.445

ηoo

-0.573

-0.497

-0.461

-0.515

Elasticity of substitution
σeo

1.147

0.982

0.822

0.798

Output elasticities
εey

1.873

1.772

1.714

1.839

εoy

0.979

0.978

0.975

0.966

o -unskilled employment, e -skilled employment, y -production
Employment in number of hours.

R2

D.W.

0.92

2.24

0.50

2.11

***
***

Table 6
DYNAMIC LABOR DEMAND ESTIMATIONS
1977:02 - 1996:04
Total E
(1)

Total E
(2)

Total E
(3)

Constant

0.0156
(0.44)

0.0156
(0.44)

0.0156
(0.44)

Production t

0.5666
(2.84) ***

0.5666
(2.84) ***

0.5666
(2.84) ***

Skilled E
(4)
-0.0364
(-0.36)
1.0237
(4.17) ***

Unskilled E
(5)
0.2143
(4.18) ***
0.6041
(2.95) ***

Skilled E
(6)
-0.1005
(-1.96) **
1.0250
(4.17) ***

Unskilled E
(7)
0.2143
(4.18) ***
0.6041
(2.95) ***

Production t-1

-0.0342
(-0.17)

-0.0342
(-0.17)

-0.0342
(-0.17)

-0.1125
(-0.44)

0.0365
(0.18)

-0.1123
(-0.43)

0.0365
(0.18)

Own Wages

t

0.0175
(0.18)

0.0175
(0.18)

0.0175
(0.18)

0.0877
(0.74)

0.1224
(1.22)

0.0880
(0.74)

0.1224
(1.22)

Own Wages

t-1

-0.1636
(-1.70) *

-0.1636
(-1.70) *

-0.1636
(-1.70) *

-0.2237
(-1.81) *

-0.0385
(-0.38)

-0.2254
(-1.81) *

-0.0385
(-0.38)

0.1215
(0.98)

0.1222
(1.24)

0.1211
(0.98)

0.1222
(1.24)

Other type of E Wages

t

Other type of E Wages

t-1

R1 t*Et-1

-0.2538
(-2.05) **
0.0334
(0.73)

R2 t*Et-1

-0.0680
(-0.92)

-0.3684
(-3.70) ***

-0.3684
(-3.70) ***

0.0089
(0.17)

-0.0364
(-0.73)

Dum91*Et-1

-0.2563
(-2.07) **

0.0607
(0.82)

-0.0097
(-0.17)

-0.0104
(-0.73)

Et-1

0.5760
(4.95) ***

0.6459
(5.39) ***

0.6095
(5.64) ***

0.4679
(4.11) ***

0.3025
(2.52) ***

0.4070
(2.43) ***

0.3211
(2.46) ***

R2
DW

0.9790
2.63

0.9790
2.63

0.9790
2.63

0.9847
1.96

0.9699
2.42

0.9847
1.98

0.9699
2.42

-0.3445755

-0.4125953

-0.3741357

-0.2555911

0.12028674

-0.2317032

0.12358227

Number of observations: 75
R1: Severance Payments
R2: Dismissal Costs

Source: NHS

Table 7
Labor demand estimation results
Firm level
[1]
OLS
Employment (t-1)
Labor cost
Price of materials
Capital Stock
Growth in production
Year

Basic Model
Interacted with BC
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
IV
OLS + Di
IV
IV + Di

0.964
(526.20)
-0.050
(-18.19)
0.024
(3.78)
0.025
(20.99)
0.245
(58.45)
-0.001
(-2.24)

0.978
(492.76)
-0.051
(-17.76)
0.030
(4.27)
0.018
(14.38)
0.243
(56.22)
0.000
(1.19)

0.965
(476.46)
-0.062
(-19.08)
0.047
(5.15)
0.027
(19.49)
0.242
(56.18)

0.965

0.966

0.966

Employment (t-1)*BC
Labor cost*BC
Price of materials*BC
Capital Stock*BC
Growth in production*BC

Adj. R2

Di referes to the 28 sectorial dummies.

0.987
0.988
(349.27) (331),.77)
-0.054
-0.070
(-17.86) (-20.13)
0.024
0.051
(2.43)
(3.83)
0.015
0.018
(8.60)
(9.19)
0.262
0.263
(40.88)
(41.02)
0.001
0.001
(1.91)
(2.06)
-0.022
-0.022
(-5.51)
(-5.66)
0.003
0.003
(2.06)
(1.99)
0.013
0.011
(0.99)
(0.85)
0.009
0.009
(3.29)
(3.44)
-0.063
-0.065
(-6.84)
(-7.05)
0.966

0.966

Table 8
Labor Demand Estimations
Panel of Manufacturing Sectors
1978-1995

OLS
(1)
Employment (t-1)

Basic Equation
Fixed Eff.
(2)

IV
(3)

OLS
(4)

Structural Change
Fixed Eff.
(5)

IV
(6)

0.7476
(52.31) ***

0.4417
(21.48) ***

0.5767
(6.00) ***

0.7791
(62.47) ***

0.5165
(28.36) ***

0.6119
(7.48) ***

Total wage

-0.2903
(-11.57) ***

-0.1413
(-3.57) ***

-0.6056
(-4.04) ***

-0.2432
(-11.84) ***

-0.2029
(-6.02) ***

-0.4746
(-4.38) ***

Input prices

-0.2208
(-5.59) ***

-0.3755
(-7.81) ***

-0.5197
(-3.90) ***

-0.3068
(-6.84) ***

-0.4986
(-9.68) ***

-0.777
(-3.69) ***

Capital stock

0.0289
(2.85) ***

0.0212
(0.69)

0.0351
(4.52) ***

0.0595
(2.55) ***

0.0118
(0.93)

Value Added

0.2154
(18.94) ***

0.2953
(22.12) ***

0.4465
(4.52) ***

0.1777
(17.77) ***

0.2593
(21.45) ***

0.3683
(4.71) ***

Year

-0.0007
(-0.48)

-0.0021
(-1.25)

0.0001
(0.07)
-0.8045
(-26.50) ***

-0.6102
(-20.28) ***

-0.5939
(-5.77) ***

D*Total wage

0.1721
(5.29) ***

0.1424
(4.37) ***

0.4223
(1.75) *

D*Input prices

0.3620
(5.97) ***

0.4321
(7.12) ***

0.9379
(3.24) ***

D*Capital stock

0.9964
(29.64) ***

0.7764
(22.33) ***

1.0687
(5.73) ***

D*Value Added

-0.1720
(-7.64) ***

-0.1513
(-6.60) ***

-0.0198
(-1.58)

D*Employment (t-1)

R2

0.9705

0.9763

Total number of observations: 1502
D is a dummy variable for the period 1992-1995

0.9622

0.9825

0.9833

-0.4244
(-1.94) **
0.9778

Table 9
Labor Demand Elasticities
Summary of Results
Own-wage elasticity
Skilled
Unskilled
Total

Output elasticity
Skilled Unskilled
Total

Quarterly Time Series
(1976:1 - 1996:4)
- Static Labor Demand
+Manufacturing
+7 Metropolitan Areas

-0.350
-0.445

-0.400
-0.515

1.968
1.839

1.068
0.966

-Dynamic Labor Demand
+7 Metropolitan Areas
Estimated with total labor cost
Estimated with wages only

-0.255
-0.310

NS
NS

1.024
0.999

0.604
0.597

Manufacturing Panel Data (Annual)
+2570 Establishments (1978-1991)
+91 Sectors (1978-1991)
short run / long run
NS: not significant

-0.374
-0.395

-0.05 / -2.27
-0.60 / -1.43

0.567
0.522

0.240
0.440

42

40
Jun-93

Sep-92

Dec-91

Mar-91

Jun-90

Sep-89

Dec-88

Mar-88

Jun-87

Sep-86

Dec-85

Jun-96

44
Sep-95

46

Jun-96

48

Sep-95

50
Dec-94

52

Mar-94

54

Dec-94

C. Evolution of total non-wage costs
Mar-94

Jun-93

Sep-92

Dec-91

Mar-91

Jun-90

Sep-89

Dec-88

Mar-88

Jun-87

Sep-86

Mar-85

Jun-84

Sep-83

Dec-82

Mar-82

Jun-81

16

Dec-85

Mar-85

Jun-84

Sep-83

Dec-82

Mar-82

Jun-81

Sep-80

Dec-79

Mar-79

Jun-78

Sep-77

18

B. Evolution of payroll taxes, vacations and bonuses

Vacations and bonuses

14

12

10

8
Payroll taxes

6

4

2

0
Jun-96

Sep-95

Dec-94

Mar-94

Jun-93

Sep-92

Dec-91

Mar-91

Jun-90

Sep-89

Dec-88

Mar-88

Jun-87

Sep-86

Dec-85

Mar-85

Jun-84

Sep-83

Dec-82

Mar-82

Jun-81

Sep-80

Dec-79

Mar-79

Jun-78

Sep-77

Dec-76

Mar-76

2

Sep-80

Mar-76
Dec-76

% of wage

% of wage
14

Dec-79

Mar-79

Jun-78

Sep-77

Dec-76

Mar-76

% of wage

Figure 1
Non-wage labor costs
(as % of wage)

16

A. Evolution of severance payments, pensions and health contributions

Severance payments

12

10

8

6

4
Health contributions

Pensions contributions

0

Mar-88

Mar-96

Sep-95

Mar-95

Sep-94

Mar-94

Sep-93

Mar-93

Sep-92

Mar-92

Sep-91

Mar-91

Sep-90

Mar-90

Average years of schooling

Sep-89

Mar-89

Sep-88

27.0

Skilled / Total Employment

15.0
Dec-

Mar-97

Jun-96

Sep-95

Dec-

Mar-94

Jun-93

Sep-92

Dec-

Mar-91

Jun-90

Sep-89

Dec-

Mar-88

Jun-87

Sep-86

Dec-

15.0

Mar-85

Jun-84

Sep-83

Dec-

Mar-82

Jun-81

Sep-80

Dec-

Mar-79

Jun-78

Sep-77

Dec-

Mar-76

11.0

Sep-87

Mar-87

Sep-86

Mar-86

Sep-85

21.0

Mar-85

Sep-84

Mar-84

Sep-83

Mar-83

Sep-82

Mar-82

16.0

Urban unemployment rate

Figure 2

Unemployment rate

14.0

13.0

12.0

MA (4)

10.0

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

Skilled to Total Employment Ratio and Average Years of Schooling

Figure 3

9.5

25.0
9.0

23.0
8.5

`

8.0

19.0

17.0
7.5

7.0

Mar-89

120
160

unskilled employment
Production

80
120

100
Unskilled employment

80

60

40

20
Skilled employment

0

Feb-

Sep-

Feb-

Jul-90

Dec-

May-

Oct-88

Mar-

Aug-

Jan-87

Jun-86

Nov-

Apr-85

Sep-96

Dec-95

Dec-

May-

Oct-95

Mar-

Aug-

Jan-94

Jun-93

Unskilled Employment

Mar-95

Jun-94

Sep-93

Nov-

180

Apr-92

140

Mar-92

D. Construction
(1990:4=100)

Dec-92

Jun-91

Sep-90

Dec-89

0
Jun-88

skilled employment

Sep-87

140

Mar-86

200

Dec-86

40
Sep-

210

Jun-85

production

Sep-84

C. Electricity
(1990:4=100)
Source: MMS

Mar-83

50

Dec-83

0.0
Dec-

70

Jul-83

20.0

Jun-82

90

May-

40.0

Sep-81

110

Dec-80

Skilled Employment

60.0

Mar-

Production

Oct-81

80.0

Mar-80

100.0

Aug-

120.0

Jan-80

140.0

Jun-79

Sep-96

Dec-95

Mar-95

Jun-94

Sep-93

Dec-92

Mar-92

Jun-91

Sep-90

Dec-89

Mar-89

Jun-88

Sep-87

Dec-86

Mar-86

Jun-85

Sep-84

Dec-83

Mar-83

Jun-82

Sep-81

Dec-80

Mar-80

Jun-79

Sep-78

160.0

Sep-78

Mar-77
Dec-77

A. Total
(1990:4=100)

Dec-77

Sep-96

Dec-95

Mar-95

Jun-94

Sep-93

Dec-92

Mar-92

Jun-91

Sep-90

Dec-89

Mar-89

Jun-88

Sep-87

Dec-86

Mar-86

Jun-85

Sep-84

100

Dec-83

Mar-83

60

Jun-82

20

Sep-81

Dec-80

Mar-80

Jun-79

Sep-78

Dec-77

Figure 4
Colombia: Urban Employment and Production
B. Manufacturing
(1990=100)

190

170

150
Capital

Unskilled employment

130
Production

Skilled employment

Sep-96

Dec-95

Mar-95

Jun-94

Sep-93

Dec-92

Mar-92

Jun-91

Sep-90

Dec-89

Mar-89

Jun-88

Sep-87

Dec-86

Mar-83

Sep-96

Mar-96

Sep-95

Mar-95

Sep-94

Mar-94

Sep-93

Mar-93

Sep-92

Mar-92

Sep-91

Mar-91

Sep-90

Mar-90

Sep-89

Mar-89

Sep-88

Mar-88

Sep-87

Mar-87

Sep-86

Mar-86

Sep-85

Mar-85

Sep-84

Mar-84

Sep-83

E. Retail
(1990:4=100)

Mar-86

Jun-85

Sep-84

G. Financial Services
(1990:4=100)

Dec-83

Mar-82
Sep-82

20

Jun-82

Mar-81
Sep-81

Unskilled employment

Mar-83

40

Sep-81

40

Mar-80

Production

Dec-80

Unskilled employment

Jun-79

120
Mar-80

100

Sep-80

120

Sep-78

Sep-96

Dec-95

Mar-95

Jun-94

Sep-93

Dec-92

Mar-92

Jun-91

Sep-90

Dec-89

Mar-89

Jun-88

Sep-87

Dec-86

Mar-86

Jun-85

Sep-84

Dec-83

Mar-83

Jun-82

Sep-81

Dec-80

140

Dec-77

Sep-96

Dec-95

Mar-95

Jun-94

100

Sep-93

Dec-92

Mar-92

Jun-91

Sep-90

Dec-89

Mar-89

Jun-88

Sep-87

Dec-86

Mar-86

Jun-85

Sep-84

Dec-83

Jun-79
Mar-80

80

Mar-83

Jun-82

80

Sep-81

Dec-80

Mar-80

Sep-78

Dec-77

60

Jun-79

Sep-78

Dec-77

Figure 4 (cont.)

180

F. Transportation
(1990:4=100)

160

140

Production
120

100
Capital

80
Production

40
60
Unskilled employment

Skilled employment
40
Skilled employment

0
20

H. Personal and Governmental Services
(1990:4=100)

140

160

140
120

100
Unskilled employment

80
Production

60
Skilled employment
60

20
Skilled employment

20

Dec-96

Jun-96

Dec-95

Jun-95

Dec-94

Jun-94

Dec-93

Jun-93

Dec-92

Jun-92

Dec-91

Jun-91

Dec-90

Jun-90

Dec-89

Jun-89

Dec-88

Jun-88

Dec-87

Jun-87

Dec-86

Jun-86

Dec-85

Jun-85

Dec-84

Jun-84

Dec-83

Jun-83

Dec-82

Jun-82

Dec-81

Jun-81

Dec-80

Jun-80

Dec-79

Jun-79

Dec-78

Jun-78

Dec-77

Jun-77

Dec-76

Figure 5
Colombia: Real Factor Costs in the Urban Sector

A. Total

130

skilled

120

110
unskilled

100
total

90

80

Dec-96

Jun-96

Dec-95

Jun-95

Dec-94

Jun-94

Dec-93

Jun-93

Dec-92

Jun-92

Dec-91

Jun-91

Dec-90

Jun-90

Dec-89

Jun-89

Dec-88

Jun-88

Dec-87

Jun-87

Dec-86

Jun-86

Dec-85

Jun-85

Dec-84

Jun-84

Dec-83

Jun-83

Dec-82

Jun-82

Dec-81

Jun-81

Dec-80

Jun-80

Dec-79

Jun-79

Dec-78

Jun-78

Dec-77

Jun-77

Figure 6

Elasticity of Substitution (Standard GL function, 7 metropolitan areas)

1.3

1.1

0.9

0.7

0.5

Figure 7

A. Total employment and simulated employment assuming no increases in health
and pensions contributions
0.28

0.24

ln(total employment)

Simulation

0.20

0.16

Employment

0.12

0.08

1996:4

1996:3

1996:2

1996:1

1995:4

1995:3

1995:2

1995:1

1994:4

1994:3

1994:2

1994:1

1993:4

1993:3

1993:2

1993:1

1992:4

1992:3

1992:2

1992:1

0.04

B. Unskilled Employment and simulated unskilled employment assuming no
increases in health and pensions contributions
0.21

Simulation

ln (unskilled employment)

0.17

0.13

Unskilled Employment
0.09

0.05

1996:4

1996:3

1996:2

1996:1

1995:4

1995:3

1995:2

1995:1

1994:4

1994:3

1994:2

1994:1

1993:4

1993:3

1993:2

1993:1

1992:4

1992:3

1992:2

1992:1

0.01

C. Skilled employment and simulated skilled employment assuming no increases
in health and pensions contributions
0.40

Simulation

0.30

Skilled Employment
0.25

0.20

0.15

1996:4

1996:3

1996:2

1996:1

1995:4

1995:3

1995:2

1995:1

1994:4

1994:3

1994:2

1994:1

1993:4

1993:3

1993:2

1993:1

1992:4

1992:3

1992:2

0.10
1992:1

ln (unskilled employment)

0.35

Figure 8

A. Total employment and simulated employment assuming elimination of
9% payroll tax
0.30

0.25
Simulation

log (employment)

0.20

0.15
Employment
0.10

0.05

1996:4

1996:3

1996:2

1996:1

1995:4

1995:3

1995:2

1995:1

1994:4

1994:3

1994:2

1994:1

1993:4

1993:3

1993:2

1993:1

1992:4

1992:3

1992:2

1992:1

0.00

B. Skilled employment and simulated skilled employment assuming
elimination of 9% payroll tax
0.40

0.35
log (skilled employment)

Simulation
0.30
Skilled employment
0.25

0.20

0.15

1996:4

1996:3

1996:2

1996:1

1995:4

1995:3

1995:2

1995:1

1994:4

1994:3

1994:2

1994:1

1993:4

1993:3

1993:2

1993:1

1992:4

1992:3

1992:2

1992:1

0.10

C. Unskilled employment and simulated unskilled employment assuming
elimination of 9% payroll tax
0.25

Simulation

0.15

Unskilled Employment
0.10

0.05

1996:4

1996:3

1996:2

1996:1

1995:4

1995:3

1995:2

1995:1

1994:4

1994:3

1994:2

1994:1

1993:4

1993:3

1993:2

1993:1

1992:4

1992:3

1992:2

0.00
1992:1

log (unskilled employment)

0.20

Table A1
Dismissal Costs
(number of monthly wages)
Years of tenure

Old Regime

New Regime

5
10
15
20

4.2
10.5
15.5
20.5

4.2
13.5
20.2
26.8

Table A2
Case without increases in health
and pensions constributions
Total
Unskilled
Skilled
employment employment employment
1993:2
0.1%
0.0%
0.1%
1993:3
0.1%
0.5%
0.4%
1993:4
0.1%
0.6%
0.4%
1994:1
0.1%
0.4%
0.5%
1994:2
0.2%
0.1%
0.3%
1994:3
0.2%
0.1%
0.3%
1994:4
0.7%
0.2%
0.9%
1995:1
0.6%
0.8%
1.1%
1995:2
0.7%
0.8%
1.1%
1995:3
1.2%
0.6%
1.7%
1995:4
1.1%
1.0%
1.6%
1996:1
1.2%
1.9%
2.2%
1996:2
1.3%
1.4%
2.0%
1996:3
1.4%
1.0%
1.9%
1996:4
1.3%
1.8%
2.2%
Source: Own calculations.

1993:2
1993:3
1993:4
1994:1
1994:2
1994:3
1994:4
1995:1
1995:2
1995:3
1995:4
1996:1
1996:2
1996:3
1996:4

Case with elimination of
9% payroll taxes
Total
Unskilled
Skilled
employment employment employment
0.2%
0.2%
0.5%
1.0%
0.6%
1.0%
0.7%
1.2%
0.7%
1.2%
1.4%
1.4%
1.2%
1.3%
0.9%
1.3%
1.8%
1.5%
1.2%
1.1%
1.1%
1.3%
1.8%
1.5%
1.2%
1.9%
1.3%
1.3%
0.9%
0.8%
1.3%
1.4%
1.4%
1.2%
2.0%
1.1%
1.2%
1.4%
0.7%
1.3%
0.9%
0.6%
1.3%
1.8%
0.9%

Eliminating mandatory bonuses would be equivalent to eliminating
payroll taxes
Source: Own calculations.

