                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        A PRISM INTO THE PPP PUZZLES:
           THE MICRO-FOUNDATIONS OF BIG MAC REAL EXCHANGE RATES

                                              David Parsley
                                              Shang-Jin Wei

                                          Working Paper 10074
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10074


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2003




We would like to thank Robert Cumby, Bruce Reynolds, Kenneth Rogoff, Lucio Sarno, Moto Shintani, and
seminar participants at the European Central Bank, the University of Virginia, and the IMF for useful
comments. The views presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of any institution with which they are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by David Parsley and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
A Prism into the PPP Puzzles: The Micro-foundations of Big Mac Real Exchange Rates
David Parsley and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 10074
October 2003
JEL No. F31

                                           ABSTRACT

The real exchange rate (RER) has been called the single most important price, yet its behavior
exhibits several puzzles. In this project, we use Big Mac prices as a unique prism to study the
movement of real exchange rates. Part of our innovation is to match these prices to the prices of
individual ingredients. There are a number of advantages associated with our approach. First, unlike
the CPI RER, we can measure the Big Mac RER in levels. Second, unlike the CPI RER, for which
the attribution to tradable and non-tradable components involves assumptions on the weights and
the functional form, we (almost) know the exact composition of a Big Mac, and can estimate the
tradable and non-tradable components relatively precisely. Third, we can study the dynamics of the
RER in a setting free of: the product-aggregation bias, the temporal aggregation bias, and the bias
generated by non-compatible consumption baskets across countries. Fourth, we show that Engel's
result that deviations from the law of one price are sole explanation for RER movements does not
hold generally. We offer some evidence that departure from the Engel effect can be systematically
linked to economic factors.

David C. Parsley
Owen Graduate School
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235
david.parsley@owen.vanderbilt.edu

Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund
Room 10-700
19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
and NBER
swei@imf.org
            “In most economies, the exchange rate is the single most important relative
            price, one that potentially feeds back into a large range of transactions.”
            Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000).


1.    General advertisement

     The real exchange rate’s central importance in an economy has long been recognized
(see, for example, Milton Friedman, 1953; and more recently, Maurice Obstfeld and
Kenneth Rogoff, 2000). Despite considerable attention, two key aspects of real exchange
rate movements evade convincing explanation. First, estimated mean reversion seems
too slow (or, equivalently, the deviations from purchasing power parity seem too
persistent). After surveying a long list of papers on the subject, Rogoff (1996) observed
that a “remarkable consensus view” exists on the estimated half-life of deviations from
PPP; which he concluded is on the order of three to five years. But this seems too long,
based on economic theories with a plausible size of arbitrage costs (e.g., Chari, Kehoe,
and McGratten, 2002). Second, we used to think that differentials in the relative price of
non-tradable goods across countries (e.g., through the Balassa-Samuelson effect) are the
primary driver of medium- to long-run movements in real exchange rates.1 However, a
recent much-cited paper by Engel (1999) seriously undermines this view; he finds that
nearly 100% of real exchange rate variation is explained by deviations from the law of one
price, and none by the differentials in the relative price of non-tradables across countries.

     Four different types of explanations have been suggested for the persistence puzzle
in (CPI-based) real exchange rates. First, there may be an important misspecification in
the common linear estimation of the persistence parameter (e.g., Obstfeld and Taylor,
1997; Taylor, 2001; Taylor and Sarno, 2002; O’Connell and Wei 2002). These authors
argue that arbitrage costs dictate a non-linear specification. Arbitrage costs lead to a band
of no-arbitrage, within which the real exchange rate can behave as a random walk (i.e., the
half-life can be infinite). But once outside the no-arbitrage zone, the force of arbitrage
may drive the real exchange rate back at a relatively fast speed (i.e., low persistence). In
empirical work, once this non-linearity is taken into account, the real exchange rate is
typically found to be much less persistent (the estimated half-life usually falls in a range of


1 Froot and Rogoff (1995) provide a comprehensive survey of studies investigating the long run
determinants of purchasing power parity.
                                                                                                           2



1-2 years). Second, there may exist a time-aggregation bias in some studies. Taylor
(2001) shows that when price or nominal exchange rate data are averages of data
collected at different points in time, the persistence of the real exchange rate may be
over-estimated. Third, there may exist a bias due to product-aggregation. Imbs et al
2002, show that the estimated persistence of an aggregate, such as the CPI-based real
exchange rate, is biased upwards relative to the “true” average of the levels of persistence
of the components of the aggregate. Fourth, CPI baskets across different countries are
not identical, and the components in each country’s basket change over time as new
products are added and through quality change. These differences also include cross-
country variation in mixtures of traded and nontraded goods in the indexes (e.g., ‘home
bias’ in price indexes), and cross-country differences in the weights for the included
prices. More generally, ‘substitution-bias’ (substitution across products in the basket) is
amplified since it is occurring in each country to an unknown extent.2 As a result,
arbitrage across countries on these consumption baskets is not easy (and cannot be fast).3
Finally, these four explanations are not mutually exclusive; each can play a role in
explaining the long persistence of the real exchange rate. Collectively, they illustrate the
confounding factors that can complicate existing studies of CPI-based real exchange
rates. Studies at the individual good level can directly control for all of these limitations
inherent in aggregate data.

     In this paper, we adopt a different approach to study the movement of real exchange
rates by using information on the prices of Big Macs. We will show that the resulting ‘Big
Mac’ real exchange rates are highly correlated with the CPI-based real exchange rates
(both in levels and in first differences). So the lessons from the Big Macs have general
implications for CPI-based real exchange rates. Our innovation is to match these prices
to the prices of individual ingredients, e.g., ground beef, bread, lettuce, labor, etc., and to
design the thought experiments in such a way as to circumvent the problems discussed
above that have confounded much of the existing literature.

2
  It is useful to stress that simply analyzing real exchange rates using more disaggregated price indexes will
not adequately address these problems. Studies using price indexes – irrespective of the level of aggregation
– are able to test only the joint hypothesis that PPP held in the base year, and that changes in international
relative prices equal zero.
3
  One component of the CPI basket is food. As an example, the French basket may have a relatively heavy
weight on cheese, which the Chinese may not care much about; while the Chinese basket may contain lots
of tofu, which may be a small portion of French consumption. It is not particularly meaningful to speak of
arbitrage between cheese prices in France and tofu prices in China.
                                                                                                             3



     To be more specific, there are five advantages associated with our approach. First,
the Big Mac is a composite good (in this sense, like a CPI index). However, unlike the
consumption baskets that go into the CPI calculation, which may not be comparable
across countries, the Big Mac composite has a (nearly) identical and transparent
production technology in all countries and across time periods (at least over the last 13
years in our sample). In fact, due to McDonalds’ global advertising strategy, millions of
people world-wide can actually sing the production function.4

     Second, unlike the CPI-based real exchange rate, we can measure the Big Mac real
exchange rate in levels in an economically meaningful way.

     Third, unlike the CPI real exchange rate for which the attribution to tradable and
non-tradable parts involves many assumptions on weights and functional form of the
underlying components, we (almost) know the exact composition of a Big Mac, and can
estimate its tradable and non-tradable components relatively precisely.

     Fourth, we can study the dynamics of the real exchange rate in a setting that is free
of the product-aggregation bias (argued to be important by Imbs, et al, 2002) or the
temporal aggregation bias (argued to be important by Taylor, 2001). To address other
biases that affect persistence estimation, we implement both linear, and non-linear,
convergence specifications.

     Finally, the combination of the prices of the Big Mac and those of its ingredients
offers a unique opportunity to re-examine Engel’s (1999) proposition concerning the role
of deviations from the law of one price in real exchange rates, and to explore whether
departures from his result can be systematically explained.

     Aside from the literature on real exchange rates referenced above, there is a
collection of recent papers that makes use of the Big Mac prices reported in the Economist
magazine, including Pakko and Pollard (1996), Click (1996), Cumby (1997), Ong (1997),
and Lutz (2001). They have typically showed that relative Big Mac prices between
countries resemble CPI-based real exchange rates in many ways. However, as far as we
know, none of these papers match Big Mac prices with the prices of its underlying
ingredients. We use these matched data sets, which are part of our innovation, to

4 We refer to the well known jingle “two all beef patties, special sauce, lettuce, cheese, pickles, onions, on a
sesame seed bun”. There are however, some differences in Big Macs around the globe. For example, in
India (not in our data set) no beef products are sold, and in Israel (in our data set) the beef is kosher.
                                                                                        4



decompose Big Mac real exchange rates into tradable and non-tradable components
relatively precisely, and to address a range of questions beyond those typically studied
using more aggregated data.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide a more
detailed description of the data sets, including their sources and coverage across time,
countries and items. Section 3 contains the core of our statistical analysis, which is
presented in four steps. First, we establish a connection between CPI-based and Big
Mac-based real exchange rates. Second, we apportion the price of a big Mac into its
constituent parts. Third, we study the dynamics of the Big Mac real exchange rates; in
particular, by comparing its ‘aggregate’ convergence speed with those of its ingredients.
Fourth, we examine the fraction of Big Mac price disparities attributable to deviations
from the law of one price and we explore factors that may explain variation in this
fraction across countries and over time.       The final section offers some concluding
remarks.


2.    Data: sources and ingredients
Key variables

     Two “matching” data sets are used in this study: prices of the Big Mac and prices of
its various ingredients in 34 countries over 13 years (1990-2002). The local currency data
for Big Mac prices was obtained from various editions of the Economist magazine. In the
original data set, the country coverage has varied over time.

     The second data set covers city specific local-currency prices of various ingredients
of the Big Mac – ground beef, bread, labor cost, etc. -- in the same set of countries and
years, compiled by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU).       Appendix table 1 lists the
countries reported in the Economist, and the corresponding cities reported in the EIU
data set. A sense of the global distribution of countries is highlighted in Table 1.

     The EIU data comes from the Worldwide Cost of Living Survey, and is designed for use
by human resource managers in implementing compensation policies. The EIU official
description is at http://eiu.e-numerate.com/asp/wcol_HelpWhatIsWCOL.asp. Some of
the goods in the EIU data set appear twice – differing by the type of establishment where
the price was recorded. When there was a choice between two prices, we selected the
                                                                                          5



lower price; these generally are supermarket prices. In particular, we selected local
currency price data on the following five traded inputs: ground beef, cheese, lettuce,
onions, and bread. We also include three nontraded inputs: hourly labor costs, rent for a
two-bedroom unfurnished moderate apartment, and electricity charges.

     To ensure that our subsequent results are not driven by some peculiarities of the data
sets, we undertake some basic “data cleaning.”           First, we exclude “high inflation
episodes” from our analysis, specifically, Argentina (1990-91), Brazil (1990-94), Mexico
(1990-92), and Poland (1990-94). Second, we visually checked the data for possible
coding errors via scatter plots.     More concretely, we looked for unreasonably large
fluctuations in local currency prices, or price changes greater than 60%, which were
subsequently reversed in the next period. We took the ten instances (lettuce (7), onions
(2), and rent (1)) where this occurred in our data set to be coding mistakes and used the
average (t-1, t+1) value instead. We have experimented with other cut-offs for coding
errors, and found the results not too sensitive to the choice of the cut-off points.

Other variables

     In addition to the price data, we use data on tariffs, sales and value added tax rates.
The first source of tariffs is simple mean tariff rates, from Table 6.6 of the World Bank
publication World Development Indicators 2001. For each country the tariff data are available
for two years – once in the early 1990s and once for the late 1990s. We use the first
reported value in our bilateral tariff rate calculations for the years 1990-95. Similarly, we
use the most recent value for the years 1996-2002. Sales tax and VAT rates were
collected from primary sources. For Europe, the European Commission publication:
“VAT Rates Applied in the Member States of the European Community” (2002), was
quite helpful. The remaining countries and cities data were obtained from web searches,
emails, and phone calls directly to national (and state) tax authorities.


3.    Digesting the Big Mac

     This section contains the core of our statistical analysis. We proceed in four steps.
First, we check the connection between CPI-based and the Big Mac-based real exchange
rates. Second, we take advantage of the simplicity of the Big Mac structure to link its
price to the costs of its underlying ingredients.        Third, we examine the speed of
convergence to law of one price for the Big Mac real exchange rate and compare it with
                                                                                             6



those of its ingredients. We employ both non-linear as well as linear specifications.
Fourth, we re-examine the Engel (1999) question, with an emphasis on trying to identify
factors that may systematically affect the importance of the deviations from law of one
price in explaining real exchange rate movement.


3.a. The Big Mac versus CPI-based real exchange rates

    We first compare Big Mac, and the more standard, CPI-based real exchange rates.
The idea is to see if Big Mac real exchange rates are informative about CPI-based real
exchange rates, or alternatively, are too unique and narrow to be useful. As shown in
Figure 1, Big Mac real exchange rates are typically highly correlated with aggregate real
exchange rates – both in levels, and in first differences. The overall impression from the
figure is that there is indeed a high correlation between aggregate and Big Mac real
exchange rates. Nonetheless, for this study we make an effort to err on the conservative
side and hence we restrict our attention to only those bilateral cases where both
correlation coefficients are greater than 0.65. In our sample, 61% (=343) of the 561
possible real exchange rates meet these two criteria simultaneously (the percentages for
each of the criteria separately are: 74% in levels; and 80% in 1st differences). To convey
an idea of what the restriction implies for the resulting sample, Table 2 presents the
correlation coefficients for only the twenty-one included bilateral U.S. dollar real
exchange rates. As is evident from the averages, the result is a sample of Big Mac real
exchange rates that are very highly correlated with the more traditional CPI based
measures of the real exchange rate.


3.b. Reverse-engineering the recipe

    Our first task is to relate the price of a Big Mac to the cost of its ingredients.
Suppose there are exactly n inputs; and the production function is Leontief:

        1 Big Mac = min {x1, x2, ..., xn}                                                   (1)

    Let Pk,tBig Mac be the price of a Big Mac in country k at time t, and Pk,j,t be the price of
input j in country k at time t. Then,

        Pk,tBig Mac= ∑j Pk,j,t xj                                                           (2)
                                                                                                7



     To be precise, here we use the term “input” broadly to also include an additive profit
markup – which, without loss of generality, can be the last “input.” That is, we could let
xn=1, and Pk,n,t = the additive profit markup in country k at time t. Expressed in this way,
Equation (2) is an identity.

     Suppose we observe Pk,tBig Mac and {Pk,j,t} for a sufficient number of time periods and
countries, (or, to be precise, when # locations X # time periods ≥ n), then it is a matter
of simple algebra to solve for all xi, i=1,2,..., n. In fact, under our assumptions, a
convenient way to solve for {x1, x2, ..., xn} would be simply to perform a linear regression
of Pk,tBig Mac on {Pk,j,t}. The regression in this case is not a statistical tool, but an algebraic
one. Since (2) is an identity, the R2 =100%.

     Of course, we do not literally have price information on every single ingredient of a
Big Mac. For example, we do not have information on cooking oil, pickles, sesame seeds,
or “special sauce” in the data set. However, we assume that, in terms of their shares in
the total cost of a Big Mac, these missing items are relatively unimportant when
compared with the items for which we do have information, such as labor, rent, bread,
ground beef, lettuce, and three other inputs. This assumption will be verified later.

     The most serious “missing input” is probably the profit markup, which might vary
by country and year. This and other “missing inputs” would go into the residual of a
regression. In subsequent analyses when the role of the “missing inputs” may matter, we
experiment with various assumptions about them to ensure that our key results are
robust. These robustness checks will be explained later when relevant.

     With these points in mind, we regress the price of a Big Mac on the prices of the
eight main inputs for which we do have information, and report the results in Table 3.
We report only the coefficients from the random effects estimator since a Hausman test
that the covariance between the independent variables and the error term is equal to zero
is not rejected. Failure to reject this hypothesis indicates that random effects estimator is
the efficient estimator. As reported in the table, the computed value of the test statistic is
χ 2 (8 ) = 5.6 , with a significance level = 0.69.
     All of the coefficients and the implied shares seem reasonable. What stands out in
Table 3 is the importance of nontraded inputs – especially labor – for the price of Big
Macs.     According to the table, the total nontraded goods share is 55%, i.e.,
                                                                                           8



α = 0.456 + 0.046 + 0.051 ≈ 0.55 . Alternatively, if we normalize the non-tradable share
by the total amount explained by all observed inputs, then, non-tradables collectively
explain 64% of the Big Mac price ( α = 0.553 0.869 ≈ 0.64 ).

    We also implement a regression where all variables are expressed in percentage
change form (last column in Table 3). The results qualitatively reinforce the conclusions
from the levels regression – especially the fact that nontraded goods prices are a very
important component of Big Mac prices. We will use the estimates presented in Table 3
when we explicitly allocate shares of real exchange rate movement to traded and non-
traded goods components. Before doing so, however, we estimate the persistence of
‘aggregate’ Big Mac real exchange rates and compare them with those for the ingredients
of a Big Mac.


3.c. Fast food: how fast is convergence?

    In this sub-section we extend the analysis to study the size and persistence of cross-
country price differences, i.e., real exchange rates. As a point of departure, note that
previously (Section 3a) we examined U.S. dollar prices across the 34 countries. In this
section we focus on all bilateral price differences in U.S. dollars, and we reiterate that our
focus is on the level of real exchange rates. Hence, we do not presume a base year where
parity holds.

    Define the (log) real exchange rate at time t as: qt = s t + pt* − pt , where s t is the
domestic currency price of foreign exchange, pt* is the foreign price of Big Macs, and pt
is the domestic price of Big Macs; all variables are expressed in natural logarithms. In
Table 4, we provide estimates of β̂ from equation 1 for the Big Mac, and each of the
eight input real exchange rates.

        ∆qi , t = β q i , t −1 + country & time dummies + ε i , t                         (3)

    Immediately apparent in the table is the fact that Tradables, as a group, have the least
persistence and the shortest half lives. Indeed, the average half life for Non-tradables (3.4
years) is more than twice that for Tradables (1.4 years) and the half life of Big Mac
deviations (1.8 years) lie somewhere in between. To gauge the sensitivity of the results to
outliers, the analysis was repeated – but excluding observations associated with the largest
5 percent of the residuals from the corresponding regression in Table 4. These results are
                                                                                             9



reported in Appendix Table 2. Nearly all the half lives rise – an aspect we explore below.
The general pattern however, remains; namely, the half life of Big Mac deviations is
bounded by that of Tradables from below, and of Non-tradables from above.

    In Appendix Table 3, we report the results of a different estimation method, i.e., we
use the random effects estimator. Though the Hausman test suggests the fixed effects
estimator is efficient, (i.e., the null hypothesis is rejected at the 10% level in all cases) we
report the random effects estimates for comparison. Again, the general pattern remains.
Specifically, the half life of Big Mac deviations is bounded by that of Tradables from
below, and of Non-tradables from above.

    In Appendix Table 4, we restrict the sample again; this time to make an explicit
comparison with Cumby (1997). In these regressions we examine only those countries in
Cumby’s sample, and we also restrict the time period to be closer to his by dropping the
final three years from our sample period. Considering the reduced set of countries, the
results are very similar to those for the full sample of countries – except that estimated
convergence is generally slightly faster than for the full sample – a result similar to that
found by Cumby. Overall however, the same general pattern emerges across the nine real
exchange rates in the table.

    In Appendix Table 5, we present the estimates from an alternate regression
specification.   Specifically, we tabulate the coefficient estimates from an augmented
Dickey-Fuller regression, including one lag of the dependent variable, as in equation 1’.
As can be seen in the table, the lagged dependent variables are generally insignificant, and
our conclusions about relative convergence speeds are unaffected.

        ∆qi , t = β q i , t −1 + γ∆q i , t −1 + country & time dummies + ε i , t           (1’)

    Finally, before turning to non-linear estimates of persistence, we consider the effects
of taxes. It is well known that taxes and other transaction costs can create a wedge –
within which, real exchange rates need not display convergence tendencies. Moreover,
time variation in these transaction costs can, in effect, present a ‘moving target’ for mean
reversion estimates. Additionally, arbitrage might occur on a pre-tax or tax-inclusive
basis. The regressions presented in Table 4 (and Appendix Tables 2-5) may therefore
embody considerable measurement error since they use prices inclusive of VAT and sales
taxes. Hence, in Table 5, we repeat the analysis after subtracting VAT and sales taxes.
                                                                                        10



    It should be noted that this adjustment may introduce error into the estimation since
the sales tax data has been taken from a number of sources – many of which present the
information in ‘simplified’ form only. For example, some countries tax ‘agricultural
products’ while others tax them at a reduced rate, while others do not. Moreover,
‘agricultural products’ may include beef for some countries, while in other countries
‘agricultural’ may be taken to be ‘vegetable’. While we have made considerable effort in
compiling accurate data, we recognize the potential for error such ambiguities introduce.
Parsley and Wei (1996) is the only study we know of that considers the effects of taxes on
convergence rates. In their study of intra-national (U.S.) real exchange rates, they find
that taxes have virtually no effect on their persistence estimates since there is simply not
much variation over time in sales tax rates within the United States. Our results, shown
in Table 5, are similar; the adjustment for VAT and sales taxes seem to matter little for
estimated convergence rates. The most notable aspect of the regressions is that the
estimated standard errors always rise, and the adjusted R-squared nearly always declines.

    As noted in the introduction, recent research by O’Connell (1998), Obstfeld and
Taylor (1997), Taylor (2001), Taylor and Sarno (2001), and O’Connell and Wei (2002)
suggests that standard regressions, such as equation (1) or (1’) are misspecified due to the
assumed linearity.   These authors have argued that estimates of real exchange rate
persistence obtained from a linear regression are biased upward, since such estimates are
essentially averages of two regimes: very high persistence for deviations smaller than
transaction costs, and possibly much lower persistence for larger deviations. These
authors have addressed the problem of lumping data from two regimes by estimating a
threshold autoregression (TAR) model. As O’Connell and Wei (2002) note, if transaction
costs create a band of no-arbitrage, TAR models provide a more powerful way to detect
global stationarity – even if the true price behavior does not conform to the TAR
specification. We consider two such models of non-linear price adjustment – an Eq-TAR
(for “equilibrium threshold autogressive model”), and a Band-TAR – both of which can
be represented by restrictions on equation 4.        According to the Eq-TAR model,
convergence occurs toward the center of the band, hence the implied restriction is b=0.
On the other hand, mean reversion in the Band-TAR model is assumed to be sufficient
to push the price differences only toward the outer edge of the bands, hence this model
imposes b=c.
                                                                                                         11


                ρ (qt −1 − b ) + ε t ,     if qt −1 > c
               
         ∆qt = qt −1 + ε t ,               if − c ≤ qt −1 ≤ c                                          (4)
                ρ (q + b ) + ε ,           if qt −1 < −c
                t −1               t




     According to these models, the real exchange rate process has a unit-root inside the
transaction cost band.           Once the real exchange rate exceeds the transaction cost
parameter (c), the real exchange rate reverts at rate, 1 − ρ . In the Eq-TAR model,
reversion is toward the center of the transaction cost band [-c, c], while in the Band-TAR
model reversion is toward the edge of the threshold.                     The Eq-TAR model would
characterize behavior if fixed costs are an important part of impediments to arbitrage.
Similarly, if the impediments to arbitrage take the form of variable costs only, then the
Band-TAR model would be appropriate. Currently, there is no consensus as to which
model is uniformly ‘best’, and there does not exist a good way to estimate a general model
that would nest both as special cases. As a result, we present estimates from both
models. As it turns out, our conclusions are similar for either model.5

     Estimation of these models can be done via maximum likelihood or sequential
conditional least squares. Franses and van Dijk (2000) demonstrate the equivalence of
the two methods. Procedurally, we estimate the pooled model using the fixed effects
panel estimator by performing a grid search over possible values of c. In the first
estimation, c = min(q) + 0.003. Each successive iteration adds 0.003 to c and the model is
re-estimated. We stop the grid search at the 75th fractile of the distribution of q. This
results in roughly 100 estimations per good. The model with the minimum residual sum
of squares is reported in Table 6.

     For comparison, we present the Eq-Tar and Band-Tar results in the two sets of
columns.       Overall, the estimates of convergence are faster in these non-linear
specifications, as one would expect. However, in both estimation specifications, the same
pattern prevails as before. Namely, the median tradable good converges fastest, while
non-tradables have the greatest persistence, with the Big Mac ‘sandwiched’ in between.
Also, the size of the threshold is of interest.                  Obstfeld and Taylor (1997) report

5 Of course, the reason our conclusions are unaffected by the estimation method is that we compare

reversion across inputs. As long as the estimation method is the same across ingredients and for the Big
Mac, any biases are likely to be “proportional” to all equations. Hence, the relative order of persistence is
unlikely to be affected.
                                                                                                        12



thresholds of between 8 and 10 percent – while those in the table are generally less than
half that.

     We now turn to a formal decomposition of movements in Big Mac real exchange
rates into parts attributable to movements in tradables and non-tradables separately.


3.d. Two for the price of one: new accounting versus old theory

     In most models of the real exchange rate, the relative price of non-tradable goods in
terms of tradables plays a key role. For example, according to the well-known Harrod-
Balassa-Samuelson effect, currencies from countries experiencing relatively faster tradable
goods productivity growth will tend to appreciate. Indeed, many have attributed the
post-war secular rise in the yen/dollar real exchange rate (at least to 1990) to this effect.6
Productivity growth however, is not the only source of movements in the relative price of
non-tradables across countries. For example, Dornbusch (1989) and Froot and Rogoff
(1991) argued that the difference in the relative price of non-tradables caused by different
government macroeconomic policies can also be important in explaining real exchange
rate movements.

     This view of the role of the relative price of non-tradables in real exchange rate
determination has recently come under assault. In an influential and much-cited paper,
Engel (1999) concludes that movements in relative prices of nontraded goods appear to
account for essentially none of the movements in aggregate U.S. based CPI real exchange
rates.7 Instead movements in real exchange rates are almost completely due to deviations
from the law of one price for tradable goods. In subsequent discussion, we refer to this
stark result as the Engel effect.8 The nature of the challenge is clear; namely, under this
view, neither the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson effect, nor the Dornbusch-Froot-Rogoff
effect, help to explain movements in real exchange rates.

     In this subsection, we examine whether it is possible that the Engel effect is
important under some conditions but less so under others, and what these conditions are.

6
  For textbook treatments, see, e.g., Caves, Jones, and Frankel (2002, p. 372-3), or Obstfeld and Rogoff
(1996, p. 210-214).
7 Engel’s (1999) study examines five high-income countries (for CPI based real exchange rates), but finds

similar results using output price indexes (seven countries) and producer price indexes (sixteen countries).
8 Parsley (2001) reaches a similar conclusion for a sample consisting of smaller, more open, and generally

faster growing Asian-Pacific economies.
                                                                                                          13



Mendoza (2000) provides one hint that the Engel effect may sometimes be less than 100
percent.9 In his study of the Mexican peso/US dollar real exchange rate, Mendoza found
the Engel effect is present when the country’s nominal exchange rate was on a floating
regime; but the effect declines to between 30% and 50% when the nominal exchange rate
was tightly managed. A reasonable conjecture from the Mendoza study is that exchange
rate volatility and/or the nominal exchange rate regime may play a role in determining the
relative importance of international deviations in traded goods prices in explaining real
exchange rate movements.

     One important drawback to the Engel (1999), Mendoza (2000), or Parsley (2001)
decompositions is that they rely on highly aggregated measures of traded and nontraded
goods.     A key concern is whether the traded and nontraded price components are
accurately compartmentalized in the resulting indexes. Indeed, Engel acknowledges this
problem and devotes considerable effort to robustness checks. In the end however, he
still must conclude that the traded goods indexes actually contain nontraded items, and
the nontraded indexes contain nontrivial traded components. Since these aggregate
indices are themselves weighted averages of hundreds of underlying prices, the ultimate
impact on the decompositions is unknown. Additionally, one must make an assumption
on the specific functional form that combines tradable and non-tradable prices into the
aggregate price index. The conventional practice makes the simplifying assumption that
traded and non-traded components are combined in a Cobb-Douglas fashion. In this
study, we examine the robustness of the Engel effect for the case of Big Mac (aggregate)
real exchange rates, where there is very little room for substitution across inputs either
within or across countries. Hence, the decomposition is arguably more straightforward.

     Another drawback to using aggregate CPI data is the well-known price index
problem, i.e., price indexes tell us something about the change in prices from the base
period. Assuming PPP held in the base period, observing changes in price indexes would
convey the same information as examining price levels in each period. However, if PPP



9 Engel’s finding is consistent with sticky local currency prices. Recently, Parsley and Popper (2002) apply
Engel’s methodology and decompose aggregate real exchange rate movements into two portions: one
attributable to deviations in the law of one price for an individual good and another that combines
everything else. They find that whichever individual good is chosen for the first portion (be it haircuts,
eggs, or indeed any of the goods they examine), that good will account for virtually all the variation. Hence,
they advise caution in interpreting such decompositions.
                                                                                                     14



did not hold in the base period this link is severed, and movements in price indexes may
not convey useful information about the level of the real exchange rate.

        We begin by decomposing movements of Big Mac real exchange rates into shares
attributable to traded- and non-traded inputs directly. An important goal of this analysis
is to examine the robustness of these earlier studies in the context of a single “aggregate”
good, where we know the production technology reasonably well. Our methodological
approach differs from previous studies as we explore a much greater cross-section
dimensionality (though shorter time series with lower frequency).

        We begin by describing the decomposition of real exchange rates into traded and
nontraded components. Express the Big Mac real exchange rate ( Q BM ) as:
                             *
                      SP BM
            Q   BM
                     = BM .                                                                          (5)
                       P
                       *
        Where, P BM is the foreign currency price of a Big Mac abroad, and P BM is the U.S.
dollar price of a Big Mac in the United States. The nominal exchange rate (foreign
currency/U.S dollar) is designated by S, and we have suppressed time subscripts. Since
        *       *       *
P BM = P T + P N and P BM = P T + P N , we can write the log real exchange rate as:
                                      *                   P N*                    PN      
            q BM = log( S ) + log( P T ) − log( P T ) + log  1 + T *    − log  1 + T   
                                                                P                   P     

        The first part of this expression is simply the deviation from the law of one price for
traded inputs (x), and the second part is the relative-relative price of non-traded goods,
i.e.,
            q BM = x + y , where
                                         *
                x = log( S ) + log( P T ) − log( P T ) , and                                         (6)
                          P     *N
                                                P  N
                                                          
                y = log  1 + *T      − log  1 + T   
                             P                    P     

        Unlike previous studies, a distinctive feature of this study is that traded goods prices
can be computed directly as P T = ∑ β̂ iT Pi T , where the summation is over the i traded
inputs ( beef , cheese , lettuce , onions , and bread ) and the β̂ estimates are computed previously
in Table 3. A similar computation can be made for P * T , P N , and P * N . Here, as in Engel
(1999), the log Big Mac real exchange rate is the sum of deviations from the law of one
                                                                                                        15


price among traded ingredients, and the relative-relative price of nontraded inputs abroad
and at home.

     Armed with empirical counterparts to x and y, Engel’s (1999) approach was to
decompose movements in aggregate real exchange rates to shares attributable to
movements in each. Using more than thirty years of monthly data he focused on (among
other measures) the mean squared error of changes in the real exchange rate at all
horizons, e.g., 1-month, 2-months, up to the highest n-month difference the data would
allow. In our case we have annual observations for thirteen years. The annual frequency
and relatively short time span forces us to take a different approach than in Engel.
Hence, we propose an alternative, time-dependent, way to construct the shares
attributable to x and y. Since we observe prices (and not price indexes) we construct
absolute (i.e., levels) measures of x and y, as well as for aggregate Big Mac deviations, at
each point in time. We have a potential cross-section of 561 real exchange rates with 13
time series observations each (without missing values).10 Our approach has the advantage
that we can systematically relate these shares to observable country-pair and time-specific
factors. For comparison with previous studies, we also present results using annual
changes.

     Generically, we construct the time-dependent measure of the share of Big Mac real
exchange rates at time t attributable to x as the ratio of the squared deviation of x from
its country-pair specific mean, to the sum of that for x and y together, i.e.,

         x −share t   =
                             (x − x )
                                t
                                       2

                                                  ,                                                   (7a)
                        (x − x ) + ( y − y )
                          t
                                2
                                       t
                                              2




We label this as ‘share in variance’ since it most closely approximates Engel’s variance
decomposition, though equation 7a preserves the time-series dimension; below we also
consider an approximate mean-squared error version. Unfortunately, the denominator of
equation 7a does not equal the squared Big Mac real exchange rate. First, this is because
our cost share regressions did not allocate 100% of the variation of Big Mac prices to the


10Since we have 34 countries, we have 561 (=34x33/2) real exchange rates. However, we continue to focus
on only those 343 good level real exchange rates highly correlated with aggregate real exchange rates. As
described above, the restriction requires the correlation coefficients of both the level and the first-
difference of the good-level real exchange rates with their corresponding aggregate real exchange rates must
exceed 0.65.
                                                                                        16


ingredients we included. Hence we must also account for this unexplained portion for
completeness.    We adopt an agnostic view and experiment with three separate
approaches, namely, (a) ignoring the unexplained portion, (b) attributing the entire
unexplained portion to x, and (c) attributing the entire unexplained portion to y. As it
turns out, the three approaches yield qualitatively similar results with regard to our key
conclusions.

    Figure 2 plots the histograms of these three measures of x-share. Note these figures
use all available cross-section and time series data points. That is, without missing values
there will be 13 observations for each of the 343 ‘highly-correlated’ real Big Mac
exchange rates that we have been focusing on previously, i.e., those with correlation
coefficients > 0.65 between CPI and Big Mac real exchange rates in both levels and in
first differences (i.e., nearly 4500 observations). The x-axis records the share of traded-
goods deviations in the aggregate Big Mac real exchange rate. The x-axis labels indicate
the lower bound of each bin, e.g., 80% stands for the percent above 80%. The height of
the bars measures the percentage of real exchange rates meeting that criterion. The figure
indicates that there is considerable heterogeneity across the 343 real exchange rates. In
particular, in less than 40% of the cases do we get the result that x accounts for more
than 80% of real exchange rates. This is true whether we attribute the unexplained
portion to x, or to y or whether we ignore it and focus on the ‘pure’ version of equation
7a. Moreover, it is apparent that x accounts for a relatively small portion of real exchange
rates for a non-trivial proportion of the real exchange rates in our sample. Thus using
direct measures of the size of traded goods deviations relative to overall real exchange
rate deviations, we see that the Engel effect is substantially smaller than documented in
previous studies based on aggregate data.

    We now turn to a more systematic panel-regression analysis using both the cross-
sectional and time series information in our data. Inspired by Mendoza (2000), we
explicitly consider the effect of the exchange rate regime. We begin by incorporating a
dummy variable for the U.S. dollar pegs of Argentina, and Hong Kong. This dummy
($peg) takes the value one corresponding to these four country-pairs for all time periods in
the data set. We also include a dummy variable (Euro) for the Euro countries during the
1999-2002 time periods. However, a more general (i.e., continuous) way to capture
exchange rate effects is to incorporate exchange rate variability – defined as the standard
                                                                                                        17


deviation of monthly exchange rate variability within the year – directly into the
specification.

     Thus, the basic specification we report in Table 7 includes the three variables ($peg,
xrvol, and Euro). In the second column of the table we add time and city dummies. In
the final specification we add controls for membership in a trade bloc, sharing a common
language, the level of tariffs between the country-pair (= the sum of tariffs in countries i
and j), and the (log) distance between their capital cities. The most general specification is
shown as equation 8 below.

        x −share t = β1xrvol ij ,t + β 2 $ peg + β 3 Euro + β 4 ln( dist ij ) + β 5Tariff ij
                                                                                                        (8)
                    + β 6Common Language + β 7 Bloc ij + city and time dummies + ε ij ,t

     Distance is calculated using the great circle formula using each city’s latitude and
longitude data. Exchange rate variability is defined as the standard deviation of changes
in the monthly bilateral exchange rate (between the country-pairs involved) during each
year. Tariff is defined as the sum of the two average tariff rates in countries i and j, unless
the two countries are both in the same free trade area or customs union (such as within
the United States, or within the European Union). In these cases the value for tariff is set
equal to zero. Results from this estimation are presented in Table 7. The first two
columns (labeled pure) report the results where the variation in the unexplained portion of
Big Mac prices is ignored. In the second group of columns (labeled over-attribution to x)
the variation in the unexplained portion of Big Mac prices has been attributed to x, and in
the third group of columns, this variation has been attributed to y.

     The results in the table are quite stable across all specifications.                      First, higher
exchange rate volatility is associated with a larger x-share, i.e., higher exchange rate
volatility exaggerates the importance of traded goods deviation. Second, having a peg to
the U.S. dollar lowers the contribution of deviations from the law of one price in traded
goods to movements in ‘aggregate’ real exchange rates, as hypothesized by Mendoza
(2000). Results for the Euro, however, are generally weaker – though also in the same
direction. Tariffs are negative and statistically significant. Distance is strongly statistically
significant across all specifications, which suggests that arbitrage is less important for
more distant locations. Having a common language does not seem important. The trade
blocs we include have some mixed results. The European Union dummy is negative (but
                                                                                          18


insignificant) when the y-share is over-attributed (i.e., it includes the entire unexplained
portion), but positive and insignificant when x-share is over-attributed. Surprisingly,
Mercosur, APEC, and ASEAN all seem to be positively associated with x-share. This may
reflect the overall size of traded goods price disparities among these countries.

        One may wonder if our results are specific to the subset of real exchange rates we are
studying. Hence in Appendix Table 6, we include all Big Mac real exchange rates – i.e.,
even those with correlations with CPI real exchange rates below 0.65. The results hardly
change, suggesting they are not limited to our specific subsample.

        In Table 8 we examine a more comprehensive measure of variation in the real
exchange rate. Equation 7b is approximately the share of the mean squared error (MSE)
of the real exchange rate attributable to x.11 In our case however, the MSE of each term
(x and y) is computed as the sum of the time t squared deviation plus the time t deviation
from the mean squared. As before, we present three different measures of 7b depending
on how we treat potential covariation between x and y.

            x −share t =
                                         (x   t   − x ) + x t2
                                                       2

                                                                        ,                (7b)
                           (x   t   − x ) + ( y t − y ) + x t2 + y t2
                                         2                 2




        The results in Table 8 are largely similar to those in Table 7. Namely, (1) higher
exchange rate volatility is associated with a larger x-share; (2) having a peg to the U.S.
dollar lowers the contribution of deviations from the law of one price in traded goods to
movements in ‘aggregate’ real exchange rates; (3) x accounts for a higher proportion for
countries that are farther apart; and (4) tariffs are negative and statistically significant.
Finally, the results in Table 8 suggest that (when significant) x accounts for a higher
proportion for countries that have adopted the euro, even after controlling for the
European union, as well as countries in Mercosur and Asean.

        One potential statistical problem is that the dependent variable, a share, is
constrained to lie between zero and one. Strictly speaking, the normality assumption of
the error term in the OLS specification is incompatible with this. We address this issue
by taking a logistic transformation of x-share. This transformation allows the dependent



11
     Our equation 7b corresponds to Engel’s (1999) equation B1.
                                                                                                                  19


variable to take any positive or negative value (see Greene 1997, p.228).                                     For the
definition of x-share given in equation 7, the new dependent variable becomes:
                        
         x −share t = ln
                               (x t − x )2      
                                                 − ln
                                                       
                                                        1 −
                                                               (x t − x )2     
                                                                               ,                                (9)’
                         (x − x ) + ( y − y ) 
                                  2           2         (x − x ) + ( y − y ) 
                                                                  2          2
                         t              t                 t           t     

     Results using this specification (corresponding to equations 7a and 7b) are presented
in Tables 9 and 10. Statistical significance generally rises using this specification, but
other qualitative conclusions remain the same. The only notable changes are that the
dummy for Common language is negative, though it is not generally statistically
significant, and the trade bloc dummies (APEC and ASEAN) become statistically
insignificant. All other conclusions hold under this transformation.

     So far, we have studied the share of deviations from purchasing power parity
attributable to deviations from the law of one price in traded goods. In contrast, previous
studies have focused on share of changes in real exchange rates attributable to changes in
deviations from the law of one price in traded goods. In previous studies, this emphasis
was necessary since the level of the real exchange rate using aggregate (e.g., CPI) data is
arbitrary.   Thus the measure we study here is more direct.                                        We have shown that
deviations from the law of one price in traded goods generally account for a much smaller
portion of real exchange rate movement than previous studies would have led us to
expect. We have also shown that exchange rate variability is strongly positively related,
and exchange rate pegs (especially the US dollar pegs in this sample) are strongly
negatively related, to the fraction of absolute PPP deviations one can attribute to traded
goods price disparities. Finally, we have found that the importance of law of one price
deviations is often higher for countries participating in regional trading blocs.

     In an effort to check whether our findings are made possible due to our ability to
focus on real exchange rate levels, and for comparison with existing work we also
examine first-differenced versions of 7a and 7b, given as 7c and 7d below.

         x −share t =
                                   (∆x   t       − ∆x )
                                                       2

                                                                   ,                                             (7c)
                        (∆x   t   − ∆x ) + (∆y t − ∆y )
                                             2                 2




         x −share t =
                                       (∆x − ∆x ) + (∆x )
                                                   t
                                                           2
                                                                       t
                                                                           2
                                                                                               ,                 (7d)
                        (∆x   t   − ∆x ) + (∆y − ∆y ) + (∆x ) + (∆y )
                                             2
                                                       t
                                                               2
                                                                               t
                                                                                   2
                                                                                       t
                                                                                           2
                                                                                          20


    These results are reported in Appendix tables 7 and 8, and the logistic
transformations of them are reported in Appendix tables 9 and 10. The message that
exchange rate variability raises the importance of deviations from the law of one price in
real exchange rate movements continues to hold. However, other conclusions are less
apparent in this weaker version of the decomposition. That is, the formerly robust
conclusions concerning the dollar peg, distance, the European Union, and tariffs, are no
longer apparent. Since the level of real exchange rate can be meaningfully measured in
our thought experiment, we regard the analyses on (7a) and (7b) as more informative.


4. Thoughts at the checkout counter

    This paper has studied one particular ‘aggregate’ real exchange rate – i.e., the Big Mac
real exchange rate – where we know a great deal about how that aggregate is constructed.
We have shown that Big Mac real exchange rates are generally highly correlated with the
CPI-based real exchange rates. Thus, the lessons leant from the Big Mac real exchange
rates are relevant for the CPI-based real exchange rates. Our main innovation is to match
these prices to the prices of individual ingredients (ground beef, bread, lettuce, labor cost,
rent, etc.) in 34 countries during 1990-2002, which allows us to do a number of useful
thought experiments..

    We have presented a number of interesting findings.               First, the non-traded
component of Big Mac prices is substantial, i.e., between 55% and 64%. Second, we
study the persistence of the real exchange rate in a setting free of possible biases induced
by non-comparability of consumption baskets across countries, product aggregation bias
(Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn, and Rey, 2002), and time aggregation bias (Taylor, 2001). We find
that the speed of convergence for tradable inputs is sufficiently fast to be compatible with
economic theories (Chari, Kehoe, and McGratten, 2002), and that for the Big Mac real
exchange rates is slower than the speed for its tradable inputs, but faster than its non-
tradable inputs. Finally, we show that Engel's result that all movements in real exchange
rates are attributable to deviations from the law of one price in traded goods does not
hold generally. In particular, reduced exchange rate volatility, lower transport cost, higher
tariffs, and exchange rate pegs generally weaken the Engel effect.
                                                                              21




                 Table 1: Countries and Regions
Europe             Western Hemisphere             Asia, Pacific, and Africa
Austria                 Argentina                       Australia
Belgium                 Brazil                          China
Czech Republic          Canada                          Hong Kong
Denmark                 Chile                           Indonesia
England                 Mexico                          Israel
France                  United States                   Japan
Germany                                                 Malaysia
Hungary                                                 New Zealand
Ireland                                                 Singapore
Italy                                                   South Africa
Netherlands                                             South Korea
Poland                                                  Taiwan
Spain                                                   Thailand
Sweden
Switzerland
                                                                     22




 Table 2: Correlation of Big Mac and CPI based Real Exchange Rates
  (In-Sample U.S. Dollar Bilateral Real Exchange Rates, 1990-2002)

                          Correlation            Correlation
Country                    in levels             in changes
Australia                   0.938                  0.893
Austria                     0.992                  0.986
Belgium                     0.657                  0.886
Brazil                      0.895                  0.967
Denmark                     0.966                  0.866
France                      0.941                  0.704
Germany                     0.956                  0.878
Indonesia                   0.727                  0.967
Japan                       0.886                  0.927
Malaysia                    0.912                  0.846
Mexico                      0.827                  0.860
Netherlands                 0.759                  0.851
New Zealand                 0.947                  0.895
Singapore                   0.783                  0.732
South Africa                0.925                  0.882
South Korea                 0.932                  0.909
Spain                       0.954                  0.778
Sweden                      0.993                  0.942
Switzerland                 0.971                  0.987
Taiwan                      0.841                  0.917
Thailand                    0.906                  0.670

Medians:
   U.S. bilateral rates     0.891                  0.873
   All bilateral            0.889                  0.915
                                                                                                       23




                     Table 3: Cost Function Estimation for Big Mac Production
                                           (1990 – 2002)
                                 Regression in Levels                   Change Regression
                             Coefficient         Implied Cost                 Coefficient
                                       1
Ingredient                   Estimates           Share (%)2                    Estimates3
  Traded:
    Beef                         3.010                 9.0                        2.257
                                (0.645)                                          (0.669)
       Cheese                    2.530                 9.4                        1.995
                                (0.592)                                          (0.625)
       Lettuce                   1.546                 0.7                        6.017
                                (3.645)                                          (3.476)
       Onions                    1.156                 0.5                        4.411
                                (3.610)                                          (3.239)
       Bread                    13.428                12.1                       11.256
                                (3.053)                                          (3.200)

    Nontraded:
       Labor                     9.245                45.6                       11.823
                                (0.832)                                          (1.069)
       Rent                      0.008                 4.6                        0.010
                                (0.003)                                          (0.004)
       Electricity               0.085                 5.1                        0.078
                                (0.027)                                          (0.039)
                                              Total = 86.9%
# of observations                318                                               284
Adjusted R-squared               .95                                               .66

1, 3
     Coefficient estimates and standard errors are multiplied by 100. Estimation method is random
effects. Hausman test statistic for levels regression is χ 2 (8 ) = 5.8 (significance level =0.67), and the
test statistic for the change regression (1st differences) is χ 2 (8 ) = 3.3 (significance level =0.91
2   The share attributed to the ith ingredient is computed as: β̂ i Pi / PBig Mac , where Pi is the average
price of the ith input.
                                                                                                         24




                                     Table 4: Persistence Estimates

                                                                                              H 0 : λi = 0
Tradables                β̂           Half-life       # obs    R2         H 0 : λi = 0              θt = 0
 Beef                  -0.431           1.2           256     0.17          00.747                 0.925
                       (0.056)                                              (0.999)               (0.889)
 Cheese                -0.451           1.2           252     0.22           1.127                 1.347
                       (0.055)                                              (0.025)               (0.000)
 Lettuce               -0.358           1.6           246     0.13           0.794                 0.959
                       (0.055)                                              (0.999)               (0.745)
 Onions                -0.609           0.7           256     0.27           0.851                 0.955
                       (0.060)                                              (0.994)               (0.767)
 Bread                 -0.252           2.4           256     0.08           0.664                 0.918
                       (0.049)                                              (1.000)               (0.909)

 Median                                 1.2

Non-Tradables
 Labor                 -0.250           2.4           227     0.09           0.844                 0.953
                       (0.052)                                              (0.993)               (0.762)
 Rent                  -0.157           4.1           253     0.03           0.989                 1.143
                       (0.040)                                              (0.559)               (0.019)
 Electricity           -0.177           3.6           256     0.16           1.485                 1.622
                       (0.035)                                              (0.000)               (0.000)

 Median                                 3.6

Big Mac                -0.326           1.8           203     0.12           0.615                 0.704
                       (0.061)                                              (1.000)               (0.999)

 Country fixed effects                               yes
 Time fixed effects                                  yes
 This table reports the results of estimating the following equation, using a fixed-effects
                                 ∑                ∑
 estimator: ∆q i ,t = β q i ,t −1 + λi country i + θ t time t + ε i ,t
                                                                                                         25




                                     Table 4: Persistence Estimates
                                     (Net of VAT and Sales Taxes)

                                                                                              H 0 : λi = 0
Tradables                β̂           Half-life       # obs    R2         H 0 : λi = 0              θt = 0
 Beef                  -0.445           1.2           228     0.17           0.650                 0.810
                       (0.060)                                              (1.000)               (0.999)
 Cheese                -0.452           1.1           224     0.21           1.050                 1.219
                       (0.058)                                              (0.217)               (0.001)
 Lettuce               -0.342           1.7           220     0.11           1.020                 1.213
                       (0.057)                                              (0.358)               (0.001)
 Onions                -0.608           0.7           228     0.27           0.854                 0.953
                       (0.063)                                              (0.992)               (0.769)
 Bread                 -0.263           2.3           228     0.07           0.669                 0.885
                       (0.052)                                              (1.000)               (0.971)

 Median                                 1.4


 Big Mac               -0.322           1.8           180     0.12           0.740                 0.787
                       (0.065)                                              (0.999)               (0.999)


 Country fixed effects                               yes
 Time fixed effects                                  yes
 This table reports the results of estimating the following equation, using a fixed-effects
                                 ∑                ∑
 estimator: ∆q i ,t = β q i ,t −1 + λi country i + θ t time t + ε i ,t
                                                                                                         26




                               Table 6: Persistence Estimates Compared
                                         (TAR specifications)
                                     EQ-TAR                                           Band-TAR
 Tradables              β̂   Threshold    Half-life   # obs             β̂      Threshold   Half-life   # obs

    Beef           -0.462      0.024        1.12        237           -0.466      0.042       1.11       221
                   (0.061)                                            (0.061)

    Cheese         -0.488      0.024        1.04        226           -0.459      0.039       1.13       216
                   (0.058)                                            (0.056)

    Lettuce        -0.430      0.051        1.23        207           -0.419      0.060       1.27       200
                   (0.065)                                            (0.063)

    Onions         -0.680      0.065        0.61        237           -0.673      0.063       0.62       210
                   (0.055)                                            (0.067)

    Bread          -0.280      0.018        2.11        233           -0.296      0.030       1.98       217
                   (0.053)                                            (0.056)

    Median                                  1.12                                              1.13

 Non-Tradables
    Labor          -0.265      0.009        2.25        214           -0.264      0.015       2.26       204
                   (0.057)                                            (0.058)

    Rent           -0.200      0.036        3.10        208           -0.201      0.048       3.09       189
                   (0.049)                                            (0.050)

    Electricity    -0.180      0.015        3.49        241           -0.192      0.036       3.25       200
                   (0.036)                                            (0.042)

    Median                                  3.10                                              3.09


    Big Mac        -0.407      0.018        1.33        176           -0.476      0.033       1.07       150
                   (0.072)                                            (0.083)


Country fixed effects                        yes                                               yes
Time fixed effects                           yes                                               yes

 This table reports estimates of equation (2) and (2’) in the text.
                                                                                                     27


                        Table 7: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                       Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
                       (Share in variance: levels of real exchange rate)
                                                   Over attribution   Over attribution
                          "pure" measure               to "x"                to "y"
Exchange Rate            1.429 1.408             1.523      1.293      1.512      0.773
Volatility               (0.267) (0.282)        (0.256) (0.268        (0.237) (0.254)

$ Peg                     -0.415 -0.440              -0.250     -0.279          -0.134     -0.162
                          (0.127) (0.132)            (0.098)    (0.096)         (0.126)    (0.129)

Euro                      -0.130 -0.128              -0.065     -0.065          -0.014      0.032
                          (0.080) (0.082)            (0.049)    (0.049)         (0.181)    (0.180)

Distance                             0.038                       0.041                      0.069
                                    (0.006)                     (0.005)                    (0.005)

Sum Tariffs                         -0.008                      -0.008                     -0.010
                                    (0.003)                     (0.002)                    (0.002)

Common                              -0.047                       0.000                      0.012
Language                            (0.027)                     (0.021)                    (0.022)

European                            -0.012                       0.040                      -0.041
Union                               (0.041)                     (0.032)                    (0.037)

Mercosur                             0.245                       0.199                      0.420
                                    (0.065)                     (0.041)                    (0.057)

Apec                                 0.119                       0.011                      0.076
                                    (0.033)                     (0.029)                    (0.027)

Asean                                0.183                       0.164                      0.187
                                    (0.089)                     (0.070)                    (0.102)

Nafta                                0.000                       0.000                     -0.071
                                    (0.000)                     (0.000)                    (0.069)


Observations              2304      2115              2404       2214            2948       2742
Adjusted R-squared        0.304     0.312             0.110      0.130           0.027      0.087
Time Dummies              yes        yes               yes        yes             yes        yes
Country Dummies           yes        yes               yes        yes             yes        yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7a in the text.
                                                                                                        28


                        Table 8: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                       Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
                         (Share in MSE: levels of real exchange rate)
                                                  Over attribution    Over attribution
                           "pure" measure             to "x"                 to "y"
Exchange Rate             1.002 1.145           0.227      0.013      1.006       0.989
Volatility                (0.271) (0.267)      (0.240) (0.245)       (0.211) (0.221)

$ Peg                     -0.744 -0.720               -0.266     -0.296          -0.273     -0.254
                          (0.059) (0.066)             (0.037)    (0.041          (0.038)    (0.040)

Euro                      0.098 0.070                  0.151     0.055           -0.101     -0.184
                          (0.032) (0.036)             (0.036)    (0.035          (0.142)    (0.142)

Distance                            -0.005                        0.053                      0.043
                                    (0.005)                      (0.003                     (0.004)

Sum Tariffs                         -0.009                       -0.004                     -0.002
                                    (0.002)                      (0.002                     (0.002)

Common                              -0.085                        0.019                      0.017
Language                            (0.022)                      (0.017                     (0.018)

European                             0.045                        0.192                      0.128
Union                               (0.034)                      (0.026                     (0.029)

Mercosur                             0.415                        0.139                      0.277
                                    (0.060)                      (0.041                     (0.069)

Apec                                -0.038                        0.125                      0.199
                                    (0.029)                      (0.024                     (0.023)

Asean                                0.236                        0.259                      0.214
                                    (0.088)                      (0.091                     (0.091)

Nafta                                0.000                        0.000                      0.026
                                    (0.000)                      (0.000                     (0.076)


Observations              2304       2115              2404       2214         2948             2742
Adjusted R-squared        0.346      0.331             0.117      0.208        0.259            0.326
Time Dummies              yes         yes               yes        yes          yes              yes
Country Dummies           yes         yes               yes        yes          yes              yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7b in the text.
                                                                                                           29


                    Table 9: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                   Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
           (Share in variance: levels of real exchange rate, logistic specification)
                                                Over attribution    Over attribution
                       "pure" measure                to "x"                to "y"
Exchange Rate         13.545 14.595           13.713     13.843       11.949         8.675
Volatility            (3.207) (3.355)         (2.829) (2.950)         (2.287)       (2.522)

$ Peg                     -4.115 -3.811               -1.994      -1.755            -0.487       -0.771
                          (1.038) (1.054)             (0.937)     (0.915)           (1.044)      (1.063)

Euro                      -2.214 -2.137                0.248       0.401            -0.925       -0.546
                          (1.750) (1.799)             (0.359)     (0.394)           (1.574)      (1.564)

Distance                            -0.042                        -0.043                          0.216
                                    (0.056)                       (0.045)                        (0.046)

Sum Tariffs                         -0.087                        -0.081                         -0.086
                                    (0.025)                       (0.019)                        (0.020)

Common                              -0.757                        -0.298                         -0.277
Language                            (0.262)                       (0.185)                        (0.196)

European                            -0.443                        -0.370                         -0.555
Union                               (0.398)                       (0.299)                        (0.342)

Mercosur                             3.835                         2.973                          1.474
                                    (0.804)                       (1.030)                        (0.527)

Apec                                 0.321                        -0.575                          0.040
                                    (0.328)                       (0.268)                        (0.252)

Asean                                1.293                         0.988                          1.237
                                    (0.878)                       (0.764)                        (0.981)

Nafta                                0.000                         0.000                         -1.423
                                    (0.000)                       (0.000)                        (0.692)


Observations              2304       2115              2404       2214              2948          2742
Adjusted R-squared        0.301      0.304             0.149      0.149             0.061         0.071
Time Dummies              yes         yes               yes        yes               yes           yes
Country Dummies           yes         yes               yes        yes               yes           yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7a in the text, and the logistic
transformation described in equation 9.
                                                                                                         30


                  Table 10: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                 Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
            (Share in MSE: levels of real exchange rate, logistic specification)
                                              Over attribution    Over attribution
                      "pure" measure               to "x"            to "y"
Exchange Rate        7.429    10.365         1.279      1.872    5.365 6.744
Volatility           (2.120) (1.940)        (1.701) (1.736)     (1.429) (1.516)

$ Peg                     -6.886 -6.396               -2.856     -2.655        -2.923 -2.674
                          (0.599) (0.628)             (0.280)    (0.304)       (0.431) (0.446)

Euro                      -0.249 -0.361                1.041      0.530        -0.382 -0.793
                          (0.857) (0.863)             (0.193)    (0.188)       (0.760) (0.763)

Distance                            -0.336                        0.033                  0.017
                                    (0.035)                      (0.020)                (0.025)

Sum Tariffs                         -0.056                       -0.026                 -0.012
                                    (0.015)                      (0.012)                (0.011)

Common                              -0.881                       -0.020                 -0.058
Language                            (0.153)                      (0.103)                (0.120)

European                            -0.051                        0.804                  0.366
Union                               (0.240)                      (0.171)                (0.174)

Mercosur                             3.251                        1.725                  1.078
                                    (0.523)                      (0.404)                (0.371)

Apec                                -0.447                        0.247                  0.947
                                    (0.200)                      (0.149)                (0.147)

Asean                                1.603                        1.575                  1.069
                                    (0.583)                      (0.647)                (0.721)

Nafta                                0.000                        0.000                 -0.633
                                    (0.000)                      (0.000)                (0.373)


Observations              2304       2115              2404       2214          2948     2742
Adjusted R-squared        0.371      0.396             0.207      0.224         0.291    0.324
Time Dummies              yes         yes               yes        yes           yes      yes
Country Dummies           yes         yes               yes        yes           yes      yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7b in the text, and the logistic
transformation described in equation 9.
                                                                                                31



                                                          Figure 1
                                      Correlation of Big Mac and CPI Real Exchange Rates
                                                            (levels)

                             100                                                           95
                                                                                  91
                                                                  85
  % of real exchange rates




                                                   77
                              80

                                    58
                              60


                              40


                              20
                                   > 0.8          > 0.6          > 0.4          > 0.2      >0
                                                              Correlation



                                      Correlation of Big Mac and CPI Real Exchange Rates
                                                         (1st differences)

                                                                                  94       97
                             100                                  90
                                                   83
% of real exchange rates




                              80
                                    68

                              60


                              40


                              20
                                   > 0.8          > 0.6          > 0.4           > 0.2     >0
                                                              Correlation
                                                                                            32




                                                           Figure 2

                                      Share of Traded Goods Price Deviations in
                                            Big Mac Real Exchange Rates
                                          (343 real exchange rates, all years)
                           100
                                                                      "pure"
                                                                      measure
% of Real Exchange Rates




                            80                  "x" includes
                                                unexplained
                                                  portion
                            60   "y" includes
                                 unexplained
                                   portion
                            40


                            20
                                   > 80               > 60        > 40          > 20   >0
                                                                 Share
References
Caves, Richard, J. Frankel, and R. Jones, 2002, World Trade and Payments: An
    Introduction, Ninth edition Harper Collins, New York.
Chari, V.V., P. Kehoe, and E. McGratten, 2002, “Can Sticky Price Models Generate
    Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?”, Review of Economic Studies, 69:3, pp. 533-
    63.
Click, Reid W., 1996, "Contrarian MacParity”, Economics Letters; 53(2), November 1996,
    pages 209-12.
Cumby, Robert, 1997, “Forecasting Exchange Rates and Relative Prices with the
    Hamburger Standard: Is What You Want What You Get with McParity?”, also NBER
    Working Paper #5675, July 1996.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1989, “Real Exchange Rates and Macroeconomics: A Selective
    Survey”, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 91:2, pp. 401-32.
Engel, Charles, 1999, “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes”, Journal of Political
   Economy, V107, pp. 507-38.
Franses, Philip Hans, and Dick van Dijk, 2000, Nonlinear Time Series Models in
   Empirical Finance, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Friedman, Milton, 1953, Essays in Positive Economics, University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago.
Froot, Kenneth, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1991, “The EMS, the EMU, and the Transition to a
   Common Currency, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 6, p. 269-317.
Froot, Kenneth, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, “Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Real
   Exchange Rates”, in Handbook of International Economics, Volume 3, Grossman
   and Rogoff, editors, Elsevier, New York.
Greene, W., 1997. Econometric Analysis. Third edition, Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Imbs, J., H. Mumtaz, M. Ravn, and H. Rey, 2002, “PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and the
   Real Exchange Rate”, NBER Working Paper #9372, November 2002.
Lutz, Matthias, 2001, “Beyond Burgernomics and MacParity: Exchange Rate Forecasts
   Based on the Law of one Price”, University of St. Gallen working paper.
Mendoza, Enrique, 2000, “On the Instability of Variance Decompositions of the Real
  Exchange Rate across Exchange-Rate-Regimes: Evidence from Mexico and the United
  States”, Duke University working paper.
O’Connell, Paul, 1998, “Market Frictions and Real Exchange Rates”, Journal of International
   Money and finance, 17(1), pp. 71-95.
O’Connell Paul, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2002, “The Bigger They Are, The Dollarer They Fall:
   How Price Differences Across U.S. Cities Are Arbitraged”, Journal of International
   Economics, 56(1), pp. 21-53.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1996, Foundations of International
   Macroeconomics, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000, “The Six Major Puzzles in
   Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual (15).
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan Taylor, 1997, “Non-linear Aspects of Goods-Market
   Arbitrage and Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Point Revisited,” Journal of Japanese
   and International Economics 11, pp. 441-479.
Ong, Li-Lian (1997): "Burgernomics: The Economics of the Big Mac Standard," Journal of
  International Money and Finance; 16(6), December 1997, pages 865.
Pakko, Michael, and Patricia S. Pollard, 1996 "For Here or To Go? Purchasing Power
   Parity and the Big Mac," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review; 78(1), Jan.-Feb. 1996,
   pages 3-2.
Parsley, David, 2001, “Accounting for Real Exchange Rate Changes in East Asia”, Hong
    Kong Institute of Monetary Research Working Paper #6/2001.
Parsley, David, and H. Popper, “Accounting for Real Exchange Rate Changes with
    Individual Goods”, December 2002, Vanderbilt University working paper.
Parsley, David, and Shang-Jin Wei, 1996, “Convergence to the Law of One Price without
    Trade Barriers or Currency Fluctuations”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111:4, pp. 1211-
    1236.
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle”, Journal of Economic
   Literature, 34, pages 647-668.
Taylor, Alan, 2001, “Potential Pitfalls for the Purchasing-Power Parity Puzzle? Sampling
   and Specification Biases in Mean-Reversion Tests of the Law of One Price.”
   Econometrica, 69, pages 473–498.
Taylor, A., and Sarno, 2002, “Purchasing Power Parity and the Real Exchange Rate”,
   International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 49(1), pp. 65-105.
                  Appendix Table 1: Cities Matched to Countries
     1    Amsterdam, Netherlands                      18   Mexico City, Mexico
     2    Auckland, New Zealand                       19   Paris, France
     3    Bangkok, Thailand                           20   Prague, Czech Republic
     4    Beijing, China                              21   Rome, Italy
     5    Berlin, Germany                             22   Santiago, Chile
     6    Brussels, Belgium                           23   Sao Paulo, Brazil
     7    Budapest, Hungary                           24   Seoul, Korea
     8    Buenos Aires, Argentina                     25   Singapore
     9    Copenhagen, Denmark                         26   Stockholm, Sweden
     10   Dublin, Ireland                             27   Sydney, Australia
     11   Hong Kong, SAR                              28   Taipei, Taiwan
     12   Chicago, USA1                               29   Tel Aviv, Israel
     13   Jakarta, Indonesia                          30   Tokyo, Japan
     14   Johannesburg, South Africa                  31   Toronto, Canada
     15   Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia                      32   Vienna, Austria
     16   London, England                             33   Warsaw, Poland
     17   Madrid, Spain                               34   Zurich, Switzerland


1
 To correspond with the Economist’s Big Mac Index, data for the U.S. is an average of
Atlanta, Chicago, San Francisco, and Washington, D.C.
                      Appendix Table 2: Persistence Estimates
                        (Dropping influential observations)

      Tradables                      β̂         Half-life      # obs          R2
        Beef                       -0.431         1.2          243            0.23
                                   (0.053)
        Cheese                     -0.370         1.5          239            0.22
                                   (0.051)
        Lettuce                    -0.347         1.6          233            0.19
                                   (0.050)
        Onions                     -0.618         0.7          243            0.35
                                   (0.056)
        Bread                      -0.227         2.7          243            0.08
                                   (0.045)

        Median                                    1.4

      Non-Tradables
        Labor                      -0.265         2.3          215            0.21
                                   (0.053)
        Rent                       -0.141         4.6          240            0.10
                                   (0.036)
        Electricity                -0.137         4.7          243            0.18
                                   (0.032)

        Median                                    3.9

      Big Mac                      -0.277         2.1          192            0.17
                                   (0.056)

    Country fixed effects            yes
    Time fixed effects               yes

This table reports the results of estimating equation 1 using a fixed-effects estimator. For
this table, the observations associated with the largest 5% of the residuals from the
regressions reported in Table 4 were eliminated prior to estimation. The half-life is
computed as log(.5)/log(1+ β̂ ).
                      Appendix Table 3: Persistence Estimates
                           (Random Effects Estimator)

      Tradables               β̂       Half-life # obs         R2     Ho : cov( X , e ) = 0
        Beef                 -0.306       1.9       256        0.23        0.024
                             (0.046)
        Cheese               -0.350       1.6       252        0.27        0.062
                             (0.047)
        Lettuce              -0.232       2.6       246        0.19        0.018
                             (0.043)
        Onions               -0.505       1.0       256        0.33        0.074
                             (0.055)
        Bread                -0.145       4.4       256        0.15        0.027
                             (0.038)

        Median                            2.3

      Non-Tradables
        Labor                -0.125       5.2       227        0.17        0.017
                             (0.037)
        Rent                 -0.075       8.9       253        0.09        0.039
                             (0.030)
        Electricity          -0.115       5.6       256        0.22        0.072
                             (0.027)

        Median                            6.6

        Big Mac              -0.189       3.3       203        0.21        0.025
                             (0.045)


This table reports the results of estimating equation 1 using a random effects estimator.
The final column reports the significance level of a Hausman test that the covariance
between the independent variables and the error term is equal to zero. Failure to reject this
hypothesis indicates that random effects estimator is the efficient estimator. The half-life is
computed as log(.5)/log(1+ β̂ ).
                      Appendix Table 4: Persistence Estimates
                      (Cumby’s Sample of Countries: 1990-1999)

      Tradables                       β̂        Half-life      # obs          R2
        Beef                       -0.540         0.9            72           0.07
                                   (0.053)
        Cheese                     -0.543         0.9            72           0.28
                                   (0.122)
        Lettuce                    -0.685         0.6            72           0.24
                                   (0.0128
        Onions                     -0.819         0.4            72           0.40
                                   (0.125)
        Bread                      -0.540         0.9            72           0.12
                                   (0.122)

        Median                                    0.7

      Non-Tradables
        Labor                      -0.622         0.7            72           0.16
                                   (0.141)
        Rent                       -0.057         4.3            71           -0.76
                                   (0.065)
        Electricity                -0.396         1.4            72           0.26
                                   (0.091)

        Median                                    2.1

      Big Mac                      -0.398         1.4            71           0.07
                                   (0.128)

    Country fixed effects             yes
    Time fixed effects                yes

This table reports the results of estimating equation 1 using a fixed-effects estimator. The
half-life is computed as log(.5)/log(1+ β̂ ).
                         Appendix Table 5 Persistence Estimates
                        (Augmented Dickey-Fuller Specification)

        Tradables                β̂            γˆ        Half-life*      # obs         R2
          Beef                -0.401          -0.077           1.4         234         0.18
                              (0.068)         (0.071)
          Cheese              -0.377          -0.075           1.5         229         0.16
                              (0.067)         (0.068)
          Lettuce             -0.324          -0.044           1.8         224         0.14
                              (0.063)         (0.071)
          Onions              -0.534          -0.077           0.9         234         0.22
                              (0.079)         (0.068)
          Bread               -0.291           0.047           2.0         234         0.11
                              (0.058)         (0.073)

          Median                                               1.5

        Non-Tradables
          Labor               -0.325           0.180           1.8         207         0.11
                              (0.064)         (0.081)
          Rent                -0.210           0.157           2.9         231         0.11
                              (0.043)         (0.070)
          Electricity         -0.205           0.100           3.0         234         0.17
                              (0.040)         (0.069)

          Median                                               2.6

          Big Mac             -0.357          -0.033           1.6         181         0.16
                              (0.076)         (0.089)

    Country fixed effects               yes
    Time fixed effects                  yes

This table reports the results of estimating the following equation for each real exchange
rate:
 ∆q i , t = β q i , t −1 + γ∆q i , t −1 + country & time dummies + ε i , t , using a fixed-effects estimator.
*The   half-life is computed as log(.5)/log(1+ β̂ ).
         Appendix Table 6: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
                 (Share in variance: levels of real exchange rate)
                                            Over attribution    Over attribution
                   "pure" measure               to "x"                 to "y"
Exchange Rate     1.315    1.351          1.595       1.415     1.797       0.900
Volatility                  (0.236) (0.255)              (0.185)     (0.198)          (0.210)    (0.232)

$ Peg                       -0.160 -0.226                 0.070      -0.031            0.046     -0.127
                            (0.065) (0.064)              (0.047)     (0.044)          (0.051)    (0.051)

Euro                        -0.131 -0.139                -0.026      -0.033           -0.121     -0.087
                            (0.049) (0.052)              (0.030)     (0.031)          (0.060)    (0.059)

Distance                               0.033                          0.035                       0.063
                                      (0.005)                        (0.004)                     (0.004)

Sum Tariffs                           -0.007                         -0.006                      -0.009
                                      (0.002)                        (0.002)                     (0.002)

Common                                 0.001                          0.028                       0.018
Language                              (0.019)                        (0.014)                     (0.015)

European                               0.028                          0.064                      -0.033
Union                                 (0.031)                        (0.023)                     (0.026)

Mercosur                               0.258                          0.250                       0.458
                                      (0.041)                        (0.032)                     (0.040)

Apec                                   0.104                          0.042                       0.057
                                      (0.025)                        (0.021)                     (0.022)

Asean                                  0.106                          0.051                       0.129
                                      (0.065)                        (0.052)                     (0.061)

Nafta                                  0.047                          0.108                       0.052
                                      (0.099)                        (0.061)                     (0.060)

Observations              3863       3390              4148      3658           4703        4181
Adjusted R-squared        0.284      0.293             0.090     0.104          0.047      0.096
Time Dummies              yes         yes               yes        yes           yes         yes
Country Dummies           yes         yes               yes        yes           yes         yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7a in the text. This table can
be compared directly to Table 7. Unlike in Table 7 however, regressions in this table focus on all Big Mac real
exchange rates – i.e., including those where the correlation with CPI real exchange rates is below than 0.65 in both
levels, and in 1st differences.
              Appendix Table 7: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                  Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
                 (Share in variance: 1st differences of real exchange rate)
                                               Over attribution    Over attribution
                     "pure" measure                to "x"            to "y"
Exchange Rate       2.123 2.106             1.509)      0.939    0.801 1.173
Volatility          (0.284) (0.303)         (0.247) (0.279)     (0.280) (0.258)

$ Peg                     0.078 0.122                 0.110     -0.002        -0.046 0.075
                          (0.149) (0.153)            (0.126)    (0.083)       (0.084) (0.132)

Euro                      -0.140 -0.081              -0.095     -0.125        -0.117 -0.028
                          (0.041) (0.048)            (0.186)    (0.064)       (0.068) (0.187)

Distance                            -0.002                       0.044                  0.033
                                    (0.006)                     (0.005)                (0.005)

Sum Tariffs                         -0.001                       0.005                 -0.009
                                    (0.004)                     (0.003)                (0.003)

Common                              -0.001                      -0.002                  0.023
Language                            (0.029)                     (0.022)                (0.024)

European                            -0.087                       0.056                 -0.077
Union                               (0.047)                     (0.036)                (0.039)

Mercosur                             0.306                       0.153                  0.058
                                    (0.072)                     (0.050)                (0.095)

Apec                                -0.027                       0.019                 -0.020
                                    (0.036)                     (0.028)                (0.029)

Asean                                0.021                       0.177                 -0.002
                                    (0.103)                     (0.069)                (0.088)

Nafta                                0.000                       0.000                  0.006
                                    (0.000)                     (0.000)                (0.078)


Observations              1939      1782              2615       2050          1892 2439
Adjusted R-squared        0.331     0.327             0.061      0.071         0.122 0.085
Time Dummies              yes        yes               yes        yes           yes   yes
Country Dummies           yes        yes               yes        yes           yes   yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7c in the text.
              Appendix Table 8: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                 Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
                  (Share in MSE: 1st differences of real exchange rate)
                                             Over attribution    Over attribution
                    "pure" measure               to "x"            to "y"
Exchange Rate      1.996 2.002)            0.728      0.522    1.445 1.070
Volatility         (0.254) (0.267)        (0.250) (0.245)     (0.227) (0.236)

$ Peg                     0.015 0.069                 0.024     -0.020        -0.053 -0.089
                          (0.146) (0.151)            (0.049)    (0.051)       (0.101) (0.106)

Euro                      -0.081 -0.029              -0.137     -0.103        -0.095 -0.020
                          (0.037) (0.041)            (0.067)    (0.070)       (0.159) (0.160)

Distance                           -0.003                        0.043                 0.030
                                   (0.006)                      (0.004)               (0.005)

Sum Tariffs                        -0.003                        0.002                -0.009
                                   (0.004)                      (0.002)               (0.003)

Common                              0.021                        0.015                 0.022
Language                           (0.027)                      (0.019)               (0.022)

European                           -0.086                        0.004                -0.096
Union                              (0.043)                      (0.028)               (0.037)

Mercosur                            0.295                        0.109                 0.056
                                   (0.063)                      (0.034)               (0.097)

Apec                               -0.034                        0.003                -0.033
                                   (0.034)                      (0.024)               (0.027)

Asean                               0.013                        0.151                 0.006
                                   (0.099)                      (0.067)               (0.082)

Nafta                               0.000                        0.000                -0.026
                                   (0.000)                      (0.000)               (0.076)


Observations              1939      1782              2051       1893         2615 2439
Adjusted R-squared        0.379     0.374             0.089      0.159        0.081 0.105
Time Dummies              yes        yes               yes        yes          yes   yes
Country Dummies           yes        yes               yes        yes          yes   yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7d in the text.
                 Appendix Table 9: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                      Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
          (Share in variance: 1st differences of real exchange rate, logistic specification)
                                                   Over attribution    Over attribution
                         "pure" measure                to "x"            to "y"
Exchange Rate           16.865 17.846            6.062      6.841    8.252 7.415
Volatility              (2.964) (3.110)         (2.317) (2.499)     (2.021) (2.113)

$ Peg                     -0.610 0.188                -0.082      0.038         1.507 1.436
                          (1.298) (1.343)             (0.962)    (1.002)       (1.146) (1.198)

Euro                      -1.592 -0.850               -0.923     -0.772        -0.939 -0.290
                          (1.015) (1.083)             (0.377)    (0.419)       (1.385) (1.406)

Distance                            -0.381                       -0.051                 -0.062
                                    (0.057)                      (0.040)                (0.047)

Sum Tariffs                         -0.017                        0.005                 -0.088
                                    (0.039)                      (0.025)                (0.027)

Common                              -0.385                       -0.194                 -0.022
Language                            (0.274)                      (0.190)                (0.206)

European                            -1.333                       -0.075                 -1.113
Union                               (0.425)                      (0.305)                (0.327)

Mercosur                             3.619                        1.576                 -0.143
                                    (1.192)                      (0.810)                (0.631)

Apec                                -0.671                       -0.363                 -0.572
                                    (0.336)                      (0.251)                (0.249)

Asean                               -0.840                        0.304                 -1.343
                                    (1.091)                      (0.499)                (0.974)

Nafta                                0.000                        0.000                 -0.245
                                    (0.000)                      (0.000)                (0.776)


Observations              1939       1782              2050       1892          2615 2439
Adjusted R-squared        0.268      0.285             0.134      0.127         0.069 0.082
Time Dummies              yes         yes               yes        yes           yes   yes
Country Dummies           yes         yes               yes        yes           yes   yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7c in the text, and the logistic
transformation described in equation 9.
                 Appendix Table 10: Contribution of Traded Good Deviations to
                      Big Mac Real Exchange Rate Movements (1990-2002)
            (Share in MSE: 1st differences of real exchange rate, logistic specification)
                                                 Over attribution    Over attribution
                         "pure" measure              to "x"             to "y"

Exchange Rate             14.904 15.904                4.415      4.632         7.513 6.377
Volatility                (2.279) (2.350)             (1.683)    (1.763)       (1.469) (1.544)

$ Peg                     -1.032 -0.188                0.215      0.376        -0.322 -0.402
                          (1.204) (1.225)             (0.595)    (0.608)       (0.592) (0.624)

Euro                      -1.546 -0.882               -0.815     -0.551        -0.687 -0.032
                          (1.158) (1.207)             (0.343)    (0.351)       (0.892) (0.903)

Distance                            -0.364                       -0.024                 -0.074
                                    (0.048)                      (0.030)                (0.038)

Sum Tariffs                         -0.038                       -0.006                 -0.080
                                    (0.029)                      (0.015)                (0.023)

Common                              -0.218                       -0.066                 -0.049
Language                            (0.215)                      (0.131)                (0.156)

European                            -1.295                       -0.220                 -1.193
Union                               (0.332)                      (0.185)                (0.264)

Mercosur                             3.570                        1.779                 -0.199
                                    (0.767)                      (0.492)                (0.496)

Apec                                -0.767                       -0.464                 -0.580
                                    (0.272)                      (0.178)                (0.194)

Asean                               -0.317                        0.357                 -0.671
                                    (0.753)                      (0.461)                (0.563)

Nafta                                0.000                        0.000                 -0.513
                                    (0.000)                      (0.000)                (0.578)


Observations              1939       1782              2051       1893         2615 2439
Adjusted R-squared        0.353      0.378             0.211      0.202        0.095 0.113
Time Dummies              yes         yes               yes        yes          yes   yes
Country Dummies           yes         yes               yes        yes          yes   yes
This table presents results using the definition of x-share given in equation 7d in the text, and the logistic
transformation described in equation 9.
