                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INVENTORIES AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE:
                      AN EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS OF (S,S) POLICIES

                                            Aubhik Khan
                                            Julia Thomas

                                        Working Paper 10078
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10078


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2003
                                 Revised January 2007




 We thank Patrick Kehoe, Robert King and Richard Rogerson for extensive discussions and suggestions
 that have substantially raised the quality of this work. We are also grateful to Fernando Alvarez, Ellen
 McGrattan, Edward Prescott, Valerie Ramey and two anonymous referees, as well as seminar participants
at Alicante, Bank of Canada, Carnegie-Mellon, Cornell, Indiana, Iowa, Ohio State, Montreal, Penn,
Pompeu Fabra, UQAM and Yale and The Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, Philadelphia
 and St.Louis and session participants at the 2002 Midwest Macro and SED meetings, February 2003
NBER EF&G meetings, and June 2003 Madrid Conference on Lumpy Investment, for helpful comments.
Thomas thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for a research fellowship supporting this work, and
the National Science Foundation for research support under grant #0318163. The views expressed
in this paper do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Burau of Economic Research.

© 2003 by Aubhik Khan and Julia Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Inventories and the Business Cycle: An Equilibrium Analysis of (S,s) Policies
Aubhik Khan and Julia Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 10078
November 2003, Revised Januray 2007
JEL No. E32,E22

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop an equilibrium business cycle model where nonconvex delivery costs lead producers of
final goods to follow generalized (S,s) inventory policies with respect to intermediate goods. When
calibrated to match the average inventory-to-sales ratio in postwar U.S. data, our model reproduces
two-thirds of the cyclical variability of inventory investment. Moreover, inventory accumulation is
strongly procyclical, and production is more volatile than sales, as in the data. The comovement between
inventory investment and final sales is often interpreted as evidence that inventories amplify aggregate
fluctuations. Our model contradicts this view. Despite the positive correlation between sales and inventory
investment, we find that inventory accumulation has minimal consequence for the cyclical variability
of GDP. In equilibrium, procyclical inventory investment diverts resources from the production of
final goods; thus, it dampens cyclical changes in final sales, leaving GDP volatility essentially unaltered.
Moreover, although business cycles arise solely from shocks to productivity and markets are perfectly
competitive in our model, it nonetheless yields a countercyclical inventory-to-sales ratio.

Aubhik Khan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Ten Independence Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
mail@aubhik-khan.net

Julia Thomas
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Ten Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106-1574
and NBER
mail@juliathomas.net
1       Introduction
      Inventory investment is a volatile component of GDP. Moreover, its comovement with ﬁnal
sales raises the variance of production above that of sales. Historically, such observations have led
researchers to emphasize changes in inventories as central to an understanding of aggregate ﬂuctua-
tions.1 Despite this, modern business cycle theory has been surprisingly silent on the topic.2 Our
goal in this paper is to develop a quantitative general equilibrium model of endogenous inventory
investment and use it to formally evaluate several prominent claims regarding the cyclical role of
inventories.
     We begin by extending a basic equilibrium business cycle model to include ﬁxed costs associ-
ated with the acquisition of intermediate goods used in ﬁnal production, thereby inducing ﬁrms to
maintain inventories of intermediate goods and manage them according to generalized (S,s) policies.
When calibrated to match the average aggregate inventory-to-sales ratio in the postwar U.S. data,
our baseline inventory model accounts for 64 percent of the measured cyclical variability of inventory
investment, and it reproduces each of the following essential empirical regularities involving invento-
ries: (i) inventory investment is procyclical, (ii) it co-moves with ﬁnal sales, and thus (iii) the cyclical
variability of total production exceeds that of sales. To our knowledge, no previous model with a
micro-foundation for inventories has succeeded in reproducing these three regularities in quantitative
general equilibrium; even absent this discipline, they have eluded most models.
     We use our model as a laboratory to re-consider the following claims about the role of invento-
ries over the business cycle. First, as noted above, it is widely believed that procyclical inventory
accumulation exacerbates aggregate ﬂuctuations. Second, as a corollary, it follows that reductions in
aggregate inventory holdings accompanied by smaller changes in inventory investment will dampen
the severity of business cycles. This view, strengthened by the predictions of reduced-form inventory
models, has led some to argue that improvements in inventory management may have caused the
substantial fall in cyclical GDP volatility observed in the U.S. since the mid-1980s.3
     Our analysis challenges both of these claims. First, we compare simulated data from our calibrated
inventory model to that from a control model where the ﬁxed costs causing inventories are eliminated.
The results of this exercise indicate that the aggregate business cycle would be essentially unchanged,
and the percent standard deviation of GDP would fall by just 2.8 basis points, from 1.886 to 1.858,
if inventories were to disappear entirely from the economy. Next, in an exercise intended to crudely
    1
      Blinder (1990, page viii) concludes "business cycles are, to a surprisingly large degree, inventory cycles." See also
the survey by Ramey and West (1999) and the references cited therein.
    2
      When inventories are included in equilibrium models, their role is generally inconsistent with their deﬁnition. See,
for example, Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Christiano (1988), where inventories are a factor of production, or Kahn,
McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2001), where they are a source of household utility.
    3
      This idea, originally espoused by Kahn, McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000), has been widely studied. See, for
example, McCarthy and Zakrajšek (2000), Ahmed, Levin and Wilson (2002), Irvine and Schuh (2002), Ramey and Vine
(2004), Stock and Watson (2002) and Maccini and Pagan (2003).

                                                            1
mimic a substantial improvement in inventory management, we compare simulated data from two
versions of our inventory model distinguished only by the size of their ﬁxed delivery costs. Our
results there indicate that the standard deviation of HP-ﬁltered GDP would fall imperceptibly, from
1.896 to 1.886, if the frictions causing inventories were reduced suﬃciently to yield a 15 percent decline
in the size of these stocks.
    These ﬁndings are speciﬁc to the outcomes of a particular inventory model, one where inventory
accumulation arises from ﬁxed order costs, markets are perfectly competitive, and technology shocks
drive all aggregate ﬂuctuations. Nonetheless, they raise the following broader observation about par-
tial equilibrium analyses involving inventories. If movements in ﬁnal sales are taken as exogenous,
researchers need only note the positive correlation between sales and inventory investment to conclude
that changes in inventory investment must raise the cyclical volatility of GDP. However, central to
our general equilibrium analysis is the fact that both inventory investment and ﬁnal sales are en-
dogenous, and that their dynamics are inter-related. Because they eﬀectively enter the same resource
constraint, there is an important trade-oﬀ between inventory accumulation versus consumption and
capital investment that is notably absent in partial equilibrium analyses. Thus, smaller ﬂuctuations
in inventory investment are accompanied by greater ﬂuctuations in the sum of these other activities.
    Because the above-mentioned equilibrium trade-oﬀ is central to understanding our inventory
model’s mechanics, it is instructive to consider its origin and implication in the model’s response
to a persistent rise in exogenous total factor productivity. During the resulting expansion, ﬁrms’
eﬀorts to avoid the delivery costs implied by excessively frequent orders lead them to increase their
stocks of intermediate goods. This implies a larger increase in the demand for these goods than
would otherwise occur, and thus a disproportionate rise in labor allocated to their production at
some expense to the rise in labor allocated to ﬁnal goods production. However, because the capi-
tal stock is both predetermined and slowly evolving, diminishing returns to labor discourages large
changes in the production of intermediate goods. As a result, procyclical inventory investment di-
verts resources that might otherwise be used in the production of ﬁnal goods, thereby dampening the
rise in ﬁnal sales. Conversely, in a recession, reduced inventory investment shifts more intermediate
goods into production and moderates the fall in ﬁnal sales. Thus, cyclical ﬂuctuations in inventory
investment do not substantially raise the variability of GDP because they lower the variability of ﬁnal
sales. Similarly, when a decline in ﬁxed delivery costs makes inventory accumulation less important
in the economy, the resulting fall in the variability of inventory investment is almost entirely oﬀset
by increased volatility in ﬁnal sales.
    Our work also has an important implication regarding the source of business cycle ﬂuctuations.
It responds to a challenge extended by the work of Bils and Kahn (2000), which suggests that a
technology-shock driven business cycle is incompatible with the behavior of inventories. In particular,
Bils and Kahn argue that, absent imperfect competition, business cycle models driven by technology


                                                    2
shocks can not reproduce the observed countercyclical inventory-to-sales ratio.4 Although its markets
are perfectly competitive and its business cycles arise solely from productivity shocks, our model
economy nonetheless exhibits both procyclical inventory investment and a countercyclical inventory-
to-sales ratio. These two regularities of the data coexist quite naturally in our economy, again as
a consequence of general equilibrium. Because capital adjusts gradually in equilibrium, changes in
aggregate inventory holdings are themselves protracted. Thus, procyclical movements in the aggregate
stock of inventories are gradual relative to those in the ﬂow of ﬁnal sales.
    Finally, we use our model to explore the puzzlingly slow inventory adjustment speeds in many
empirical studies.5 When viewed through the lens of a conventional estimation approach, our simu-
lated model data exhibit persistence in the inventory-to-sales ratio consistent with existing empirical
estimates, and thus an implied inventory adjustment rate neatly inside the range of values inferred
from actual data. However, this estimate is far from the actual adjustment speed in our economy.
We ﬁnd that heterogeneity in ﬁrms’ inventory and production levels breaks the linear mapping be-
tween the persistence of the inventory-sales ratio and the economywide adjustment rate implied by
the standard stock-adjustment equation.
    While useful for understanding how the dynamics of inventory accumulation interact with the
dynamics of sales and other broad macroeconomic aggregates, the simplicity of our baseline inventory
model limits its quantitative ﬁt in two respects. First, it understates the relative volatility of inventory
investment. Second, it generates an excessively countercyclical relative price of inventories. These
deﬁciencies are largely resolved in enhanced versions of the model, as we discuss in a ﬁnal section of
the paper. Nonetheless, we continue to ﬁnd that the inventory-sales ratio is countercyclical, and that
the cyclical volatility of GDP is essentially unaﬀected by the frictions causing inventories. Throughout
these enhanced versions of our model, alongside a battery of other examples, our results repeatedly
challenge the conventional wisdom about inventories.

2       Model selection
     Given positive real interest rates, the ﬁrst challenge in any formal analysis of inventories is to
explain their existence. Within macroeconomics, by far the most common rationalization for these
stocks has been the assumption that production is costly to adjust, and the associated costs are con-
tinuous functions of the change in production. This assumption underlies the traditional production
smoothing model (and extensions that retain its linear-quadratic representative-ﬁrm structure). In
    4
     Bils and Kahn (2000) examine a partial equilibrium reduced-form inventory model and ﬁnd that, without counter-
cyclical markups (which are rejected by the industry data they examine), the model cannot simultaneously generate
procyclical inventory investment and a countercyclical inventory-sales ratio when it is driven by technology shocks.
   5
     See Ramey and West (1999). Several studies have argued that this puzzle in the data arises from the omission of
important nonconvexities in the ﬁrm-level production technology. See, for example, Caplin (1985), Blinder and Maccini
(1991) and McCarthy and Zakrajšek (2000).

                                                         3
its simplest form, the model assumes that ﬁnal sales are an exogenous stochastic series, and that
adjustments to the level of production involve convex costs. As a result, ﬁrms use inventories to
smooth production in the face of ﬂuctuations in sales.6 An apparent limitation of the model is that
it applies to a narrow subset of inventories, ﬁnished manufacturing goods, which represents only 13
percent of total private nonfarm inventories (Ramey and West (1999), p. 869). Additionally, a num-
ber of researchers have found that this class of model fares poorly in application to data. Blinder and
Maccini (1991, page 85) summarize that it has been “distinctly disappointing, producing implausibly
low adjustment speeds, little evidence that inventories buﬀer sales surprises, and a lack of sensitivity
of inventory investment to changes in interest rates.” Blinder (1981) and Caplin (1985) conjecture
that such weaknesses may arise from the model’s convex adjustment costs. In more recent work,
Schuh (1996) estimates three modern variants of the model using ﬁrm-level data and ﬁnds that each
accounts for only a minor portion of the movements in ﬁrm-level inventories.
    Given the extensive body of research already devoted to the production smoothing model, we
instead base our analysis on the leading microeconomic model, the (S,s) inventory model originally
solved by Scarf (1960). In our model, inventories arise as a result of nonconvex delivery costs. To
economize on such costs, ﬁrms hold stocks, making active adjustments only when these stocks are
suﬃciently far from a target. We choose to explore this motive in part because it may explain a broad
group of inventories. As Blinder and Maccini (1991) have argued, the decisions facing manufacturers
purchasing inputs for production and wholesalers and retailers purchasing goods from manufacturers
are similar in that they each involve decisions as to when and in what quantity orders should be
undertaken from other ﬁrms. If there are ﬁxed costs associated with moving items from ﬁrm to ﬁrm,
then eﬀorts to avoid such costs may explain why stocks of manufacturing inputs, as well as those
of ﬁnished goods in retail and wholesale trade, are held. Next, there is empirical support for the
approach. Mosser (1991) tests a simple ﬁxed-band (S,s) model on aggregate retail trade data and
ﬁnds it more successful in explaining the observed time series than the traditional linear quadratic
model. More recently, McCarthy and Zakrajšek (2000) have isolated nonlinearities indicative of (S,s)
policies in ﬁrm-level inventory adjustment functions in manufacturing, and Hall and Rust (1999) have
shown that a generalized (S,s) decision rule can explain the actual inventory investment behavior of
a U.S. steel wholesaler.
    The aggregate implications of the (S,s) inventory model have been largely unexplored; in fact,
thus far there has been no quantitative general equilibrium analysis of this environment. The only
equilibrium study we know of is that by Fisher and Hornstein (2000), which focuses on explaining the
   6
     A frequently noted diﬃculty with the original production smoothing model is its prediction that production is less
variable than sales, and relatedly that sales and inventory investment are negatively correlated. This has been addressed
in several ways. For example, Ramey (1991) studies increasing returns to production, while Eichenbaum (1989) explores
productivity shocks. The most common approach, motivated by the stockout avoidance model of Kahn (1987), has been
to assume costs of deviating from a target inventory-to-sales ratio; see Ramey and West (1999).


                                                           4
greater volatility of orders relative to sales in a model of retail inventories without capital. Building
on the work of Caplin (1985) and Caballero and Engel (1991), who study the aggregate implications
of exogenous (S,s) policies across ﬁrms, Fisher and Hornstein construct an environment that endoge-
nously yields time-invariant one-sided (S,s) rules and a constant order size per adjusting ﬁrm.7 This
allows them to tractably study (S,s) inventory policies in general equilibrium without confronting
substantial heterogeneity across ﬁrms.
    In our model economy, changes in the aggregate stock of inventories occur through two channels.
First, changes in the order sizes of ﬁrms engaged in inventory investment produce movements along
the intensive margin. Next, changes in the fractions of ﬁrms placing orders from each given level of
inventories (i.e., shifts in a nontrivial adjustment hazard) interact with a time-varying distribution of
ﬁrms over inventory holdings to produce movements along the extensive margin. The assumptions
made by Fisher and Hornstein (2000) preclude the ﬁrst of these mechanisms, which we ﬁnd is an
important channel through which changes in ﬁrms’ inventory decisions aﬀect the aggregate economy.
More broadly, our analysis is distinguished from theirs by our inclusion of capital. As we have noted
above, the dynamics of capital accumulation play a central role in determining the aggregate eﬀects
of inventories in our model. Finally, our analysis is quantitative; our purpose is to examine the extent
to which inventory investment alters aggregate ﬂuctuations.
    A further distinguishing feature of our model is that it does not focus on ﬁnished goods inventories.
Both Blinder and Maccini (1991) and Ramey and West (1999) have emphasized that inventories of
ﬁnished manufacturing goods have seen disproportionate attention in theoretical and empirical work
relative to other, more cyclically important, components of private nonfarm inventories. Manufactur-
ing inputs, the sum of materials and supplies and work-in-process, are a particularly notable omission,
as ﬁrst stressed by Ramey (1989). Manufacturing inventories as a whole are far more cyclical than re-
tail and wholesale inventories (the other main components of private nonfarm inventories).8 However,
within manufacturing, inventories of intermediate inputs are twice the size of ﬁnished goods invento-
ries (see Ramey and West (1999)). Moreover, the results of a variance decomposition undertaken by
Humphreys, Maccini and Schuh (2001) indicate that they are three times more volatile. Given these
observations, we develop a model that includes inventories of manufacturing inputs. However, we do
not limit our analysis to these stocks. In particular, we do not identify our intermediate goods, or our
ﬁrms, as belonging to a speciﬁc sector. Rather, our inventories are stocks that broadly represent goods
held in various stages of completion throughout the economy. Consequently, we calibrate our model
to deliver a relative magnitude of inventories matching that of total private nonfarm inventories.
   7
     Speciﬁcally, they assume indivisible retail goods, one unit sold per successful retailer per period, and small aggregate
shocks. Together, these assumptions imply that retailers place orders only when their stocks are fully exhausted, and
that the common target inventory level to which they then adjust never varies.
   8
     Over the postwar period, the contemporaneous correlation between detrended inventory investment and GDP is
0.65 for manufacturing, while it is 0.32 (0.35) for retail (wholesale) trade.




                                                             5
3       Model

3.1     Overview

     There are three sets of agents in the economy: households, intermediate goods producers and
ﬁnal goods ﬁrms. Households supply labor to all producers, and they purchase consumption goods
from ﬁnal goods ﬁrms. Intermediate goods ﬁrms own capital and hire labor for production. They
supply their output to ﬁnal goods producers, from whom they purchase investment goods. Final
goods ﬁrms use intermediate goods and labor to produce output used for consumption and capital
accumulation. All ﬁrms are perfectly competitive.
    We assume a continuum of ﬁnal goods ﬁrms with measure one. Each produces output using
intermediate goods, m, and labor, n, through a concave, decreasing returns to scale production
function, G (m, n). We provide an explicit motive for inventory accumulation by assuming that these
ﬁrms face ﬁxed costs of ordering or accepting deliveries of intermediate goods. As the costs are
independent of order size, these ﬁrms choose to hold stocks of intermediate goods, s, where s ∈ R+.
    At the start of any date, a ﬁnal goods ﬁrm is identiﬁed by its inventory holdings, s, and its current
                        
delivery cost, ξ ∈ ξ, ξ . This cost is denominated in units of labor and drawn from a time-invariant
distribution H (ξ ) common across ﬁrms. Before production, the ﬁrm can pay its ﬁxed cost and adjust
its stock of intermediate goods available for current production, s1 ≥ 0. Letting xm denote the size
of such an adjustment, the stock available for production is s1 = s + xm. Alternatively, the ﬁrm can
avoid the cost, set xm = 0, and enter production with its initial stock, s1 = s.
    Following its inventory adjustment decision, a ﬁnal goods ﬁrm determines current production,
selecting m ∈ [0, s1] and n ∈ R+. Intermediate goods fully depreciate in use, and the remaining
stock with which the ﬁrm begins the next period is s = s1 − m. (Throughout the paper, primes
indicate one-period-ahead values.) Finally, inventories incur storage costs proportional to the level of
inventories held. Given end of period inventories s , the total cost of storage is σs , where σ > 0 is
a parameter capturing the marginal cost of holding inventories in units of the ﬁnal good. Thus, the
ﬁrm’s net production of ﬁnal goods is y = G(m, n) − σs .
    Intermediate goods are supplied by a large number of identical producers. The representative
intermediate goods ﬁrm produces with capital, k, and labor, l, using a constant returns to scale
technology,        F.        x = zF (k, l), where z is exogenous stochastic total factor productivity.
                        Its output is

Capital depreciates at the rate δ ∈ (0, 1), and the ﬁrm augments its capital stock for the next period

using ﬁnal goods as investment; k = (1 − δ) k + i.
    The aggregate total factor productivity shock follows a Markov Chain,              z   ∈ {z1, . . . , zNz }, where
Pr (z   = zj   |   z   =z) ≡ πj ≥ 0     , and
                                                Nz πij   = 1 for each = 1
                                                                    i         . This is the sole source
                                                                        , . . . , Nz
                          i      i              j =1

of aggregate uncertainty in the model. Its placement in the intermediate goods sector is dictated
by the countercyclical relative price of inventories in the aggregate data, since the relative price of
inventories in the equilibrium of our model will equal the relative price of intermediate goods (which

                                                          6
will fall only if a shock raises intermediate goods ﬁrms’ productivity relative to that of ﬁnal goods
ﬁrms). Throughout the paper, we represent current productivity, z , by z except where necessary for
                                                                                   i

clarity.
    A unit measure of identical households value consumption and leisure in each period and discount
future utility by β ∈ (0, 1). Households are endowed with 1 unit of time in each period, and they
supply labor to all ﬁrms in the economy. They own all intermediate and ﬁnal goods ﬁrms, and they
have access to a complete set of state-contingent claims.9 Denoting the representative household’s
total consumption and labor supply at date t by ct and nht , respectively, its expected discounted
lifetime utility is E0
                       ∞t=0 βtu ct, 1 − nht .

3.2       Competitive equilibrium

     We now describe the behavior of producers and households, beginning with a summary of the
aggregate state observed by all prior to their decisions.10 Recall that ﬁnal goods ﬁrms carry stocks
of intermediate goods to avoid frequent payment of ﬁxed delivery costs. At any date, some ﬁrms
adjust their stocks and others do not, given diﬀerences in delivery costs. Thus, the model yields an
endogenous distribution of ﬁnal goods ﬁrms over inventory levels, μ : B → [0, 1], where B is the Borel
algebra and μ(S ) represents the measure of ﬁrms with start-of-period inventories in the set S ∈ B .

    The economy’s aggregate state is (z , A), where A ≡ (K, μ) represents the endogenous state vec-
tor. K is the aggregate capital stock held by intermediate goods ﬁrms, and z is their total factor
productivity described in the section above.11 The distribution of ﬁnal goods ﬁrms over inventory
levels evolves according to a mapping Γμ , μ = Γμ (z, A), and capital similarly evolves according to
K = ΓK (z, A). Below, we summarize the law of motion governing the endogenous aggregate state
by A = Γ(z, A).
    The ﬁnal good is the numeraire, and equilibrium relative prices are functions of the aggregate state.
Firms employ labor at real wage ω (z, A), and intermediate goods are traded at relative price q (z, A).
Finally, Q (z, A) is the price of an Arrow security that will deliver one unit of the ﬁnal good next
            j

period if z = z ; in equilibrium, all ﬁrms discount their future earnings using these state-contingent
                   j

prices.
Problem of a ﬁnal goods ﬁrm:                     Let v0 (s, ξ ; z, A) represent the expected discounted value of
a ﬁnal goods ﬁrm with current inventory stock, s, and ﬁxed cost draw, ξ , given the aggregate state
   9
     We introduce a complete set of Arrow securities only so as to derive the prices that ﬁrms use to discount their future
proﬁt ﬂows.
  10
     While we have chosen to examine the decentralized economy here, it should be noted that the competitive allocation
corresponds to the solution of a planning problem, since markets are complete and perfectly competitive.
  11
     As ﬁrms’ delivery costs are iid draws from a time-invariant distribution, the joint distribution of ﬁrms over inventories
and these costs may be constructed from the distribution over inventories alone. Hence, delivery cost draws are not
part of the aggregate state.


                                                              7
(z   , A)                      m chooses whether or not to undertake active inventory adjustment
        . Recall that any such ﬁr

prior to production. Contingent on that decision, the ﬁrm selects its order for intermediate goods,
xm = 0, which determines its stock available for current production, s1 = s + xm. Given s1, the ﬁrm
chooses its employment n ≥ 0, and future inventories, s ≥ 0, thus determining its production net of
storage costs, y = G (s + xm − s , n) − σs .
    We state the problem facing such a ﬁrm using equations (1) - (2). Although we suppress the
arguments of q, ω and Qj for ease of exposition, recall that all are functions of the aggregate state.
The ﬁrm’s problem is
                  v0 (s, ξ ; z, A) = max          −ωξ + xmax
                                                         m ≥−s
                                                               −qxm + v1 (s + xm; z, A)                   ,   v 1 (s; z, A)     .               (1)


Here,       v1 (s1 ; z, A) summarizes expected discounted proﬁts gross of current order costs, conditional on
the available stock of intermediate goods at production time:
                                                                                   Nz             ξ
            v1 (s1 ; z, A) =
                               n
                                  max G s1 − s , n − σs − ωn +
                                ≥0 ≥s ≥0
                                      , s1
                                                                                          Q
                                                                                          j           v 0 s , ξ ; zj , A      H (dξ)        ,   (2)
                                                                                   j =1       ξ



given the aggregate law of motion A = Γ (z , A).                         Finally, in equation (2),              ξ
                                                                                                                 ξ
                                                                                                                     v0 (s , ξ ; zj , A )   H (dξ)
represents the expected continuation value associated with future inventories s if the aggregate state
next period is (zj , A ).

Intermediate goods ﬁrm’s problem:               Given its pre-determined capital stock, k, and the cur-
rent aggregate state, (z, A), the representative intermediate goods ﬁrm chooses current employment,

l, and capital for the next period, k . Its value, w (k; z, A), solves the functional equation:
                                     ⎛                                                        Nz
                                                                                                                            ⎞
                 w (k; z, A) = ≥max
                                0 ≥0
                                     ⎝l   ,k
                                                 qzF   (k, l)   − ωl −   k   − (1 − δ) k +             Qwj       k;    z ,A ⎠
                                                                                                                        j           ,           (3)
                                                                                              j =1


given       A = Γ (z, A)  .



Household’s problem:                           The representative household receives an aggregate dividend,                             D (z, A)  ,

from the economy’s ﬁrms in each period, and its net worth is held in the form of Arrow securities,
a. In addition to its asset income, the household receives labor income ω (z, A) nh given its choice of
total hours worked,            nh .
    In each period, the household allocates its initial wealth plus labor and dividend income across
current consumption, c, and purchases of new securities, aj , j = 1, . . . , Nz , to maximize its expected
discounted lifetime utility. Speciﬁcally, given its assets and the aggregate state, the household chooses




                                                                     8
        h
                    Nz
  c, n ,     aj                to solve
                    j =1

                                                                          ⎛                                                   ⎞
                                                                                    N
                                                                          ⎝                                              z ,A ⎠
                                                                                                       z
                                                h (a; z, A)   =       max     1−n +β
                                                                                u
                                                                                 h  c,                      πij h aj ;   j                             (4)
                                                                                                     j =1

                                                                      subject to
                                       Nz
                           c   +            Q (z, A)a ≤
                                                 j       j            a + D (z, A) + ω(z, A)nh .                                                       (5)
                                   j =1


To rule out Ponzi schemes, the following additional constraints are imposed on household purchases of
securities: aj ≥ a, j = 1, . . . , Nz , where a < 0. These constraints do not bind in equilibrium. Finally,
the household also takes as given the evolution of the endogenous aggregate state, A = Γ (z, A).
Equilibrium:                           A Recursive competitive equilibrium                   is a set of functions,      (v, xm , n, s   , w, l, k ,

       h
h, c, n , (aj )
               Nz , ω, q, (Qj )Nz , D, ΓK , Γμ ),                         satisfying the following conditions.           12
               j =1            j =1


1. Firm and household decisions are optimal;
2. Markets for ﬁnal goods, intermediate goods, labor and securities clear;
3. Laws of motion for aggregate state variables are consistent with individual decisions:
(a) μ S = {(s,ξ) s (s,ξ;z,A)∈S} H (dξ ) μ (ds) for all S ∈ B deﬁnes Γμ (z, A) ;
                                   |

(b)    K = k (K ; z, A) deﬁnes ΓK (z, A)                          .


   As there is no heterogeneity across households there is zero net supply of Arrow securities in
                                                                                         ,

equilibrium, so a = 0 As a result, the representative household’s consumption and total hours
                                            .

worked may be written simply as functions of the aggregate state, C (z, A)  N (z, A)           se                    and                 . We will u

this result below.

3.3         Firm behavior and inventory adjustment

     In this section, we develop several properties of ﬁrms’ decision rules that will be used in discussing
our model’s results. We ﬁrst simplify the description of their optimization problems using a result from
the representative household’s problem. In equilibrium, the household’s choice of Arrow securities
                                          j ,A ) 1− ( j ,A ))
requires that Qj (z, A) = πij βUU11(C(C(z(z,A ),1−N (z,A))
                                                              . This allows us to reformulate ﬁrms’ problems,
                                                                      ,   N z



eliminating the time-varying discount factor. To be more precise, we now require that each ﬁrm
weight its current proﬁts by the output price p (z, A) = U1 (C (z, A) , 1 − N (z, A)) and discount its
future expected earnings by β . The only implication of our reformulation is that value functions are
  12
       To avoid additional notation, we use choice variables to denote decision rules.                      are functions of
                                                                                                                  Thus    (xm , n, s )
ﬁnal goods ﬁrms’ state vector (s, ξ, z, A); (l, k ) are functions of the intermediate goods ﬁrm’s state vector (k, z, A); and
       h (a )Nz       are functions of the household state vector (a, z, A).
 c, n ,    j j =1




                                                                                    9
now measured in units of marginal utility, rather than ﬁnal output; the resulting Bellman equations
yield the same decision rules as above.
    We begin by presenting the intermediate goods ﬁrm’s reformulated value function. Suppressing
the arguments of p, q and ω for brevity, W solves
                                                                                                   Nz
                  W (k; z, A) = max p
                                     k   ,l
                                                qzF   (k, l) + (1   − δ) k − k − ω + β
                                                                                 l                      π ij   W   k ; zj , A       .          (6)
                                                                                               j =1

Linear homogeneity of F immediately implies that the ﬁrm’s decision rule for employment, and hence
its production of the intermediate good, is proportional to its capital stock.
     Next, we turn to ﬁnal goods ﬁrms. Let V 0 (s, ξ ; z, A) represent the reformulated value function
of a ﬁnal goods ﬁrm with start-of-date inventory holdings s and ﬁxed order cost ξ . We describe
the problem facing such a ﬁrm using (7) - (9) below. We divide the period into two sub-periods,
an adjustment sub-period and a production sub-period, and we break the exposition of the ﬁrm’s
problem into the distinct problems it faces as it enters into each of these sub-periods.
     Beginning with the second sub-period, let V 1(s1 ; z, A) represent the value of entering production
with inventories s1 . Given this stock available for production, the ﬁrm selects its current employment,

its inventories for next period, and hence its current production, to solve
                                                                              Nz                  ξ
   V   1
           (s1   ; z, A) = s ≥max
                               0 ≥0
                                ,n
                                         p    G s1 − s   ,n   − ωn − σs + β              πij           V0   s , ξ ; zj ,   A H (dξ)        ,   (7)
                                                                               j =1            ξ

which is the analogue to (2) above. Given the continuation value of inventories,                                       V    (s ; zj ,   A ) equa-
                                                                                                                                          ,

tion (7) yields both the ﬁrm’s employment (in production) decision, N (s1; z, A), and its stock of
intermediate goods retained for future use, S (s1; z, A). Its net production of ﬁnal goods is then
Y (s1; z, A) = G (s1 − S (s1 ; z, A), N (s1; z, A)) − σS (s1; z, A). Thus, we have decision rules for employ-
ment, production, and next-period inventories as functions of the production-time stock s1.
    Given the middle-of-period valuation of the ﬁrm, V 1 , we now examine the inventory adjustment
decision made by a ﬁnal goods ﬁrm entering the period with inventories s and drawing adjustment
cost ξ . Equations (8) - (9) describe the ﬁrm’s determination of (i) whether to place an order and (ii)
the target inventory level with which to begin the production sub-period, conditional on an order.
The ﬁrst term in the braces of (8) represents the net value of stock adjustment (the gross adjustment
value less the value of the payments associated with the ﬁxed delivery cost), while the second term
represents the value of entering production with the beginning of period stock:
                            , ξ; z, A) = pqs + max −pωξ + V a(z, A), −pqs + V 1 (s; z, A)
                       V 0 (s                                                                                                                  (8)

                            V a(z, A) ≡ max −pqs1 + V 1 (s1 ; z, A)                  .                                                         (9)
                                         s1 ≥0

   Note that the target inventory choice in (9) is independent of both the current inventory level, s,

and the ﬁxed cost, ξ . Thus, all ﬁrms that adjust their inventory holdings choose the same production-
time stock and achieve the same gross value of adjustment, V a (z , A). Let s∗ ≡ s∗(z, A) denote the
                                                                     10
common target that solves (9). Equation (7) then implies common employment and intermediate
goods use across all adjusting ﬁrms, as well as identical inventory holdings among these ﬁrms at the
beginning of the next period.
   Turning to the decision of whether to adjust inventories, it is immediate from equation (8) that a
ﬁrm will do so if its ﬁxed cost is at or below ξ (s; z, A), the cost that equates the net value of inventory
adjustment to the value of non-adjustment:
                                −pωξ(s; z, A) + V a(z, A) = −pqs + V 1 (s; z, A)                       .                 (10)
Note that the cost satisfying (10) depends upon the ﬁrm’s initial stock, s, which we will refer to as
its type. Given the support of the cost distribution, and using (10) above, we deﬁne ξ T (s; z, A) as
the type-speciﬁc threshold cost separating those ﬁrms that place orders from those that do not:
                                                                                        
                                   ξ T (s; z, A) = min max ξ , ξ (s; z, A) , ξ                  .                        (11)
   From the analysis above, we arrive at the following decision rules for production-time inventory
holdings and stock adjustments:

                                , ξ z, A)
                           s1 (s ;          =
                                                          , A) if ξ ≤ ξT (s; z, A)
                                                      s∗ (z
                                                                                                                         (12)
                                                        s       if  ξ > ξT (s; z, A)
                        xm (s, ξ ; z, A)    =   s1 (s, ξ; z, A) − s     .                                                (13)
Finally, as ﬁnal goods ﬁrms face a common distribution of adjustment costs, H , the probability that
a ﬁrm of type s will alter its inventory stock before production is given by H ξ T (s; z, A) .
    Having described the inventory adjustment and production decisions of ﬁnal goods ﬁrms as func-
tions of their type, s, and cost draw, ξ , we can now aggregate their demands for intermediate goods
and for labor, their use of intermediate goods, and their production of the ﬁnal good. The aggregate
order for intermediate goods is the sum of the stock adjustments from each start-of-period inventory
level s, weighted by the numbers of ﬁrms undertaking these adjustments:
                             X(z, A) = H          ξ T (s;   z, A) s∗(z, A) − s                μ(ds).                     (14)
Total use of intermediate goods, M(z , A), is the total production-time stock across adjusting and
non-adjusting ﬁrms, less that retained by each ﬁrm as inventories for the subsequent period:
                                                                            
               M z, A
                                                                                    
                 (     )    =      s (z, A) − S
                                     ∗             ∗
                                                  s (z   , A); z, A             H   ξ T (s;     z, A)      μ (ds)        (15)
                                                                            
                                            +     s   −S      s; z, A       1−      H       ξ T (s;   z, A)   μ (ds) .

Aggregate production of the ﬁnal good is a weighted sum of the output of adjusting and nonadjusting
ﬁrms, and, similarly, total employment among ﬁnal goods ﬁrms is a weighted sum of labor in their

                                                              11
production, together with the total time costs of adjustment:
                Y(z, A)    =   Y (s∗(z, A); z, A) H             ξ T (s;   z, A) μ (ds)                                       (16)


                                              +       Y (s; z, A)         1   −H      ξ T (s;     z, A)     μ (ds) ,


                          N(z, A) = N (s∗(z, A); z, A) H                  ξ T (s;   z, A) μ (ds)                             (17)

                                                                                            z,A)
                                                                                        ξ T (s;
                + N (s; z, A) 1 − H      ξ T (s;   z, A)    μ (ds) +                                 ξ   H (dξ)   μ (ds) .
                                                                                    ξ
    In concluding this section, it is useful to explain how the aggregates above determine our coun-
terparts to production, sales and inventory investment in the NIPA. In the model, ﬁnal sales is the
aggregate production of ﬁnal goods, Y(z, A). Next, aggregate net inventory investment is deﬁned as
the change in the total value of inventories. In our model, this is the diﬀerence between total orders
and use of intermediate goods weighted by their relative price, q(z, A) X(z, A) − M(z , A) . Finally,
in the model, as in the data, GDP is the sum of sales and inventory investment.

4        Calibration and solution
      We examine the implications of inventory accumulation for our otherwise standard equilibrium
business cycle model using numerical methods. In calibrating the model, we choose the length of a
period as one quarter and select functional forms for production and utility as follows. We assume
that intermediate goods producers have a constant-returns-to-scale Cobb-Douglas production function
with capital share α. Their productivity follows a Markov Chain with nine values, Nz = 9, that is
itself the result of discretizing an estimated log-normal process for technology with persistence ρ and
variance of innovations, σ ε . Each ﬁnal goods ﬁrm’s production function is G(m, n) = m m n n , with
                             2                                                              θ  θ

intermediate goods’ share θm and labor’s share θn . The adjustment costs that provide the basis for
their inventory holdings are uniformly distributed with lower support 0 and upper support ξ . Finally,
we assume that the representative household has period utility u(c, 1 − nh ) = log c + η · (1 − nh ).13
   This speciﬁcation may be derived from a model with indivisible labor and employment lotteries, as shown by
    13


Rogerson (1988).




                                                           12
4.1     Control model

       If we set ξ   = 0 the result is a model where no ﬁrm has an incentive to hold inventories 14
                         ,                                                                                           .

With no adjustment costs, ﬁnal goods ﬁrms buy intermediate goods in every period; hence there
are two representative ﬁrms, an intermediate goods ﬁrm and a ﬁnal goods ﬁrm. We take this as
a control model against which to evaluate the eﬀect of introducing inventory accumulation. The
parameterizations of the control and inventory models are identical, with the already noted exception
of the cost distribution associated with adjustments to intermediate goods holdings.
    The ﬁrst set of parameters common to both the control and inventory models (α, θm, θn , δ, β ,
η) are derived as follows. The parameter associated with capital’s share, α, is chosen to reproduce
a long-run annual nonfarm business capital-to-output ratio of 1.415, a value derived from U.S. data
between 1953 and 2002. The depreciation rate δ is equal to the average ratio of business investment to
business capital over the same time period. The distinguishing feature of the control model, relative
to the Indivisible Labor Economy of Hansen (1985), is the presence of intermediate goods. The
new parameter associated with this additional factor of production, the share term for intermediate
goods, is selected to match the value implied by the updated Jorgenson, Gollop and Fraumeni (1999)
input-output data from manufacturing and trade. From this data set, we obtain an annual weighted
average of materials’ share across 21 2-digit manufacturing sectors and the trade sector, averaged
over 1958-1996, of 0.499. The remaining production parameter, θn , is taken to imply a labor’s share
of output averaging 0.64, as in Hansen (1985) and Prescott (1986). Turning to preferences, the
subjective discount factor, β , is selected to yield a real interest rate of 6.5 percent per year in the

steady state of the model, and η is chosen so that average hours worked are one-third of available
time.
    We determine the stochastic process for productivity using the Crucini Residual approach de-
scribed in King and Rebelo (1999). In contrast to the Solow method, where total factor productivity
shocks are inferred using data on aggregate output, capital and labor together with the assumption of
an aggregate production function, the Crucini approach infers these shocks from a linear approxima-
tion to the full solution of a model alongside data on aggregate output and each series present in the
model’s endogenous aggregate state vector. When applied to our control model, this approach allows
us to estimate a shock series using data on only aggregate output and capital. A continuous shock
version of the control model, where log zt+1 = ρ log zt + εt+1 with εt+1 ∼ N 0, σ2ε , is solved using an
approximating system of stochastic linear diﬀerence equations, given an arbitrary initial value of ρ.
This linear method yields a decision rule for output of the form Yt = πz (ρ) zt + π k (ρ) Kt , where the
  14
    When ξ = 0, any ﬁnal goods ﬁrm can order exactly the quantity of intermediate goods it will use in current
production without suﬀering delivery costs. In this case, the expected return to holding inventories is simply the
appreciation of the relative price of intermediate goods adjusted for storage costs, E(1+
                                                                                     q
                                                                                         σ)q − 1. Our calibration implies
                                                                                      ( | )
                                                                                         z,μ



persistent aggregate shocks that are never suﬃciently large that this return exceeds the expected real interest rate.
Thus inventories are never held in simulations of this special case of our model.

                                                           13
coeﬃcients associated with z and K are functions of ρ. Rearranging this solution, data on GDP and
capital are then used to infer an implied set of values for the technology shock series zt . Maintain-
ing the assumption that these realizations are generated by a ﬁrst-order autoregressive process, the
persistence and variance of this implied technology shock series yield new estimates of ρ, σ2ε . The
process is repeated until these estimates converge. Resulting values for the shock’s persistence and
the implied variability of model GDP are similar to those found in comparable business cycle studies
(for example, Prescott (1986)). Table 1 lists the complete baseline parameter set.

4.2     Inventory model

     For all parameters that are also present in the control model, we maintain the same values as
there. This approach to calibrating the inventory model is feasible, as the steady states of the two
model economies (in particular, the capital-output ratio, hours worked, and the shares to factors of
production) are close.
    The two parameters that distinguish the inventory model from the control are the proportional
storage cost associated with inventories and the upper support for adjustment costs. Conventional
estimates of inventory storage costs (or carrying costs ) average 25 percent of the annual value of
inventories held (Stock and Lambert (1987)). Excluding those components accounted for elsewhere
in our model (for instance, the cost of money reﬂected by discounting) and those associated with
government (taxes), we calculate that storage costs should represent 12 percent of the annual value
of inventories in our model.15 Next, using NIPA data, we compute that the quarterly real private
nonfarm inventory-to-sales ratio has averaged 0.7155 in the United States between 1954:1 and 2002:4.
(As noted by Ramey and West (1999), the real series, in contrast to its nominal counterpart, exhibits
no trend.) Given the parameters speciﬁed above, these calibration targets jointly determine our
remaining two parameters, (σ = 0.012 and ξ = 0.220), and imply that the relative price valuing
inventories is q = 0.417 in the model’s steady state.

4.3     Numerical method

       The      inventory model developed above is characterized by an aggregate state vector that
             (S, s)

includes the distribution of the stock of inventory holdings across ﬁrms, which makes computation
of equilibrium nontrivial. Our solution algorithm involves repeated application of the contraction
mapping implied by (7), (8) and (9) to solve for ﬁnal goods ﬁrms’ start-of-period value functions V ,
given the price functions p(z, A), ω(z, A) and q(z, A) and the laws of motion implied by Γ and (π j ).            i

This recursive approach is complicated in two ways, as discussed below.
    First, the nonconvex factor adjustment here requires that we solve for ﬁrms’ decision rules using
  15
    Excluded components are cost of money, taxes, physical handling and clerical and inventory control; see Richardson
(1995). The last component is already reﬂected in our model by labor-denominated adjustment costs.


                                                         14
nonlinear methods. This is because ﬁrms at times ﬁnd themselves with a very low stock of intermediate
goods relative to their production-time target, but draw a suﬃciently high adjustment cost that they
are unwilling to replenish their stock in the current period. At such times, they defer adjustment
and exhaust their entire current stock in production. Thus, a non-negativity constraint on inventory
holdings occasionally binds, and ﬁrms’ decision rules are nonlinear and must be solved as such. This
we accomplish using multivariate piecewise polynomial splines, adapting an algorithm outlined in
Johnson (1989).
    Second, equilibrium prices are functions of a large state vector, given the distribution of ﬁnal
goods ﬁrms in the endogenous aggregate state vector, A = (K, μ). For computational feasibility, we
assume that agents use a smaller object in proxy for the distribution as they forecast the future state
to make decisions given current prices. In choosing this proxy, we extend the method applied in Khan
and Thomas (2003), which itself applied a variation on the method of Krusell and Smith (1997, 1998).
In particular, we assume that agents approximate the distribution in the aggregate state vector with
a vector of moments, m = (m1 , ..., mI ), drawn from the distribution. In our work involving discrete
choices by producers, we ﬁnd that sectioning the distribution into I equal-sized partitions and using
the conditional mean of each partition is eﬃcient in that it implies small forecasting errors. In the
results reported here, I = 1. This means that, alongside z and K , agents use only the mean of the
current distribution of ﬁrms over inventory levels, the start-of-period aggregate stock, to forecast the
relevant features of the future endogenous state.
    The actual distribution of ﬁrms over inventories in our model is a large but ﬁnite object. In
simulations, we use this actual distribution in each period, alongside ﬁrms’ value functions (derived
using the forecasting rules described above), to determine equilibrium prices and quantities and thus
the subsequent period’s distribution. Next, the simulation data are used in a regression step to
revise agents’ forecasting rules. Finally, based on the revised forecast rules, value functions are re-
solved, and the model is simulated again, with this iterative process repeating until the forecasting
rules converge. The approximation implied by this numerical approach would be unacceptable if it
generated large errors in forecasts; however, the resulting forecast rules prove to be highly accurate.
Standard errors across all regressions are small, and R2 ’s all exceed 0.999. A complete description
of our solution algorithm, along with a table of agents’ forecasting rules, is provided in a technical
appendix available on request.

5    Steady state results
    Table 2 presents the steady state behavior of ﬁnal goods ﬁrms when we suppress stochastic
changes in the productivity of intermediate goods producers, the sole source of aggregate uncertainty
in our model. This table illustrates the mechanics of our generalized (S,s) inventory adjustment.
In our baseline calibration, where ξ = 0.22, ﬁrms are distributed over 6 levels of inventories at the

                                                  15
start of the period. This distribution is in columns labeled 1 − 6, while the ﬁrst column, labeled
adjustors, represents those ﬁrms from each of these groups that undertake inventory adjustment prior
to production. Of course, the number of ﬁnal goods ﬁrm types varies endogenously outside of the
model’s steady state.
    The inventory level selected by all adjusting ﬁrms, referred to above as the target value s∗, is
1.694 in the steady state. Firms that adjusted their inventory holdings last period, those in column
1, begin the current period with 1.155 units of the intermediate good. Given the proximity of their
stock to the target value, they are unwilling to suﬀer substantial costs of adjustment and, as a result,
their probability of adjustment is low, 0.036. Because inventory holdings decline with the time since
their last order, ﬁrms are willing to accept larger adjustment costs as they move from group 1 across
the distribution to group 6. Thus, their probability of undertaking an order rises as their inventory
holdings fall further from the target, and the model exhibits a rising adjustment hazard in the sense
of Caballero and Engel (1999).
    The steady state table exhibits evidence of precautionary behavior among ﬁnal goods ﬁrms, given
their uncertainty about the length of time until they will next undertake adjustment. While the
representative ﬁrm in the control model orders exactly the intermediate goods it will use in current
production, 0.42, ordering ﬁrms in the baseline inventory economy prepare for the possibility of lengthy
delays before the next order, selecting a much higher production-time stock, 1.69. Next, although ﬁnal
goods ﬁrms substitute labor for the scarcer factor of production as their inventory holdings decline,
the fraction of inventories used in production rises until, for ﬁrms with very little remaining stock
(those in column 5), the entire stock will be exhausted in production unless adjustment is undertaken.
Nonetheless, ﬁrms’ ability to replenish their stocks prior to production in the next period implies that
the adjustment probability is less than one. In fact, even among the 0.017 ﬁrms that begin the period
with no inventory, only 84 percent adjust prior to production. The remainder, a group representing
0.28 percent of all plants, forego current production and await lower adjustment costs.


6        Business cycle results
     We begin this section with a brief review of the empirical regularities concerning inventory
investment that are most relevant to our analysis.16 Table 3 summarizes the business cycle behavior
of GDP, ﬁnal sales and net inventory investment in quarterly postwar U.S. data.17 All series are
detrended using a Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter with a weight of 1600. We HP-ﬁlter the logarithms of GDP
and ﬁnal sales. However, as net inventory investment is often negative, the same approach cannot
be used for this series. Instead, it is detrended as a share of GDP; that is, we apply the HP-ﬁlter to
    For more extensive surveys, see Fitzgerald (1997), Hornstein (1998) and Ramey and West (1999).
    16

    Reported series are GDP of domestic business less housing, ﬁnal sales of domestic business, and changes in the total
    17


value of private nonfarm inventories, 1954:1 - 2002:1. Data are seasonally adjusted and chained in 1996 dollars.


                                                          16
the ratio NII/GDP.
     Note ﬁrst that the relative variability of net inventory investment is large. In particular, though
its share of gross domestic production averages roughly one-half of one percent, its standard deviation
is 29.5 percent that of output. Next, inventory investment is procyclical; its correlation coeﬃcient
with GDP is 0.67. Moreover, as the correlation between inventory investment and ﬁnal sales is itself
positive, 0.41 for the data summarized here, the standard deviation of production substantially exceeds
that of sales. Again, it is for this reason that the comovement of sales and inventory investment is
commonly interpreted as evidence that ﬂuctuations in inventory investment increase the variability
of GDP.

6.1   Accounting for the inventory facts

     Our model’s predictions for the volatility and cyclicality of GDP, ﬁnal sales and inventory invest-
ment, as well as the inventory-sales ratio, are reported in table 4. There, we compare the results of a
10, 000 period simulation to the corresponding values taken from the data, with each model-generated
series detrended exactly as is its empirical counterpart. Together, the panels of this table establish
that our baseline inventory model is successful in reproducing both the procyclicality of net inventory
investment and the higher variance of production when compared to ﬁnal sales. Further, this simple
model with nonconvex factor adjustment costs as the single source of inventory accumulation accounts
for 64 percent of the measured relative variability of net inventory investment. Finally, note that the
inventory-to-sales ratio is countercyclical in our model, as in the data.
    Certainly, there are diﬀerences between the model and data, most notably the model’s understated
variability of inventory investment, an issue that we address below in section 8. However, the strong
procyclicality in inventory investment, as well as the excess variability of production over sales, are
well reproduced by the model. The latter arises from the positive correlation between inventory
investment and ﬁnal sales, 0.83 in the simulated economy. We take these results to imply that
the predictions of the model are suﬃciently accurate to validate its use in exploring the impact of
inventory investment on aggregate ﬂuctuations.
    The model’s success in reproducing the basic inventory facts arises because aggregate inventories
rise and fall with total production and ﬁnal sales. Consider the economic dynamics following a
persistent rise in productivity. This causes a rise in both current and planned future consumption,
and hence in ﬁnal goods production. As a result, ﬁnal goods ﬁrms deplete their stocks of intermediate
goods more rapidly. If average inventory holdings were left unchanged, this higher rate of use would
necessarily require more frequent orders and a persistent rise in adjustment costs. To avoid this, ﬁrms
increase their average inventory holdings.
    At the shock’s impact, the fall in the marginal cost of intermediate goods leads adjusting ﬁrms
to place larger orders and accumulate more inventories. This, reinforced by a transitory rise in

                                                  17
adjustment rates that increases the number of ordering ﬁrms, more than oﬀsets the more rapid
decummulation among nonadjusting ﬁrms.18 In the aggregate, inventories begin to rise. However,
given any level of intermediate goods production, there is a trade-oﬀ between accumulating these goods
as inventories and using them in current production. Unless intermediate goods production increases
suﬃciently, increases in ﬁnal sales are necessarily dampened by the rise in inventory investment. This
will be important to our discussion in the next section.
    Before proceeding further, it is useful to note the relation of the relative price of inventories in
our model to its empirical counterpart. In the data, we measure the relative price of inventories using
the one-period lagged implicit price deﬂator for end-of-period private nonfarm inventories divided by
the implicit price deﬂator for ﬁnal sales. Detrending the series, we ﬁnd that its percentage standard
deviation is 0.653 that of output, a value somewhat larger than that in our inventory model, 0.535.

Our model predicts a strongly countercyclical relative price (its contemporaneous correlation with
GDP is −0.973), an immediate consequence of our assumption of a single shock to the productivity
of ﬁrms supplying intermediate goods. While the measured relative price is also countercyclical, a
ﬁnding that motivated our choice of the location of the technology shock, its correlation with GDP is
substantially weaker, −0.257. This correlation would move further from the data if we had instead
assumed a single shock evenly aﬀecting intermediate and ﬁnal goods production. In that case, it
would be strongly positive, at 0.96, and even more so if we had assumed the shock aﬀected only the
production of ﬁnal goods. This discrepancy between model and data may reﬂect additional shocks
present in the data but absent our model economy, as explained in section 8.

6.2    Aggregate implications of inventory investment

     In table 5, we begin to assess the role of inventories in the business cycle using our model. The
ﬁrst row of each panel presents results for the control model without inventories; the second row
reports the equivalent moment from the baseline inventory model driven by the same sequence of
shocks. (We will defer discussion of the third rows until section 6.4.) The most striking aspect of
this comparison is the broad similarity in the dynamics of the two model economies. At ﬁrst look,
the introduction of inventories into an equilibrium business cycle model does not appear to alter the
model’s predictions for the variability or cyclicality of production, consumption, investment or total
hours in any substantial way.
    We introduced our paper by discussing the view that inventories exacerbate ﬂuctuations in pro-
duction. Table 5 provides little support for this view. Though the baseline inventory economy has a
higher standard deviation of GDP than the control economy, the diﬀerence is only 2.8 basis points.
This is because the rise in GDP volatility implied by procyclical inventory investment is almost en-

  18
    Given decreasing returns, eﬃciency requires that any rise in production be spread across the distribution of ﬁrms.
However, the rise in production among nonadjusting ﬁrms is constrained by relatively low initial stocks. A rise in
adjustment rates, by reducing the number of such ﬁrms, alleviates this problem.

                                                         18
tirely oﬀset by a reduction in the volatility of ﬁnal sales. (Recall that ﬁnal sales in the control model
is equivalent to production, given the absence of inventory investment.) Given that the level of in-
ventories in our model is calibrated to reproduce their intensity of use in the U.S. economy, our result
suggests that inventories do not amplify ﬂuctuations in production.
     In comparing the control and inventory economies, it is useful to note that agents in the former
choose to invest only in one asset, capital, while agents in the latter choose to invest both in capital
and in inventories of intermediate goods. Because production of ﬁnal goods draws upon interme-
diate goods, procyclical inventory investment crowds out some capital investment, given that labor
allocated to the production of intermediate goods does not rise suﬃciently to fully accommodate
the accumulation of these goods while consumption remains strongly procyclical. Thus, we see that
capital is less procyclical in the inventory economy. Also consistent with reduced responses in the
production of ﬁnal goods, the relative variability of consumption is somewhat lower when inventories
are accumulated. The relative variability of total hours worked, by contrast, is higher in the economy
with inventories.
     In both economies, a positive productivity shock lowers the relative price of intermediate goods,
q , and predicts a persistent increase in production. This leads ﬁnal goods ﬁrms to anticipate high use
of intermediate goods. While ﬁrms in the control economy increase their orders by exactly the rise in
use at each date, ﬁxed adjustment costs make this policy suboptimal. As we discussed in section 6.1,
ﬁrms in the inventory economy increase their average stocks in order to avoid more frequent orders
and a persistent rise in adjustment costs. Consequently, the increase in the production of intermediate
goods must supply not only their higher use, but also additional inventory accumulation. Relative to
the control economy, this implies a disproportionate share of the rise in employment is allocated to
intermediate goods production.
     Our discussion suggests that employment among intermediate goods ﬁrms should be more respon-
sive to aggregate shocks in the model with inventories, while the converse should hold for employment
among ﬁnal goods ﬁrms. Indeed, in the inventory model, the relative volatilities of labor in interme-
diate goods production, L, and labor in ﬁnal goods production, N , are 0.890 and 0.537, respectively,
while they are equal at 0.674 in the control model. Overall, we see that the inventory economy’s

higher variance in total hours arises from increased volatility in hours worked in the production of
intermediate goods, and despite reduced hours volatility in ﬁnal goods production. These patterns
of relative variability in employment across sectors carry over into the production and use of inter-
mediate goods. Thus, in the ﬁnal columns of table 5, production of intermediate goods, X , is more
volatile in the presence of inventories, while the use of these goods in ﬁnal production, M , is less
volatile.
     Although the increase in intermediate goods production is larger in the inventory economy, it does
not fully accommodate inventory accumulation because diminishing marginal product of labor hinders
large increases in production, given capital. Thus, inventory accumulation diverts some intermediate

                                                   19
goods from being used in current production, thereby reducing the rise in employment and production
among ﬁnal goods ﬁrms. As a result, ﬁnal sales is dampened relative to the control model. This
reduces the rise in not only consumption, but also investment, which slows capital accumulation in
the inventory economy and prolongs the dampening of ﬁnal sales relative to the control. In other
words, because the stock of capital constrains increases in the supply of intermediate goods, there is a
tradeoﬀ between increased production of ﬁnal goods versus inventory accumulation that perpetuates
itself by diverting some resources away from the production of investment goods that are used to
increase the future stock of capital.
    In concluding this section, we emphasize what we see as a central result of our study. All else
equal, a positive covariance between ﬁnal sales and inventory investment implies that inventories
must increase the variability of production. However, as clear from table 5 and the discussion above,
ﬁnal sales are not exogenous; they are aﬀected by the introduction of inventories. Our general
equilibrium analysis suggests that procyclical inventory investment reduces cyclical ﬂuctuations in
ﬁnal output. The percentage standard deviation of ﬁnal sales falls from 1.858 to 1.583 when inventories
are introduced into our model economy. This reduction in ﬁnal sales variability largely oﬀsets the
eﬀects of inventory investment for the variance of total production.

6.3    Role of capital

     In the previous section, we found that procyclical inventory investment dampens the changes in
ﬁnal production following productivity shocks, and consequently inventories cause little increase in
GDP volatility. In this section, we establish that the presence of capital in our model is essential
to this prediction. Our reasoning is as follows. A substantial capital share in production, given
diminishing marginal product of labor, slows the fall in the marginal cost of producing intermediate
goods following a positive productivity shock. This decline is complete only after suﬃcient capital
has been accumulated. Moreover, the rise in capital is itself gradual due to households’ preference for
smooth consumption proﬁles. This slows the rise in the supply of intermediate goods, so increases in
inventory investment necessarily reduce intermediate goods used in ﬁnal production.
    Here, we verify the essentiality of capital in our results by considering a model with a substantially
smaller role for capital in production. Speciﬁcally, we examine the eﬀect of inventory accumulation
when capital’s share in intermediate goods production is reduced to imply an average capital-output
ratio one-quarter that observed in the data. This involves a capital share in intermediate goods
production of roughly 0.09.19
    When capital is made largely irrelevant in production, cyclical variations in inventory investment
  19
    To isolate the eﬀects of the reduced capital-output ratio, we hold returns to scale constant, which implies a rise in
the economywide share to labor from 0.64 to 0.78. Elsewhere, parameters are selected to preserve the control model’s ﬁt
to the remaining calibration targets, and the shock process is recalibrated accordingly. As a result, there is no change
in average hours worked or the mean inventory-to-sales ratio.

                                                           20
yield substantial increases in GDP volatility; the standard deviation of GDP, at      2.349, is roughly
51 basis points higher in the inventory model than it is in the corresponding control model without
inventories, 1.837. (Recall that this diﬀerence was only 2.8 basis points in our comparison of the
calibrated models above.) Here, inventory investment is far more volatile than in the calibrated
inventory economy; in fact, its relative standard deviation, 0.375, exceeds that in the data. Moreover,
much of this high volatility in inventory accumulation translates into high GDP volatility, because
the dampening of ﬁnal sales is comparatively minor; the percent standard deviation of sales, 1.84 in
the control model, falls only to 1.64 in the presence of inventories.
    Now that capital has such a small share in production, its important role in slowing aggregate
responses to shocks is largely eliminated; adjustments in both models, control and inventory, are more
rapid. Relative to our baseline model, the more rapid rise in the supply of intermediate goods following
a positive technology shock allows faster inventory investment with less crowding out of ﬁnal goods
production. As a result, sharp quantitative diﬀerences emerge between the control and inventory
models. In the control model, the percent standard deviations of orders and use of intermediate
goods are equal at 3.16. Moving to the inventory economy, a sharp rise in the volatility of orders to
4.38 allows rapid inventory adjustments at little expense to the volatility of intermediate goods use
in production, 2.91.
    Given a very low capital share in intermediate goods production, marginal product of labor sched-
ules are much ﬂatter than those in the calibrated inventory economy. In this case, a positive shock to
productivity generates larger increases in employment, and thus in the supply of intermediate goods,
before diminishing marginal productivity discourages further increase. Thus, intermediate goods pro-
duction responds much more sharply when capital’s share is low, and the relative price of these inputs
in ﬁnal production falls further and more rapidly. This alleviates the trade-oﬀ between inventory ac-
cumulation and intermediate goods use, allowing ﬁnal goods ﬁrms to raise their inventories faster,
with little crowding out of ﬁnal production. The result is an episode of rapid inventory accumulation
during which GDP rises substantially more than its counterpart in the model without inventories.
Thus, inventory investment can cause sharp increases in GDP volatility when capital is suﬃciently
unimportant in production. Comparing these results with those discussed in section 6.2, we conclude
that capital plays a central role in determining the aggregate eﬀects of inventories in our model.
    We have shown here that our model’s central trade-oﬀ between inventory investment and ﬁnal
sales arises because gradual capital accumulation slows changes in intermediate goods production.
We argue that this result would remain if we assumed that capital was used to produce not only
intermediate goods but also ﬁnal goods. Consider such an alternative model. Assuming an unchanged
aggregate capital to output ratio, the share to capital in intermediate goods production would be
reduced, and thus capital would now be less important in constraining changes in the supply of
intermediate goods. However, the level of capital in the production of ﬁnal goods would now be an
important determinant of the marginal product of intermediate goods. As such, capital used by ﬁnal

                                                  21
goods ﬁrms (and hence aggregate capital) would directly limit the demand for intermediate goods in
current production and thus, given the slow rise in capital, the demand for these goods as inventories
toward production in nearby dates. As a result, gradual capital accumulation would again slow the
increase in the production of intermediate goods, just as in our model.20

6.4     Changes in average inventory holdings

                           rieﬂy consider what our analysis might contribute to recent discussions regard-
       In this section, we b

ing the large drop in U.S. GDP volatility in the mid-1980s, and, in particular, the Kahn, McConnell
and Perez-Quiros (2001) argument that improvements in inventory management were responsible for
this change. Ramey and Vine (2004) identify a structural break at 1984:1 where they ﬁnd the variance
of GDP growth decreases by 50 percent. Examining the aggregate data before and after this date, we
ﬁnd that the standard deviation of (log HP-ﬁltered) U.S. domestic business production less housing
dropped by 72 percent between 1954:1 - 1983:4 and 1984:1 - 2002:4. Variability in ﬁnal sales and
inventory investment showed lesser reductions, 64 and 27 percent, respectively. Thus, the relative
volatility of ﬁnal sales rose, and, most importantly, the relative volatility of inventory investment rose
substantially. This in itself suggests that a decline in inventories was not the leading force behind the
dampened ﬂuctuations in GDP.
    To explore this question further, we increase the upper support of the cost distribution in our
model, ξ , from the baseline value of 0.220 to 0.333, which pushes the average inventory-to-sales ratio
up by 15 percent to 0.8315. Maintaining all other parameters, and using the same simulated shock

series as above, we contrast the behavior of this high inventory economy to our baseline inventory
economy where the inventory-to-sales ratio is 0.7155, the average quarterly value observed in the data.
The results of this exercise may be seen by comparing the third rows to the second rows in table 5.
    Starting from the high inventory economy, and moving to the baseline, the reduced prevalence
of inventories is associated with less cyclically volatile inventory investment; its standard deviation
relative to GDP falls slightly from 68 to 64 percent of that measured in the data. However, for reasons
described in section 6.2, the underlying reduction in adjustment frictions responsible for this lower
inventory volatility also raises the volatility of ﬁnal sales. As a result, GDP volatility falls by only 1
basis point.
    Based on these results, we ﬁnd little support for the suggestion that technological improvements in
inventory management, by reducing average inventory-sales ratios, are responsible for dampened U.S.
business cycles. In the data, the average real (nominal) inventory-sales ratio was 0.719 (0.858) during
  20
    This argument is supported by the results of a reduced-form model where inventories are assumed as a factor
of production. There, as the share to capital in ﬁnal goods production is raised (and its share in intermediate goods
production lowered to maintain the aggregate capital-output ratio), we ﬁnd no change in the model’s aggregate dynamics.
In particular, the minor increase in GDP volatility that occurs with the introduction of inventories is unaﬀected. Details
are available upon request.


                                                           22
1954:1 - 1983:4, and fell to       0.709 (0.731)   during 1984:1 - 2002:4.       Thus, the real ratio changed very

little, roughly   1.4        while the fall in the nominal ratio, at 16 percent, was quite comparable
                        percent,

to the change that we have just examined. Our theory predicts that the cyclical volatility of GDP
would be reduced by far less than even 1 percent if adjustment frictions were reduced to yield a 15
percent decline in the average inventory-sales ratio. Moreover, absent other changes in fundamentals,
this decline would be accompanied by a rise in the volatility of ﬁnal sales and a fall in the relative
volatility of inventory investment. We conclude that, irrespective of changes in inventory-sales ratios,
the direct explanation for dampened business cycles lies elsewhere.21

7        Two puzzles about inventory adjustment
         We noted in section 6.1 that our inventory model is consistent with the data in its prediction
of a countercyclical inventory-to-sales ratio. This happens because the trade-oﬀ between inventory
accumulation and intermediate goods use slows the rise in the aggregate stock following a rise in
productivity. While the largest increase in sales occurs immediately, the rise in inventories, like the
familiar response in capital, is far more gradual. We begin the section by relating this result to a
puzzle raised in recent work by Bils and Kahn (2000).
    Based on a model in which inventories are assumed to be directly productive in generating sales,
Bils and Kahn conclude that a business cycle model driven by technology shocks is incapable of
delivering a countercyclical inventory-sales ratio in the absence of imperfect competition. The puzzle,
they emphasize, is not that inventory investment is procyclical, but rather that it is not suﬃciently
so as to keep inventory stocks in pace with sales. This diﬃculty arises quite immediately in their
environment because the particular function through which inventories are assumed to generate sales
leads these two series to move closely together over time.22 To break this tendency, and hence obtain
the desired regularity, the authors ﬁnd that they must introduce either procyclical marginal costs or
countercyclical markups.
    Here, by contrast, we have developed a business cycle model in which perfectly competitive ﬁnal
goods ﬁrms choose to hold inventories in order to reduce the ﬁxed costs they incur in obtaining de-
liveries from their perfectly competitive suppliers. Moreover, business cycles in our model are driven
by technology shocks alone. Yet the inventory-sales ratio is strongly countercyclical. For models
     Focusing on the automobile industry, Ramey and Vine (2004) suggest an alternative explanation based upon reduced
    21

sales volatility (and persistence) and nonconvexities in ﬁrms’ cost functions arising from institutional arrangements.
Estimating a model of inventory holding behavior, Maccini and Pagan (2003) also reject the inventory-driven explanation.
Finally, Stock and Watson (2003) examine several possible causes of reduced cyclical volatility in the United States and
other G7 countries, among them reduced inventory holdings. Their results indicate that the fall in volatility may be a
largely transitory result of smaller shocks experienced over the past two decades.
  22
     Sales are assumed to be a state-invariant power function of the stock of available goods. Speciﬁcally, s = d(p) · aφ ,
where s is sales, a is the stock of goods available for sale, (the sum of inventories and current output), and p is price.


                                                            23
designed to examine inventories, this illustrates that the method used to introduce these stocks can
substantially inﬂuence the results obtained. Further, reconsidering why inventories move more grad-
ually than sales in our model economy, it is important to understand that aggregate stocks, whether
of capital or inventories, tend to adjust slowly in general equilibrium. This is an immediate conse-
quence of households’ preference for smooth consumption paths, which prevents sharp movements in
investment, and it suggests that general equilibrium analysis may be essential in understanding the
inventory-to-sales relationship.23
    Our model may also oﬀer some insight into a second puzzle, one involving inventory adjustment
speeds. Much of the empirical inventory literature has estimated inventory adjustment equations
derived from linear-quadratic (LQ) models of ﬁrm behavior. Typically, these models predict that
target inventory holdings are a function of expected sales and other variables, and that some constant
fraction of the gap between actual and target inventory holdings is closed in each period. As discussed
in Ramey and West (1999), estimates of this gap based on aggregate data typically uncover a ﬁrst-
order autocorrelation coeﬃcient between 0.8 and 0.9, which implies that between 0.1 and 0.2 of the
distance between target and actual inventories is closed in any given quarter. A number of researchers
have objected that these rates of inventory adjustment are implausibly low.
    As indicated above, the common method of inferring inventory adjustment rates from the data
rests on an assumption of partial adjustment toward a target inventory-to-sales ratio. Here, we illus-
trate the diﬃculties that can arise with this approach if the data is in fact generated by heterogeneous
ﬁrms pursuing endogenous (S,s) inventory policies. Equation (18) is a version of the familiar stock-
adjustment model, which assumes that actual economywide inventory holdings, St, adjust gradually
toward a desired level of inventories,        St∗, with ρ representing the rate at which the gap between the
actual and target levels is closed in each quarter:



                                            St   = ρS ∗ + (1 − ρ)S −1 + ε
                                                     t             t       t.                                     (18)
The stock-adjustment equation is operationalized by assuming that the unobservable desired stock is
linearly related to sales, Xt:
                                            St∗ = θXt.                                        (19)
In some applications, cost variables are appended to the model; for example, Schuh (1996) includes
a real interest rate. However, such terms are generally found to be insigniﬁcant.
    We obtain an implied estimate of the adjustment rate ρ in our model as follows. First, we estimate
θ using the cointegration approach described in Ramey and West (1999), which yields θ = 0.7177
for our simulated data. With this in hand, we then estimate the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of the
inventory to sales relation, St − θXt, at 0.825. Ramey and West show that, given (18) and (19), this
  23
       Maintaining the assumptions of technology shocks and perfect competition, a reduced-form model where inventories
are assumed as a factor of production exhibits the same countercyclical inventory-to-sales ratio when solved in general
equilibrium. Details are provided in an appendix available at http://www.juliathomas.net/inventoryappendices.

                                                           24
autocorrelation is equal to (1 − ρ), which would imply an adjustment rate of ρ = 0.175 for our model
economy. Note that this lies well inside the range of previous empirical estimates from aggregate
data. However, interpreting the number of ﬁrms adjusting in our model as the aggregate adjustment
rate, this is only about one-half of the true value, 0.27. If we instead weight ﬁrms by the diﬀerence
between their target and actual end-of-period inventories, [s∗t − mt (s∗t )] − [st − mt (st)], and compute
the fraction of this diﬀerence closed in the aggregate, the implied adjustment rate rises to 0.35.
     There are several reasons why the persistence of the inventory-sales relation does not reveal the

true average adjustment rate in our model economy. First, equation (18) does not hold in our model.
To see this, deﬁne St∗+1 ≡ s∗t − mt (s∗t ) as the common target inventory level held at the end of the
period by each ﬁrm adjusting its stock in date t. Recall that the economy’s true date t adjustment
rate is the fraction of ﬁrms that are adjustors, ρt ≡ H ξ T (s; zt, At ) μt(ds). Writing the aggregate
inventory stock at the end of date t, St+1, as the sum of end-of-period inventories held by adjustors
together with those held across all ﬁrms not adjusting, we arrive at the following relationship between
true and target inventories:
                                                                          
            St+1 = ρtSt∗+1 + (1 − ρt) St +    1−   H   ξ T (s;   z ,A )
                                                                  t   t    s   − m (s) − S
                                                                                  t      t   μt(ds).   (20)


Equation (20) includ    es a weighted sum, across all ﬁrms not actively adjusting their stocks, of the
diﬀerences between current end-of-period inventories and the average stock held at the end of the
previous period. This time-varying term is missing in equation (18). A second reason that equation
(18) fails to identify the true adjustment rate is that the relationship between target inventories and
sales in our model is a nonlinear function of the aggregate state that is not captured in the ﬁrst step
of the estimation. Finally, in our model economy, the adjustment rate ρt is not only state-dependent,
but co-moves positively with the target St∗+1 .

8     Robustness
      In the preceding sections, we have developed the ﬁrst    quantitative general equilibrium model
with endogenous inventory accumulation successful in reproducing the cyclical regularities involving
inventories. Our equilibrium business cycle model simultaneously delivers procyclical inventory
investment, the comovement of inventory investment and sales and the greater volatility of total
production relative to sales, without forfeiting capital as a competing accumulable stock. Thus, it
provides a unique laboratory within which to formally assess several prominent claims regarding the
cyclical implications of inventories. Using it as such, we have found that endogenous inventory
accumulation does not amplify aggregate ﬂuctuations, nor do smaller average stocks imply reduced
GDP volatility, and nor is it necessary to assume imperfect competition in order to reconcile the
observation of a countercyclical inventory-to-sales ratio with technology-shock-driven business cycles.
These ﬁndings represent a direct challenge to previous claims in the literature, and hence may be
                                                   25
viewed with some initial scepticism. In this section, we consider whether they are likely to survive in
more elaborate versions of the model that sharpen its empirical performance.
     Our baseline model’s relative simplicity makes it useful for understanding the inter-related dynam-
ics of ﬁnal sales and inventory investment in an actual economy. However, it also limits the model’s
quantitative ﬁt in two notable respects: (i) the relative price of inventories is too countercyclical, and
(ii) the relative variability in net inventory investment is somewhat weak. In assessing the relevance
of our ﬁndings, it is useful to know whether they would still arise if these two model-generated series
were made to more closely resemble the data.24
     We explore each of these issues in table 6. First, we consider how the model’s ﬁt to the cyclical
behavior of the relative price of inventories might be improved, beginning with an explanation of
the problem. To facilitate analysis in the sections above, we have assumed aggregate ﬂuctuations in
our baseline inventory economy arise from a single source, technology shocks that directly aﬀect only
the production of intermediate goods. Under this single-shock assumption, the largest rises in GDP
occur in times of the largest declines in the marginal cost of producing intermediate goods. Thus, our
baseline model generates a contemporaneous correlation between q and GDP near −1. By contrast,
the empirical correlation is quite weak, at about −0.257. As we suggested in section 6.1, multiple
shocks may largely oﬀset each other’s inﬂuence on this correlation in the actual economy.
     To see what information has been lost with our abstraction, we add an independent shock to the
productivity of ﬁnal goods ﬁrms, and we target the parameters of the Markov process governing this
shock to match the cyclical dynamics of q (while maintaining all existing parameter values). Row 3
of table 6 reveals that adding the second shock is successful in this respect. Moreover, it improves
the ﬁt to the inventory facts by reducing the correlations of inventory investment with GDP and ﬁnal
sales. As to our model’s implications about the cyclical role of inventories, the ﬁnal columns show
that the inventory-sales ratio is again strongly countercyclical, and the addition to GDP volatility
with the presence of inventories remains minimal, at 5 basis points.
     Turning to the second issue, we believe that our model reproduces only 64 percent of the empirical
relative volatility of inventory investment because it abstracts from stage-of-completion distinctions
across stocks held in the actual economy. As our inventories represent stocks of an intermediate
good, we have calibrated the share parameter governing their usefulness in production, θm, at 0.5
(the average share to intermediate goods in manufacturing and trade). At the same time, to study

the eﬀect of inventory accumulation on cyclical ﬂuctuations in GDP and other broad aggregates, we
have calibrated the ﬁxed costs causing inventories in our model to imply an overall stock matching
total private nonfarm inventories in the data, which include stocks of ﬁnished goods. This creates a
tension for our calibration of θm.
     Consider a retail ﬁrm producing with the technology y = mθm nθn , where m is a ﬁnished good
  24
    We thank two anonymous referees for raising each of these questions to our attention. Additional robustness
exercises from a previous draft of this paper are available at http://www.juliathomas.net/inventoryappendices.

                                                      26
drawn from its inventories. For such a ﬁrm, it is likely that θm is closer to 1. As such, our
baseline value represents a conservative lower bound for the overall production share of goods held
as inventories. It would seem that further substantive progress toward understanding inventories
may require the construction of a model with both intermediate and ﬁnished goods inventories, and
thus far more heterogeneity. Here, to explore whether such an extension is likely to overturn the
conclusions obtained from our relatively simple model, we consider a compromise designed to reﬂect
some use of ﬁnished goods stocks in our ﬁnal goods sector by raising θm to an intermediate value
between 0.5 and 1 (and recalibrating our remaining parameters accordingly). Selecting the value of
this share parameter at 0.65 to maximize the ﬁt to relative inventory investment volatility in the
data, we re-examine the model’s predictions in row 4 of table 6.
    Our proxy for the presence of distinct ﬁnished goods stocks has the desired eﬀect, yielding a
relative volatility of inventory investment roughly 92 percent that in the aggregate data, and it moves
the inventory investment correlations with GDP and ﬁnal sales closer to the data. Nonetheless, our
conclusions about the role of inventories are again unaﬀected. Of course, the negative correlation
between the relative price of inventories and GDP is too strong here as in our baseline results, as
we have allowed no second shock process in this case. Row 5 of our table reports results for this
same exercise when a second shock is included. There, the countercyclicality of q is corrected, while
the correlations of inventory investment with GDP and ﬁnal sales are moved even nearer the data.
These improvements come at some expense to inventory investment volatility. Nonetheless, at 78
percent of the data, the model continues to reproduce a large fraction of observed aggregate inventory
ﬂuctuations. Viewing table 6 as a whole, we conclude that extensions to our model that substantially
improve its quantitative match to the observed cyclical behavior of inventories and their relative price
in no way alter our central ﬁndings and the challenge they present to the conventional wisdom about
inventories.

9    Concluding remarks
     In the preceding pages, we generalized an equilibrium business cycle model to allow for endoge-
nous (S, s) inventories of an intermediate good. Assuming that aggregate ﬂuctuations result from
technology shocks in the intermediate goods sector, we showed that our calibrated baseline model
of inventories accounts for the procyclicality of inventory investment, the comovement of ﬁnal sales
and inventory investment (and hence the higher variance of production relative to sales), and almost
two-thirds of the relative variability of inventory investment. Using this model to assess the role of
inventories in the aggregate business cycle, we found that the inventory economy exhibits a business
cycle that is broadly similar to that in a counterpart model without inventory investment.
    In our model, ﬁxed delivery costs induce ﬁnal goods ﬁrms to maintain stocks of intermediate
goods and to increase these holdings during expansions. As a result, inventory investment co-moves

                                                  27
with ﬁnal sales and GDP. However, in equilibrium, there is a trade-oﬀ between inventory investment
and the production of ﬁnal goods. Procyclical accumulation of inventories diverts both labor and
intermediate goods that would otherwise be used in ﬁnal production, and thereby mutes changes in
ﬁnal sales. This substantially limits the eﬀect of inventory investment on the overall variability of
GDP.
    Our results represent a challenge to previous conclusions about the role of inventories in the
business cycle. Contrary to the common belief among researchers and policymakers, we ﬁnd that in-
ventories do not amplify aggregate ﬂuctuations. This, in turn, implies that improvements in inventory
management are unlikely to explain substantial reductions in GDP volatility. Moreover, our results
show that the observation of a countercyclical inventory-to-sales ratio, alongside procyclical inventory
investment, is not, in itself, inconsistent with a business cycle driven by shocks to technology. While
the presence of ﬁxed adjustment costs is essential to the (S, s) policies that endogenize inventory
investment in our model, general equilibrium is central to the trade-oﬀ between inventory investment
and ﬁnal sales. This suggests that the development of equilibrium models with diﬀerent motives for
inventories may lead to similar predictions, provided that such models reproduce the procyclicality
of inventory investment.




                                                  28
References
 [1] Ahmed, S., A. Levin and B. Wilson (2002), ‘Recent U.S. Macroeconomic Stability: Good Policies,
     Good Practices, or Good Luck’ Federal Reserve Board, International Finance Division Working
     Paper.
 [2] Bils, M. and J. A. Kahn (2000) ‘What Inventory Behavior Tells Us About Business Cycles’
     American Economic Review 90: 458-481.
 [3] Blinder, A. S. (1981) ‘Retail Inventory Behavior and Business Fluctuations’ Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity 2: 443-505.
 [4] Blinder, A. S. (1990) Inventory theory and consumer behavior, University of Michigan Press.
 [5] Blinder A. S. and L. J. Maccini (1991) ‘Taking stock: a critical assessment of recent research on
    inventories’ Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, 73-96.
 [6] Caballero, R. J. and E. M. R. A. Engel (1991) ‘Dynamic (S,s) economies’ Econometrica 59,
     1659-86.
 [7] Caballero, R. J. and E. M. R. A. Engel (1999) ‘Explaining investment dynamics in U.S. manu-
     facturing: a generalized (S , s) approach’ Econometrica 67, 783-826.
 [8] Caplin, A.S. (1985) ‘The Variability of Aggregate Demand with (S,s) Inventory Policies’ Econo-
    metrica 53: 1395-1410.
 [9] Christiano, L. J. (1988) ‘Why does inventory investment ﬂuctuate so much?’ Journal of Monetary
     Economics 21: 247-80.
[10] Eichenbaum, M. S. (1989) ‘Some Empirical Evidence on the Production Level and Production
     Cost Smoothing Models of Inventory Investment’ American Economic Review 79: 853-864.
[11] Fisher, J. D. M. and A. Hornstein (2000) ‘(S, s)    inventory policies in general equilibrium’ Review
    of Economic Studies 67: 117-145.
[12] Fitzgerald, T. J. (1997) ‘Inventories and the business cycle:    an overview’   Economic Review   33

    (3): 11-22, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.


[13] Hall, G. andJ. Rust (1999) ‘An empirical model of inventory investment by durable commodity
    intermediaries’ Yale University working paper.
[14] Hansen, G. D. (1985) ‘Indivisible labor and the business cycle’ Journal of Monetary Economics
     16, 309-327.


                                                    29
[15] Hornstein, A. (1998) ‘Inventory investment and the business cycle’ Economics Quarterly 84,
     49-71, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
[16] Humphreys, B. R., L. J. Maccini, and S. Schuh (2001) ‘Input and output inventories’ Journal of
     Monetary Economics 47: 347-375.

[17] Irvine, O. and S. Schuh (2002), ‘Inventory Investment and Output Volatility’ FRB Boston Series,
     paper no. 02-6.
[18] Johnson, S. A. (1989) Spline approximation in discrete dynamic programming with application
     to stochastic multi-reservoir systems Unpublished dissertation (Cornell, Ithaca, NY).
[19] Jorgenson, D. W., F. M. Gollop, and B. M. Fraumeni (1999) Productivity and U.S. Economic
     Growth (toExcel, New York).
[20] Kahn, J. A. (1987) ‘Inventories and the volatility of production’ American Economic Review 77,
    667-679.

[21] Kahn, J., M. McConnell and  G. Perez-Quiros (2001) ‘Inventories and the information revolution:
    implications for output volatility’ Federal Reserve Bank of New York working paper.
[22] Khan A. and J. K. Thomas (2003) ‘Nonconvex factor adjustments in equilibrium business cycle
     models: do nonlinearities matter?’ Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 331-360.
[23] Khan A. and J. K. Thomas (2004) ‘Modeling         Inventories Over The Business Cycle’ NBER

    Working Paper No. 10652.

[24] King, R. G. and S. T. Rebelo (1999) ‘Resuscitating real business cycles’ in: M. Woodford and J.

    Taylor, eds.,   Handbook of Macroeconomics IB (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam): 927 - 1007.
[25] Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith Jr. (1997) ‘Income and wealth heterogeneity, portfolio choice, and
     equilibrium asset returns’ Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 387-422.
[26] Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith Jr. (1998) ‘Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy’
     Journal of Political Economy 106, 867-896.

[27] Kydland, F. and E. C. Prescott (1982) ‘Time to build and aggregate ﬂuctuations’ Econometrica
    50, 1345 - 1370.
[28] Maccini, L. J. and A. Pagan (2003) ‘Exploring the role of inventories in the business cycle’ Johns
    Hopkins University working paper.
[29] McCarthy, J. and E. Zakrajšek (2000) ‘Microeconomic Inventory Adjustment: Evidence from
     U.S. Firm-Level Data’ Finance and Economics Discussion Paper 2000-24, Board of Governors of
     the Federal Reserve System.
                                                  30
[30] Mosser, P. C. (1991) ‘Trade inventories and (S,s)’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1267-86.
[31] Prescott, E. C. (1986), ‘Theory ahead of business cycle measurement’ Quarterly Review 10,
    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis: 9-22.
[32] Ramey, V. A. (1989) ‘Inventories as factors of production and economic ﬂuctuations’ American
     Economic Review 79, 338-54.
[33] Ramey, V. A. (1991) ‘Nonconvex costs and the behavior of inventories’ Journal of Political
     Economy 99, 306-334.
[34] Ramey, V.A. and D. J. Vine (2004) ‘Tracking the Source of the Decline in GDP Volatility: An
    Analysis of the Automobile Industry’ NBER Working Paper No. 10384.
[35] Ramey, V. A. and K. D. West (1999) ‘Inventories’ in: M. Woodford and J. Taylor, eds., Handbook
     of Macroeconomics IB. (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam), 863 - 922.
[36] Richardson, H. (1995), ‘Control Your Costs then Cut Them’ Transportation and Distribution,
     94-96.
[37] Rogerson, R. (1988) ‘Indivisible labor, lotteries and equilibrium’ Journal of Monetary Economics
     21, 3-16.
[38] Scarf, H. (1960) ‘The optimality of (S,s) policies in the dynamic inventory problem’ in: K. J.
     Arrow, S. Karlin and H. Scarf, eds., Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences (Stanford
    University Press, Stanford), 196-202.


                                            ween Firm-Level and Aggregate Inventory Behavior’
[39] Schuh, S. (1996) ‘Evidence on the Link Bet

    Finance and Economics Discussion Series 96-46, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
    System.
[40] Stock, J. R. and D. M. Lambert (1987) Strategic Logistics Management (Irwin, Homewood,
     Illinois).
[41] Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2003) ‘Has the business cycle changed?      Evidence and expla-

    nations’ Harvard University working paper.




                                                  31
                                             Table 1: Baseline parameter values*

            β          η           α          θm           θn           δ           ρ           σε          σ           ⎯ξ

          0.984      2.128      0.374       0.499        0.328       0.017       0.956       0.015        0.012       0.220
*
 Columns 1 – 8 list parameters common across control and inventory models; β: household subjective discount factor, η: preference
parameter for leisure, α: capital’s share in intermediate goods production, θm: intermediate goods’ share in final goods production, θn:
labor’s share in final goods production, δ: capital depreciation rate, ρ: technology shock persistence, σε: standard deviation of
technology innovations. Columns 9 – 10 list parameters specific to inventory model; σ: per-unit inventory storage cost,⎯ξ: upper bound
for fixed delivery costs.




                     Table 2: Distribution of final goods firms in baseline inventory steady-state
                                           adjustors         1              2           3            4          5            6
    start-of-period distribution: μ(s)                    0.268        0.258        0.224       0.159        0.074       0.017

     start-of-period inventories: s                       1.155        0.705        0.343       0.094        0.003       0.000

      fraction adjusting: H(ξT(s))                        0.036        0.132        0.292       0.534        0.806       0.838

    production-time inventories: s1          1.694        1.155        0.705        0.343       0.094        0.003       0.000

      production-time distribution           0.268        0.258        0.224        0.159       0.074        0.014       0.003
                             Table 3: GDP, final sales and inventories in the postwar U.S.
                                                                                                         Net Inventory
                                                   GDP                       Final Sales
                                                                                                          Investment
             standard deviation
                                                 ( 2.237 )                      0.710                         0.295
               relative to GDP
            correlation with GDP                   1.000                        0.943                         0.669

            correlation with NII                   0.669                        0.411                         1.000
        *
         Column 1 of row 1 reports percentage standard deviation of GDP in parentheses; columns 2 – 3 report standard deviations
        relative to GDP for final sales and net inventory investment.




                                    Table 4: Inventory results for the baseline model*
                                                                                Net Inventory
                                  GDP                 Final Sales                                         Inventory/Sales
                                                                                 Investment
                                                      A: standard deviations relative to GDP*

            data                (2.237)                    0.710                     0.295                       0.545

    baseline inventory          (1.886)                    0.839                     0.188                       0.742

                                                      B: contemporaneous correlations with GDP

            data                                           0.943                     0.669                      - 0.381

    baseline inventory                                     0.994                     0.880                      - 0.911
*
 Column 1 of panel A reports percent standard deviation of GDP in parentheses; columns 2 – 3 report standard deviations relative to
GDP for final sales, net inventory investment and the inventory-sales ratio. Contemporaneous correlation between final sales and net
inventory investment in baseline inventory model: 0.825.
            Table 5: Business cycles with no inventories, baseline inventories and high inventories*

                             GDP            FS            C             I           TH             K            X            M

                                                               A: standard deviations relative to GDP

         control            (1.858)       1.000         0.384        7.470         0.674        0.423        1.579         1.579

    baseline inventory      (1.886)       0.839         0.345        6.318         0.722        0.376        1.677         1.347

      high inventory        (1.896)       0.823         0.338        6.296         0.733        0.373        1.688         1.322

                                                              B: contemporaneous correlations with GDP

         control                          1.000         0.902        0.970         0.969        0.118        0.998         0.998

    baseline inventory                    0.994         0.864        0.982         0.973        0.065        0.999         0.985

      high inventory                      0.994         0.856        0.981         0.975        0.066        0.999         0.985
*
 Column 1 reports percent standard deviation of GDP in parentheses. FS: final sales, C: consumption, I: capital investment, TH: total
hours worked, K: capital stock, X: total orders of intermediate goods, M: total use of intermediate goods. In high inventory model:
corr(FS,NII) = 0.846, corr(NII,GDP) = 0.899, and relative standard deviation of NII = 0.202.
                                                 Table 6: Robustness Results*
                                                                                                                 Implications for
                                                   Inventory Facts                      Relative Price               Claims

                                                                  rel. sd   rel. sd.                rel. sd.                  σ(GDP)
                           σ(GDP)     ρ(NII,GDP)     ρ(NII,FS)      NII       FS       ρ(q,GDP)        q       ρ(I-S,GDP)      Rise


    1: U.S. data           2.237        0.669         0.411      0.295      0.710       -0.257      0.653       -0.381


    2: baseline model      1.886        0.880         0.825      0.188      0.839       -0.973      0.535       -0.911         0.028


    3: second shock        2.223        0.671         0.567      0.160      0.901       -0.295      0.595       -0.894         0.050

    4: raised intermed.
       goods share         1.902        0.744         0.579      0.270      0.819       -0.978      0.334       -0.861         0.044

    5: second shock
       and raised θm       2.151        0.611         0.435      0.229      0.879       -0.234      0.400       -0.866         0.031
*
 Column 1: percent standard deviation of GDP in data and models, (rows 2 – 5 report standard deviation in each inventory model;
subtract column 9 to obtain standard deviation in each corresponding control model). Columns 2-5 (Inventory Facts): contemporaneous
correlations of inventory investment with GDP and final sales, respectively, then relative volatilities of inventory investment and final
sales. Columns 6-7 (Relative Price): contemporaneous correlation with GDP, then relative standard deviation, of relative price of
inventories. Columns 8-9 (Implications for Claims): corr(GDP,inventory-sales ratio), then the rise in percent standard deviation of GDP
in moving from control model to inventory model. All series based on 10000 period simulations and filtered as in Table 1. Second
shock in rows 3 and 5 is lognormal; ρ2 = 0.992 and σε2 = 0.006 in row 3, and ρ2 = 0.956 and σε2 = 0.005 in row 5.
