                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LIQUIDITY SHORTAGES AND BANKING CRISES

                                         Douglas W. Diamond
                                          Raghuram G. Rajan

                                         Working Paper 10071
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10071


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2003




We thank John Cochrane, Isabel Gödde, Gary Gorton, and Nobu Kiyotaki for very helpful comments on an
earlier draft, and Steve Ross and participants at the NBER Economic Fluctuations meetings in February 2001
for helpful suggestions. We are grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation and the
Center for Research on Security Prices. Rajan also thanks the Center for the Study of the State and the
Economy for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 10071
October 2003
JEL No. G2, E5

                                          ABSTRACT
We show in this paper that bank failures can be contagious. Unlike earlier work where contagion

stems from depositor panics or ex ante contractual links between banks, we argue bank failures can

shrink the common pool of liquidity, creating or exacerbating aggregate liquidity shortages. This

could lead to a contagion of failures and a possible total meltdown of the system. Given the costs

of a meltdown, there is a possible role for government intervention. Unfortunately, liquidity

problems and solvency problems interact and can cause each other, making it hard to determine the

root cause of a crisis from observable factors. We propose a robust sequence of intervention.

Douglas W. Diamond
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
douglas.diamond@gsb.uchicago.edu

Raghuram Rajan
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, Rm 10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu
        Banks are often found at the center of systemic financial crises. The causes of these crises have

long been debated. Do they stem from depositor panics or do they arise because bank balance sheets are

exposed to common factors? If the latter, then is there any sense in which bank failures can be

contagious? Can anything be done to prevent these crises or stop them from propagating once they begin?

        Our purpose in this paper is to reexamine whether bank failures can start and propagate systemic

crises even if we assume depositors do not panic, that is, even if depositors’ actions are coordinated and

they do not run simply because they fear others will run. Our focus is not because we think panics

empirically unimportant (the jury is still out on that). Instead, we show that contagion can stem from an

underlying real general equilibrium problem rather than just lack of coordination among depositors.

From a policy perspective, attempts to reassure investors through confidence building measures will not

work if panic and lack of coordination is not the reason for a crisis.

        We start in this paper with a model of a bank that we developed in Diamond and Rajan (2001).

Assets in this model are illiquid -- they cannot be borrowed against or sold for the full value of resources

they will generate in their best use -- because the human capital necessary to generate that full value

cannot be committed to the asset. So, for example, projects are illiquid because the entrepreneur who sets

up the project is the best person to run the project. Even if he wants to pay out all the future revenues he

generates to a potential lender (or he wants to sell the project) he cannot get full value because he cannot

commit to using his skills on behalf of the lender. Anticipating the rents the entrepreneur will extract in

the future for his skills, the lender will only be willing to lend (or pay for) a fraction of the project value.

        Someone who learns a good alternative use of the project assets can lend more to the project

because he can use the threat to put the assets to alternative use to collect more from the entrepreneur.

Call such a lender the banker, for reasons that will become clear soon. The problem, however, is that

while the project becomes less illiquid as the banker acquires collection skills, his loan to the project (i.e.,

the banker’s asset) becomes more illiquid: potential lenders to the bank do not have the banker’s skills. So

how then can the banker finance the project if the project needs more funds than he has? Has illiquidity

(stemming from specific skills) simply been transferred from the real project to the project loan?



                                                                                                                   1
        The solution in Diamond and Rajan (2001) is that the banker can commit to using his collection

skills on behalf of investors (and not extracting a rent) by issuing demand deposits. No depositor will ever

accept a lower amount than initially promised. Because of the first-come first-served nature of deposits,

the depositor is always better off demanding immediate payment if he thinks others will accept. Thus any

attempt by the banker to bargain down deposits will be met by a bank run, which Diamond and Rajan

show completely dissipates any rents the banker could get. Fearing such a run, the banker will always pay

what he has promised to depositors, if he has the means to pay.

        By issuing demand deposits in sufficient quantity, the banker can effectively tie his collection

skills to the loans he has made and borrow what is required from unskilled depositors. Thus the banker

does not pass on illiquidity but reduces it through a combination of his collection skills and demand

deposits. Moreover, so long as there is no aggregate shortage of resources, the bank’s ability to issue new

demand deposits allows it to meet an uncertain depositor demand for resources. Thus banks play a central

role in funding potentially long term projects while allowing depositors to withdraw when in need.

        Unfortunately, the demandable claims that perform such a useful role also expose the banking

system to the risk that there might be a mismatch between the economy-wide production of resources and

the demands of depositors. Even if the mismatch is merely due to delay in production and not because of

any impairment of the long-term production possibilities of the economy, such an aggregate shortage of

resources (also termed an aggregate real “liquidity shortage”) can be spread through bank failures to the

entire banking system.

        Let us understand why. To do that, let us specify the nature of projects in greater detail. Projects

require an investment of resources up front, and will pay off a larger amount of resources, either at an

interim date (early) or after considerable delay (late).1 Projects are thus risky, but only in that the timing

of when they pay off is uncertain. Projects can also be discontinued and restructured so that they

immediately return a fraction of the resources originally invested. We now ask what happens if a number



1
 This could be thought of as a model of delays in harvest, or crop failure, that so plagued banking systems in the
19th century. If the consumption good is commodity money or foreign exchange, the delay could be thought of as a
delay of exports. It also has more modern parallels, which we will draw later.

                                                                                                                     2
of projects are delayed. To sharpen the intuition, let us assume that all initial depositors have utility for

resources only at the interim date.

         If the number of delayed projects is not too large in the economy, the banking system will

intermediate well. At the interim date, the bank can raise additional resources against loans to delayed

projects and pass that along to depositors who demand them. The resources will be available from

entrepreneurs whose projects are early, because they will have spare resources after repaying their loans

to their bankers. The bank’s ability to collect from late projects and commit to repay these new depositors

will enable it to raise the resources, which it will use to repay old depositors. Thus the economy-wide

resources produced at the interim date will be allocated efficiently via the bank.

        Problems arise if too many projects are delayed in the economy so that there are too few

resources produced at the interim date relative to depositor demand. Such an incipient aggregate shortage

of fungible resources (i.e., liquidity) will draw forth three possible responses from bankers who are short

of resources. First, they will increase the real interest rate they are willing to pay for fresh deposits of

resources. Since there is an aggregate shortage, this price alone will not be enough to clear the market.

Second, they will attempt to sell late project loans. But since only the banker has the skills to collect on

them, loan sales will not fetch much and this option will be dominated by the first one (of borrowing fresh

resources to support the late loans). The third option is to discontinue late projects and restructure them to

harvest resources immediately. Unlike the first two options, this option does increase the pool of

resources available to satisfy the demand for liquidity, but it does reduce long run production possibilities

in the economy. As the real interest rate mounts, this option becomes more favored.

        Unfortunately, the banks’ asset values also drop with an increase in the real rate. Before banks

collectively have enough incentive to produce the desired amount of aggregate liquidity by restructuring

late projects, some banks may become insolvent. So a system wide shortage of resources (a shortage of

aggregate liquidity) at the interim date because of a delay in production can make banks insolvent.

        More interesting is the converse. Insolvency can exacerbate liquidity shortages. The anticipated

insolvency of a bank will precipitate an immediate bank run: depositors will demand resources

immediately rather than at the interim date. Faced with an immediate need for resources, the banker may

                                                                                                                3
prefer restructuring all projects (and not just the late ones) rather than selling the illiquid project loans (we

will make the conditions for this precise). But because early projects would have produced at the interim

date, which is the earliest anyone wants to consume, a bank run is socially detrimental. It forces the bank

to produce resources immediately at great cost to the interim and long run production possibilities of the

economy. Moreover, because it subtracts from the pool of resources available at the interim date, a bank

run can exacerbate aggregate liquidity shortages, making more banks insolvent, causing further runs, and

squeezing the pool of resources even further till the entire system melts down. Our approach suggests the

reason bank failures are contagious is also the same reason that bank assets are illiquid: banks make hard-

to-collect relationship loans and can influence the production decisions of their borrowers. Unfortunately,

even though runs are socially inefficient, we will argue that the right intervention by a central authority is

by no means obvious, and traditional interventions can be counterproductive.

        Our work is related to a number of important recent papers. In particular, while Caballero and

Krishnamurthy (1999, 2000) and Holmstrom and Tirole (1997,1998,), also focus on crises, the notion that

banks create liquidity for depositors is less central to their argument. Moreover, by liquidity they typically

mean collateral value or wealth, while we introduce an additional notion of immediacy in this paper. The

notion of loans as being illiquid due to the lender’s specific lending skills, as well as his inability to

commit, is in our earlier work (Diamond and Rajan (2001)) as well as in Kiyotaki and Moore (2000).

Kiyotaki and Moore do not focus on the structure of bank contracts or on banking crises, while in

Diamond and Rajan (2001), we examined bank deposit structures as commitment devices, assuming there

is a plentiful supply of aggregate liquidity.

        Our paper also relates to Allen and Gale (2000), Bhattacharya and Gale (1987), Diamond (1997),

Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Donaldson (1992), and Smith (1991), in its focus on the consequences of an

aggregate shortage of liquidity. But there are three important differences between our paper and much of

this literature. First, the sequential service constraint inherent in demand deposits, which is the source of

bank runs and systemic fragility, is not superimposed in our framework but is necessary for the function

the banks perform.



                                                                                                                4
        Second, we examine liquidity shortages stemming from the bank’s asset side -- from exogenous

delays in the generation of project cash flows by borrowers or endogenous shortages stemming from the

early termination of projects. Most of these earlier studies view liquidity shortages as stemming from the

bank’s liability side -- from endogenous panics or exogenous fluctuations in the liquidity demanded by

depositors. The difference is important. Individual bank runs in those models lead, at best, to fire sales of

long term assets and, at worst, to the premature liquidation of long term assets if these assets are assumed

to be non-transferable (as, for example, in Allen and Gale (2000)). But runs then do not exacerbate

shortages since the run bank liquidates assets to pay off depositors. In fact, if the bank liquidates long-

term assets to pay off depositors who do not need to consume, then a run can alleviate shortages since

these depositors can redeposit in sound banks (a flight to quality). Thus if there is no aggregate liquidity

shortage to begin with in these models, the mere fact that some banks become insolvent and are run

cannot create a shortage. In our framework, by contrast, an aggregate liquidity shortage (and possible

contagion) can be caused by bank runs precipitated by bank insolvency, even if there is no shortage in the

absence of the runs.

        The third difference stems from how contagion arises. In both Smith (1991) and Allen and Gale

(2000), banks are linked ex ante, in the former through a banker’s bank where investments are pooled,

and in the latter through inter-bank loans. When the realized liquidity demand exceeds the supply, linked

banks have to fail. In our paper, however, contagion can occur even if there are no explicit links between

banks ex ante, because of the negative real spillover effect of bank failure on the available liquidity.

        The rest of the paper is as follows. We lay out the framework in section I, and solve the model in

section II. Section III examines the effects of various kinds of interventions, after which we conclude.


                                                   I. Framework
1.1. Agents, Preferences, Endowments, Technology.

        Consider an economy with three types of agents: investors, entrepreneurs, and bankers and four

dates: 0, ½, 1, and 2. Investors get utility only from near-term consumption, that is, their utility is a linear

function of the consumption on or before date 1. All other agents get equal utility from long-term

consumption also, and their utility is a linear function of the sum of consumptions at all dates on or before

                                                                                                                5
date 2. These assumptions are a very simple way of capturing the idea that some initial investors need to

consume quickly. We discuss date ½ below: it is a date when uncertainly is resolved and on which there

may be renegotiation.

        Investors are each endowed initially with a fraction of a unit of good. No other agent is endowed

with goods. Goods can be stored at a gross real return of 1. They can also be invested in projects.

        Each entrepreneur has a project, which requires the investment of a unit of good at date 0. It pays

C production goods at date 1 if the project produces early or C at date 2 if the project is delayed and

produces late. There is a shortage of endowments of goods initially relative to projects that can be

invested in, implying that entrepreneurs and banks must offer as high an expected return as possible to

attract funding. There is a competitive market for bank deposits and other claims on banks.


1.2. Projects and the non-transferability of skills


        The primary friction in the model is that those with specific skills will earn a rent from future

surplus produced because they cannot commit to using their human capital on behalf of others. This

implies that they will not be able to borrow the full value of the surplus they can produce with an asset or

sell the asset for the amount they can produce with it. Both projects and loans to projects will be illiquid

because of the inalienability of human capital.

        Specifically, since an entrepreneur has no endowment, he needs to borrow to invest. The

entrepreneur can, however, credibly threaten not to supply his human capital (destroying the project if

there isn’t outside intervention) at any date, including date ½. This credible threat would allow him to

renegotiate down any promised payment, typically making it impossible for the entrepreneur to borrow.

Fortunately, he has access to a banker who has, or can acquire during the course of lending, knowledge

about an alternative, but less effective, way to run the project. If the banker lends, while keeping the right

to foreclose on the project any time the entrepreneur threatens to withdraw, he can counter the

entrepreneur’s threat with the credible threat of seizing assets. Thus the banker’s specific knowledge,

together with the demandability of the loan he makes, allows the banker to collect γC from an



                                                                                                               6
entrepreneur whose project just matures.2 No one else has the knowledge to collect from the

entrepreneur.

        Regardless of whether a project is early or late, the banker can also restructure the project at any

time before date 1 to yield c1 in goods immediately and c2 in date-2 goods – intuitively, restructuring

implies stopping half finished projects and salvaging all possible production goods from them

(equivalently, the banker can call in the loan and force the borrower to restructure). Restructured projects

can be collected by anyone. We assume

                                       c1 + c2 < 1 < γ C < C ,                (1.1)

Since no one other than the bank has the specific skills to collect from the entrepreneur, the loan to the

entrepreneur is illiquid in that the banker will get less than γC if he has to sell the loan before the project

matures. Any buyer will realize that the banker will extract a future rent for collecting the loan, and the

buyer will reduce the price he pays for the loan accordingly. In fact, bank loans are so dependent on the

banker’s specific skills for collection (that is, they are so illiquid) that the banker prefers restructuring

projects to selling them.3

        Since there is a shortage of endowment relative to projects, only a select few entrepreneurs get a

loan from their respective banks to buy a unit of the good from investors. Entrepreneurs will have to

promise to repay the maximum possible to obtain the loan. This means that the amount the borrower

must promise to pay the banker on demand is γC.

1.3. Financing Banks

        We analyze the general equilibrium effects in an economy where banks finance the illiquid loans

with both demand deposits and bank capital (which in our model is any claim that is long-term, and

cannot demand payment on date ½, including equity, and longer term debt). Our positive results do not

depend on the reason that banks choose this capital structure. However, in previous work, we argued that




2
  While we don’t derive this here, see Hart and Moore (1994) or Diamond and Rajan (2001) for an extensive form
game with this outcome.
3
  This requires c1 + c2 ≥ γ C − π where B is the discounted present value of the banker’s rent.

                                                                                                                  7
bankers can commit to collect loans on behalf of investors if they issue demand deposits to them. It is

useful to briefly recount the reasons here.

        Bankers themselves have no endowment, so they have to persuade investors to entrust them with

their goods. But unlike the banker, ordinary investors cannot collect from the entrepreneur. The problem

then is that having obtained investors’ money promising a certain repayment, the banker can threaten to

hold back his collection skills unless investors reduce the required repayment. Since courts cannot compel

the banker to contribute his human capital even if courts can enforce financial contracts, investors will be

vulnerable to attempts at strategic renegotiation by the banker. The prospect of having the promised

repayment renegotiated down would seriously impair the amount investors are willing to entrust the

banker with. Therefore, the banker has to find a way to commit to using his skills on behalf of investors,

else he will not be able to raise enough to finance the loan he has made.

        The banker can finance lending while committing his human capital to the service of investors by

issuing uninsured demand deposits. Because of the "first come, first served" aspect of uninsured demand

deposits, they cannot be negotiated down. This is because depositors are liable to run to demand

repayment if they ever apprehend that they will be paid less than their due. The run is in the individual

interest of each depositor (it is a Nash equilibrium). The run will foreclose on the bank’s assets even

though it may give depositors less collectively than if they negotiated to accept a payment than was

promised originally. Courts will enforce the depositors’ demands, so the banker will have to pay, and this

will destroy the banker’s rents (see Diamond-Rajan (2001) for details). Thus if a banker has promised to

pay depositors dt, they want to consume at date t, and the banker has enough resources at that date, he will

make the payment rather than risk a run by renegotiating.4

        In Diamond-Rajan (2001) there is no uncertainty, and fixed value demand deposits are optimal

contracts because runs are always off the equilibrium path. For them to be optimal here, we need to

assume that the amount promised to each demand depositor cannot be made contingent on the bank



4
  For other models where runs or short term debt serve as a source of discipline, see Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and
Jeanne (2000). The difference in Diamond-Rajan (2001) is that the run is particularly useful in disciplining an
intermediary, even if it is not effective in disciplining a corporation that borrows directly.

                                                                                                                  8
specific or aggregate state of nature. Alternatively, our analysis can be seen as an examination of the

positive effects of using uncontingent demand deposits.

         Since the banker can credibly threaten to not collect the loan at any point after the deposit is

made, deposits must be demandable at any time if they are to provide commitment, although consumption

is needed only on dates 1 or 2. In fact, demandability is critical at date ½ (a stand-in for any time between

dates 0 and 1) even though it hurts depositors collectively if indeed they demand payment at this earlier

time (as we will see). Therefore, the nature of the bank’s lending activities creates a necessary fragility in

its capital structure -- deposits are demandable not so much to satisfy the uncertain consumption needs of

depositors (though, as we will see, they end up doing that) but so that the banker can commit, via the

collective action problem created by deposits, not to extract rents from depositors.5

         But while the collective action problem inherent in demand deposits enables the banker to

commit to repay if he can (that is, avoid strategic defaults), it exposes the bank to destructive runs if he

truly cannot pay (it makes non-strategic default more costly): when depositors demand repayment before

projects have matured, the bank will be forced to restructure projects to get c1 immediately instead of

allowing them to mature and generate γC.

         Such rigidity can be tempered by raising part of the funds through claims that can be

renegotiated. In particular, we focus on the issue of capital where the renegotiation process leads the

banker and capital holders to split the residual surplus after deposits have been paid (see the extensive

                                                                                                      v−d
form game in Diamond and Rajan (2000)). Assuming equal division, capital will be paid                     where v is
                                                                                                       2

the present value of the bank’s assets in their best use from capital’s perspective and d is the level of

deposit repayments. So the virtue of capital is that its value adjusts to the underlying value of the bank’s

assets, its cost is that the bank cannot raise as much up front against its future receipts since the banker


5
  We assume a court system in the background, which enforces contracts and transfers assets to lenders when loans
are defaulted upon. The court, however, cannot force agents to supply their human capital. So if the banker borrows
from a single lender, the banker can threaten to not provide his collection skills. The lender can use the court to seize
the bank’s loans, but these are of little value to the lender. So the lender will be renegotiated down. By contrast, the
collective action problem inherent in demand deposits forces a change in the ownership of the bank’s assets
whenever the bank attempts to renegotiate. As Diamond and Rajan (2001) show, this becomes the source of
discipline.

                                                                                                                       9
absorbs an equal surplus that increases in the level of capital. We assume that capital has to be fraction

k of the present value of bank assets (this could be because of un-modeled uncertainty the bank faces on

its loans or an explicit capital requirement imposed by regulators) so that the bank can raise only


                                                              v
                                                                                                                 (1.2)
                                                             1+ k

against its assets by issuing a mix of deposits and capital.6 We add bank capital to the model only to

understand its effects, the key qualitative results are unchanged if we leave it out, and assume that all

claims on the bank are demand deposits.


1.4. Sequence of Events in the Economy.

           Each bank faces an identical pool of entrepreneurs at date 0. At date ½, everyone learns which

projects are early and which are late. The aggregate state is then fully characterized by the realization of

the fraction of projects that are early for each bank i, αi. Without loss of generality, let us assume that αi

is increasing in the index i. The realized distribution of banks in aggregate state s is Fs(αi). The date-0

probability of the aggregate state s is qs.

           In what follows, we will suppress the dependence on the state for notational convenience. All

quantities will henceforth be normalized by the total initial endowment of goods. The timeline for a

project and the loan to it is in Figure 1. The sequence of events is summarized in Figure 2. Ex ante

identical banks will compete for investors’ endowments by issuing a mix of deposits d0 (per unit of

consumption good invested) and, given the distribution of anticipated outcomes, the associated quantity

of capital to them at date 0. Since consumption goods are in short supply relative to projects, investors

will be promised the maximum that can be pledged to them, and will invest so long as their opportunity

rate of return (of storage) is met.



                                       1       (v − d )
    From the definition, we have k =
6                                          2
                                                          where the numerator on the right hand side is the value of capital and
                                       1
                                           2   (v + d )
the denominator is the value of capital plus maturing deposits. Therefore, the total amount that can be pledged to
                                                                                                                      v
investors out of the amount the bank collects is the denominator, which on substituting for d works out to                .
                                                                                                                     1+ k
                                                                                                                              10
         The bank can then lend to entrepreneurs or invest in storage. We show later that the bank does

not store if it lends but we assume it for now. If it lends, the bank will charge γC repayable on demand.


        At date ½, everyone learns what fraction αi of a bank i’s projects are early. If depositors

anticipate the bank will not be able to pay them at date 1, given the bank’s state and aggregate liquidity

conditions, they will run immediately, otherwise they will wait till date 1 and demand payment in an

orderly fashion. Runs are therefore based on fundamentals: because we wish to understand how aggregate

liquidity shortages influence bank decisions and possibly lead to contagious bank failures, we do not

allow runs caused by panics, where depositors run at date ½ only because they think other depositors will

run, regardless of date-1 fundamentals (see, for example, Diamond and Dybvig (1983)). We also assume

for now that if there is more than one market-clearing interest rate, depositors can coordinate their beliefs

about this rate.7


        If their bank survives, the entrepreneurs with early projects will repay the bank γC at date 1

(leaving them with (1-γ)C to invest as they will), while entrepreneurs with late projects will default.

Depending on the prevailing rate and its need for funds, the bank will then decide how to deal with each

late project – whether to restructure it if goods are needed at date 1, or perhaps get greater long run value

by rescheduling the loan payment till date 2 and keeping the project as a going concern. The bank uses

repayments from entrepreneurs whose projects are early, from restructured late projects, and from new

funds reinvested in bank deposits and capital by early entrepreneurs to repay investors at date 1. Finally,

at date 2, late projects mature and their proceeds are divided up according to commitments made at date 1.

Bankers and entrepreneurs consume.


                          II.      Solving the Model.

        We determine individual optimizing decisions, then aggregate them applying market clearing

conditions to obtain the equilibrium. The optimizing decisions of all agents in this model except the

7
  In other words, while we assume that each depositor expects the others in the same bank to choose a withdrawal
that is an individual best response to others’ actions (so we assume non-cooperative actions where individual


                                                                                                                   11
bankers are relatively simple. Investors will deposit in banks provided their expected gross return from

date 0 to date 1 weakly exceeds storage. They will wait till date 1 to withdraw, unless they know the bank

cannot repay everyone, in which case they will run as soon as uncertainty is revealed at date ½. If their

projects are not restructured earlier, early entrepreneurs will produce at date 1 and repay what they owe.

They will invest the excess provided the real rate paid on bank claims between date 1 and date 2, r, is

greater than or equal to 1. Late entrepreneurs will produce at date 2 if their projects are not restructured

earlier, and will also repay what they owe.


2.1. Banker’s Maximization.


         The banker’s decision is only a little more complicated. Taking the real interest rate between date

1 and date 2, r, as given, banker i has to decide the fraction of late projects to restructure, µ i , so as to

maximize his consumption while constrained by the necessity to pay off all bank claimants. This problem

can be written as


                                                      c                           γC
                      max α iγ C + µ i (1 − α i )(c1 + 2 ) + (1 − µ i )(1 − α i )                         (1.3)
                       µi                              r                           r



                                                     max v (α i , µ ' , r ) + d 0
                                                       '
                                                       µ
s.t.                          v (α i , µ i , r ) ≥                                                                (1.4)
                                                                  2


To see why this is his maximization problem, start with the constraint (1.4). The value the banker can

raise at date 1 in consumption goods is


                                                                      c2                            γC
                v (α i , µ i , r ) = α iγ C + µ i (1 − α i )(c1 +        ) + (1 − µ i )(1 − α i )                 (1.5)
                                                                      r                           (1 + k )r


The first term is the amount repaid by the αi early entrepreneurs whose projects mature at date 1. The

second term is the amount obtained by restructuring late projects. The third term is the amount the bank


incentives may not lead each depositor to maximize the welfare of the whole), they all agree to choose the set of


                                                                                                                          12
can raise (in new deposits and capital – see (1.2)) against late projects that are allowed to continue

without interruption till date 2.


         In bargaining over how much they have to be paid, capital holders have the right to pick a level of

restructuring that maximizes what they get.8 This can be different from the level actually chosen by the

                                                                 max v (α i , µ ' , r ) + d 0
                                                                   '
                                                                   µ
banker. Hence the repayment to capital and deposits is                                          .9 Therefore (1.4), the
                                                                                2

constraint on the banker, is simply that the resources he can raise should exceed the required repayment.


         The banker’s objective is to maximize the present value of his total consumption. Since the

bank’s repayment to initial investors is invariant to the actual amount of restructuring chosen (repayment

depends instead on the amount of restructuring that maximizes outsiders’ claims), the banker is the

residual claimant of repayments by entrepreneurs on bank loans and his objective can be changed to

maximizing the present value of the total repayments on his loans, as in (1.3). Note that this exceeds (1.5),

the amount he can raise at date 2, because the banker cannot raise money against his own prospective

future rents.


The banker’s decision boils down to whether he should continue or restructure a late project. To see the

                                                                   γC
solution to this problem, note that the banker can raise                      in deposits and capital at date 1 against
                                                                 (1 + k ) r

                                                                                c2
the prospective payment from a late entrepreneur. He obtains c1 +                    by restructuring the late project. So
                                                                                r

continuation (or µ i = 0 ) maximizes the value the bank raises, v(α i , µ i , r ) , and thus loosens the

                                             γC
                                                     − c2
                                   (1 + k )
constraint (1.4) most when r < R =                          , while restructuring ( µ i = 1 ) loosens it most when
                                        c1


Nash actions that make them best off.
8
  Intuitively, if capital has the right to make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the banker, it will demand all the value the
banker generates net of deposits when the assets are put to their best use from the perspective of capital.



                                                                                                                          13
r ≥ R . By contrast, the banker himself cares about the value he will get (including his rents) at date 2. If

he continues a late project, he will collect γC at date 2. If he restructures it, he will get rc1+c2 at date 2.

                                                                                                            γ C − c2
Therefore, the banker’s objective function is maximized by continuing a project if r < R =                             and
                                                                                                               c1

restructuring it otherwise. It follows then that the solution to the constrained maximization is µ i = 0 if

r < R and µ i = 1 if r ≥ R . But for moderate rates such that R ≤ r < R , because the banker earns an

unpledgeable rent on late projects, he wants to continue them even though he can raise more at date 1 by

restructuring them. It follows that the banker sets µ i at the minimum level that satisfies the constraint. So


Lemma 1: (i) When1≤ r <R, no solvent bank restructures late projects. Further, let i*(r) be such

         *
that v (α i , 0, r ) = d 0 . Then banks with i ≥ i*(r) are solvent, while those with i < i*(r) are insolvent and will


be run. (ii) When r ≥ R , solvent bank i will restructure all its late projects. A bank is solvent if i ≥ i*(r)

                               *
where i*(r) is such that v(α i ,1, r ) = d 0 . (iii) When R < r < R , solvent bank i will restructure a fraction of

                                                                                    v (α i ,1, r ) + d 0
late projects which is the minimum non-negative µi such that v (α i , µ i , r ) ≥                          . A bank is
                                                                                             2

                                                     *
solvent if i ≥ i*(r) where i*(r) is such that v(α i ,1, r ) = d 0 .


Proof: Omitted.

         Lemma 1 suggests that, ceteris paribus, the higher the prevailing interest rate the more attractive

it becomes for a bank to restructure its late projects. Also, as the interest rate goes up, the bank’s asset

value falls, which could lead the bank to become insolvent and be run.

         As soon as uncertainty is revealed at date ½, a bank’s depositors will estimate whether the bank

will be solvent at date 1 at the predicted equilibrium interest rate – whether there is some non-negative µi

such that (1.4) is satisfied – or run immediately if they anticipate it will not. Even though depositors have

no need to consume before date 1, the anticipated demise of the bank forces them to rush for payment



                                                                                                                         14
before others. Since bank assets are illiquid and cannot be transferred without restructuring, and since the

run occurs before date 1, the bank will restructure all projects, even early ones, in a futile attempt to pay

off depositors as they come to withdraw.10 The bank produces liquidity in a very inefficient way,

restructuring early projects to produce immediate liquidity even though no one can consume before date

1. Depositors, however, leave it no alternative. The value paid out to depositors will be the entire market

                                    c2
value of the bank’s assets, c1 +       , and all projects will be restructured.
                                    r


         Interestingly, even if early projects in run banks are being restructured to produce liquidity

inefficiently, not all banks have the incentive to restructure late projects and add to the available supply of

liquidity. The reason is that because the run bank is insolvent (and cannot afford to pay the social value

for retaining deposits), the interest rate does not reflect the value of liquidity to the banking system. In

fact, if r<R, Lemma 1 (i) indicates any solvent bank continues all late projects, regardless of whether

other banks are being run.


2.2. Market Clearing Conditions


         Given the initial level of deposits, the equilibrium is one where all agents maximize given the

state, and the goods market clears at date ½, date 1, and date 2. Because date-½ consumption is a perfect

substitute for date-1 consumption (and goods can also be stored), the supply of goods on those two dates

can be added together to meet date-1 claims. The demand for consumption before date 2 comes entirely

from initial investors who can express their demand through bank claims. For a solvent bank, the value of

                                         max v (α i , µ ' , r ) + d 0
                                           '
                                           µ                                                                  c2
bank claims, and hence demand, is                                       . For an insolvent bank, it is c1 +      . The
                                                      2                                                       r

10
  When a bank is run and it runs out of reserves, it can either allow depositors to seize project loans equivalent in
market value to what they are owed, or restructure projects and pay the resulting funds out to depositors (by
assumption of illiquidity, restructuring dominates the bank selling the loan). In either case the bank’s rents will be
zero, but the bank will have a weak preference for restructuring rather than allowing depositors to seize loans. The
reason is that the market value of seized loans is the value from restructuring them (the best alternative use of the
project assets) less the strictly positive rent the bank is anticipated to charge for restructuring. Thus the market value
of loans is less than the value from restructuring the underlying projects. Therefore, the banker will weakly prefer



                                                                                                                         15
supply comes from early projects and restructured projects. A solvent bank i supplies

l (α i , µ i ) = α i C + µ i (1 − α i )c1 while an insolvent bank supplies c1 . The real interest rate clears the

market for consumption before date 2 (that is, liquidity). If this market clears, the date-2 goods market

will also clear automatically by Walras law.


               In what follows, we will see that there can be multiple interest rates consistent with the liquidity

market clearing. Let us term the equilibrium where each investor’s belief about date-1 interest rate is the

lowest consistent with market clearing the “most optimistic equilibrium”. We call it so because initial

investors all wish to consume at date 1, and each is better off if their bank does not fail and if real interest

rates prevailing when their banks are attracting new deposits to repay them are low (this also increases the

market value of their long term [capital] claims). As a result, they are always worse off coordinating on

beliefs that artificially increase future interest rates. It is particularly useful to show that contagion is

possible when we rule out panics and beliefs coordinated on the “wrong” interest rates -- that is even if

we focus only on the most optimistic equilibrium. We do, however, comment later on other possible

equilibria when there exist multiple Bayesian Nash equilibria.


               Now consider the market for liquidity. If there is an excess of supply over demand at an interest

rate of 1 (the storage rate), that is the real rate and the excess goods are stored. By contrast, if there is

excess demand at a rate of 1, the real interest rate has to rise. It is easy to show that the interest rate in the

most optimistic equilibrium is given by


Proposition 1:


(i) r=1 if


*                                                        *
i (1)                        i                           i (1)                                i


 ∫      c1 f (i ) di +    ∫      l (α , 0) f (i ) di ≥    ∫      [c1 + c2 ] f (i ) di +    ∫          2 [ v (α       , 0,1) + d 0 ] f (i ) di   (1.6)
                                     i                                                            1              i


                         *                                                                *
    i                    i (1)                               i                            i (1)




restructuring loans when faced with a run, and if there is any chance that the queue of depositors will not exhaust the
bank’s assets, this preference will be strict. Thus, when run, the banker will restructure all projects.

                                                                                                                                                        16
(ii) r greater than1 and less than R if (1.6) does not hold but


*                                                                                  *
i (R)                                  i                                       i (R)
                                                                                                             c2                i


    ∫    c1 f (i ) di +                ∫     l (α , 0) f (i ) di ≥                     ∫       [c1 +            ] f (i ) di + ∫ 1 2 [v (α i , 0, R ) + d 0 ] f (i ) di                           (1.7)
                                                       i


    i                              *
                                   i (R)                                                   i
                                                                                                             R               i (R)
                                                                                                                                           *




(iii) r greater than or equal to R and less than R if (1.6) and (1.7) do not hold but


                                                                                                             c2
*                                                                              *
i (R )                             i                                           i (R )                                                  i


    ∫                              ∫                                   >           ∫           [ c1 +           ] f (i ) di +          ∫                          ,1, R ) + d 0 ] f (i ) di
                                                            i
         c1 f (i ) di +                     l (α , µ ) f (i ) di
                                                   i
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                   2 [ v (α
                                                                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (1.8)
    i
                               *
                           i (R )                                                      i
                                                                                                             R                     *
                                                                                                                                   i (R )




(iv) r ≥ R otherwise where r solves


                                                                                                        c2
*                                                                      *
i (r)                          i                                       i (r)                                                   i


    ∫   c1 f (i ) di +         ∫           l (α ,1) f (i ) di
                                               i
                                                                   =       ∫   [ c1 +                      ] f (i ) di +       ∫   1
                                                                                                                                       2 [ v (α
                                                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                                                          ,1, r ) + d 0 ] f ( i ) di     (1.9)
    i
                           *
                           i (r)                                           i
                                                                                                        r                  *
                                                                                                                           i (r)




Proof: Omitted.


One might think that a higher interest (effectively, the price of liquidity) would tend to reduce the excess

demand for liquidity. It turns out that this is not always true because of the effect of bank failures. To see

why, consider first the reasons it would reduce the excess demand. For example, when 1≤ r <R so that

solvent banks continue all late projects, the excess demand is:



                               {                                 }                                   1 i                                  
                   *

                                                                                                                (1 − α )γ C
                   i (r)                                                                            i                  i
                                                       c2
EDr < R =              ∫            [c1 +                   ] − c1 f (i ) di +                   ∫2   α γ   +              + d 0 ] − α C  f (i ) di                                             (1.10)
                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                       [    C
                       i
                                                       r                                        *
                                                                                               i (r)
                                                                                                                  (1 + k ) r               


The term in the first set of curly brackets is the excess demand from banks that are insolvent while the

term in the second set is the excess demand from solvent banks. Note that even though insolvent banks

restructure all their loans, they also sell the date-2 portion of restructured loans for goods. On net,


therefore, they subtract liquidity of
                                                                                                        c2
                                                                                                             r from the overall pool. Differentiating the excess demand with
respect to r, we get



                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                 c                                  
              *                                                                              *

dEDr < R    i (r )
                   c             i
                                         (1 − α )γ C
                                               i
                                                                  di
                                                                       *
                                                                                         (1 − α )γ C
                                                                                                i

         = − ∫ 22 f (i ) di − ∫                                                                       − α (1 − γ )C ]
                                                                                                        *

                                                          f ( i ) di +    f (i )  2 − [                                 (1.11)
                                     1                                     *                             i

  dr
                                     2
                                                                                           (1 + k ) r
                                                      2
              i
                   r         *
                             i (r)
                                         (1 + k ) r                    dr        r                                  


A higher interest rate will reduce demand because depositors in failed banks will just get the bank’s asset

value, and this (in particular, the date-2 portion of restructured loans) will fall with the interest rate. Hence

the first term in (1.11). While depositors in solvent banks will get an amount that is invariant in the

interest rate, the holders of capital in solvent banks will be paid less because bank asset values (in

particular, the value of continued loans) will fall with the interest rate. So demand falls for this reason

also, hence the second term in (1.11). For r<R, solvent banks do not restructure loans. For r ≥ R, they do,

so an additional term would be the increase in supply (and the fall in excess demand) from the additional

restructuring forced by a rise in the interest rate. Thus if one were to ignore the effect of bank failures on

excess demand (the last term in (1.11)), excess demand would always fall with the interest rate.


2.3. Example 1.


        Consider a realized state of nature with two possible types of banks at date 1: L and H where the

banks are distinguished by the fraction of early projects in their portfolio, either αL =0.55 or αH =0.7. In

the realized state, let fraction 0.2 of banks be of type L and 0.8 of banks be of type H. Let

c1 = 0.4, c2 = 0.5, C = 1.6, γ = 0.8, k = 0.12. Plugging in values, we obtain R = 1.95 and                               R=1.60 . Let

the level of outstanding deposits per unit loaned at date 0 be d0=1. When discussing aggregates, we

normalize the total amount loaned out in the system to one.


        In this example, there is sufficient date 1 liquidity in the most optimistic equilibrium to repay all

deposits without any restructuring ( 0.2α L C + 0.8α H C = 1.072>1=d0). However, at a real interest rate

equal to that of storage, r=1, there is an excess demand for liquidity because capital also has to be paid

dividends which, aggregated across banks, exceed 0.072. Higher interest rates reduce the value of

capital’s dividends, until at r=1.31 the aggregate value of capital dividends plus deposits is 1.072; r=1.31

clears the market without any project restructuring (because r<R=1.60). For higher levels of αL, there is



                                                                                                                                    18
more date-1 aggregate liquidity. If we change αL , keeping αH =0.7 and the fraction of type L banks

constant, the equilibrium interest rate, r, declines monotonically to 1 as α L increases from 0.55 to 0.7.

Eventually, with αL ≥ 0.7, there is more than enough date-1 liquidity to pay the dividends to capital even

with r=1, the real return of storage.


          Now suppose the fraction of type L banks increases to 0.6. Let us vary the realized fraction of

early projects of type L banks, leaving everything else unchanged. Now we get restructuring. For

example, with αL =.51 there will be a liquidity shortage if no bank restructures late projects because

aggregate date 1 liquidity is insufficient to repay all deposits: [0.6αL + .4αH](1.6)=0.9376<1=d0. The

market clearing interest rate is r=1.61 in this case, which gives L banks the incentive to restructure

projects (since the interest rate exceeds R=1.60) while leaving them solvent (they fail only if r>1.94). If

we change αL, the equilibrium interest rate is:

αL =.51         R=1.61         L banks restructure all late projects   (L just solvent)
αL =.55         R=1.84         L banks restructure some late projects (L just solvent)
αL =.56         R=1.87         L banks restructure some late projects (L just solvent)
αL =.59         R=1.91         L banks restructure no late projects (L just solvent)
αL =.6          R=1.70         No banks restructure (L capital has value)
αL =.65         R=1.31         No banks restructure (L capital has value)
αL =.7          R=1            No banks restructure (L capital has value)

Interestingly, the real interest rate initially goes up as the fraction of early projects in the L type banks

increases. The increase in αL from 0.51 to 0.59 increases the L type bank’s intrinsic ability to pay higher

interest rates. So long as the alternative is to restructure projects, each type L bank promises the highest

interest rate consistent with its solvency (because banks prefer to offer higher interest rates rather than

restructure projects at real interest rates between R and R ). But when αL ≥0.6, there is sufficient liquidity

for all banks to survive without any restructuring, and increases in αL then reduce real interest rates as

before. The interesting point is that there isn’t a monotonic relationship between the amount of aggregate

liquidity absent restructuring, which increases in α L and the real rate.


2.4. Bank Failures and Contagion


          Thus far we have ignored the effect of a rising real rate on bank failures. Now consider the third

                                                                                                                19
term in (1.11). An increase in the interest rate causes more banks to become insolvent and run. Whether

this increases or decreases excess demand depends on the sign of the term in square brackets. It is the


difference between the excess demand of an insolvent bank (=
                                                                         c2
                                                                              r ) and the excess demand of a bank
                               *
                     (1 − α i )γ C
that is just solvent               − α i (1 − γ )C (the first term in this last expression is the liquidity the
                       (1 + k )r

solvent bank absorbs from the system by continuing late loans, and the second term is the liquidity it

indirectly generates for the system by allowing early entrepreneurs with spare goods to produce). Bank

failure will reduce excess demand if the bank has few early projects (α low) so that it does not produce

much liquidity while solvent but instead absorbs a lot to keep late projects afloat. Such a bank may even

release liquidity on net in the process of being run because it will be forced to restructure its many late

projects (in addition to the few early ones). So at interest rates where the marginal insolvent bank has low

α, the overall excess demand for liquidity is likely to fall in the interest rate.

           But a bank could well add to excess demand when it fails. For example, when r>R, the marginal

solvent bank already liquidates all late projects, so failure does not create any additional liquidity. Rather,

because bank failures cause even early projects to be restructured before they produce liquidity, failure

increases the excess demand for liquidity. 11 It is now possible for the aggregate excess demand to

increase with interest rates (all that is required is that the increase in excess demand from the mass of

additional failing banks outweigh the reduction in excess demand as a result of higher rates). In this case,

bank runs are destabilizing, and an initial shortage of liquidity could result in a meltdown of the entire

banking system.




     All the bank’s late projects are restructured. So the bank’s projects spew out α C + (1 − α )c1 of cash at date 1 if
11                                                                                   i            i


the bank stays solvent (note thatα i (1 − γ )C of this stays with early entrepreneur). Since the bank is just solvent, all
the date-1 amount it can raise, α γ C + (1 − α )[c1 + c2 / r ] just meets what it owes date-1 claimants. So the net
                                 i              i



amount of liquidity the bank releases to the system when solvent is     α i (1 − γ )C − (1 − α i ) c2 r   .By contrast, the

net amount of liquidity released when a bank restructures all projects is c1 − (c1 +
                                                                                         c2 ) = − c2 which is clearly
                                                                                           r        r
lower. So a bank failure absorbs more liquidity from the system relative to a solvent bank.

                                                                                                                          20
2.5. Example 2.


            Now let us return to the earlier example, but let us set αL =0.4 and αH =0.6, while a fraction 0.6

of the banks are of type L. In the absence of any restructuring, the aggregate supply of liquidity is only

0.6 * α L C  + 0.4 * α H C  = 0.768 which is insufficient to pay deposits and capital. Faced with an

aggregate excess demand for liquidity, banks will bid up rates. The L type banks (with αL =0.4) are

insolvent for r > 1.40. Since no bank will voluntarily restructure to increase supply for any interest rate

below R=1.60, and since some additional supply (or a drastic reduction in demand) is needed, this means

the equilibrium interest rate has to be above 1.60, and L type banks will be insolvent in equilibrium.

Anticipating this, depositors of L type banks will run at date ½.


            How does the failure of the L type banks change the aggregate excess demand for liquidity? On

the one hand, the demand for liquidity falls because depositors in the failed banks have to settle for

        c2
c1 +       instead of the 1 they are owed, and capital gets nothing. Thus bank failure at r=1.6 reduces
        r

                           c2
demand by d 0 − c1 −          = 0.29 .12 But a run also reduces the potential supply of liquidity. An L type bank
                           r

could potentially create α L C + (1 − α L )c1 of liquidity. But when it is run at date ½, it creates only c1.

Thus there is a reduction in liquidity supply of α L C − α L c1 = 0.48 per run bank. Thus the failure of L

type bankswith aggregate weight 0.6 increases the aggregate excess demand by 0.6*(0.48-0.29)=0.11.


            Put another way, the depositors of the failed bank absorb all of the liquidity produced by their

               c2
bank plus         . The net supply of liquidity (at r=1.60) available to surviving H banks in aggregate is
               r

                              c2
then 0.4 * α H C  − 0.6      = 0.197 , not enough to pay their deposits (which aggregate to 40% of the total,
                              r

or 0.4). Thus the interest rate will have to rise further to get H banks to start restructuring projects. At



12
     At the point of failure, capital gets nothing.

                                                                                                                21
r= R =1.95, the H banks are willing to restructure all their late projects. Even so, the aggregate supply of

                                                                     c                    c
liquidity available to them is 0.4 * α H C + (1 − α H )c1  − 0.6* 2 = 0.448 − 0.6 * 2 = 0.294 . As a result,
                                                                      r                 r

even after the type H banks liquidate all their late projects, there is still insufficient liquidity for them to

repay their deposits of 0.4. Eventually, as the interest rate climbs still higher to 2.77, even type H banks

also fail before demand falls enough to meet supply. Thus all banks fail, and in aggregate, depositors

consume c1 = 0.4 , while bankers and entrepreneurs consume c2=0.5 (if depositors had placed any value

on date-2 consumption, this would be consumed by them).

         The total aggregate liquidity that could be generated if all late projects were restructured (but no

banks are run) is 0.6 * α L C + (1 − α L )c1  + 0.4 * α H C + (1 − α H )c1  = 0.976 . Even when outstanding

deposits are just 0.976 rather than 1 -- so that there is enough potential aggregate liquidity for both banks

to survive -- the only equilibrium is still that both banks fail. Here is why: the private incentive of each

bank is to free-ride on publicly available liquidity until the price of liquidity becomes high enough (= R )

to make it worthwhile to supply some by restructuring late projects. But before that price, some banks

will fail. Bank failures then subtract liquidity from the system, ensuring that when the price is reached,

there is too little liquidity for the remaining banks to survive. If instead of many small type H banks, there

was a single large type H bank (and aggregate deposits were 0.976 or less), it would be willing to lend at

a subsidized rate to the type L banks, to prevent their joint demise. But with many H type banks, self-

interest can overcome collective interest and cause a bank meltdown. Note that such a meltdown occurs

even in the most optimistic equilibrium.


Proposition 2:


Even if the banking system can generate enough liquidity to pay off date-0 investors if all late projects are

restructured, the unique (and most optimistic equilibrium) can be one where the entire banking system

melts down.


Proof: Established by example.

                                                                                                                      22
The point is that if all banks restructured their late projects, there could be enough liquidity for all banks

to pay claimants. But by the time the interest rate is high enough that all banks find it worthwhile to

restructure, some banks can fail. Because they subtract liquidity on net, it may no longer be possible to

meet liquidity demand even if all banks restructure. As a result, all banks fail.


2.6. The Causes of Contagion.


        It is useful to list the assumptions that lead to the possibility of a contagious meltdown. First, the

underlying source of friction in this model is the non-transferability of specific skills. Because it has

specific skills in collecting on bank loans, a bank has to issue claims demandable at date ½ to deter it

from negotiating down depositors at that date. But the very difficulty of renegotiating these claims turns

from virtue to vice when there is an anticipated shortfall in available aggregate goods relative to demand.

The illiquidity of thebank’s loans makes them hard to sell, so banks are forced to restructure projects.

Restructuring of late projects typically creates additional liquidity, so this by itself cannot be the source of

the spillover. We need a second assumption: that the information about the aggregate state can arrive

earlier (at date ½) than when liquidity is produced (date 1). Now anticipation of a future liquidity

shortage (or bank insolvency for any other reason) causes depositors to redeem their claims immediately.

This forces failing banks to restructure even early projects. The rigid contract structure can lead an

undesirable scramble for liquidity. Note that the reason banks themselves have the right to restructure

projects (call loans) at date ½ is to deter borrowers from seeking concessions from the bank on that date.


        Even the restructuring of early projects will not cause contagion if the excess demand does not

increase in the marginal failure. In particular


                                             dED
Lemma 2: If γ =1 and c 2 = 0,        then        < 0.
                                              dr


Proof: Obtained by differentiating the excess demand functions over all the ranges.




                                                                                                             23
         Excess demand increases with interest rates only if by failing, a bank absorbs more liquidity than

if it is solvent. The two sources through which the failed bank reduces what is left for other banks are,

first, early entrepreneurs are restructured leaving them nothing to reinvest and, second, the failed bank

absorbs more liquidity than it produces when it sells the date-2 portion of restructured loans. The first

effect is absent when γ=1 (so that early entrepreneurs contribute no liquidity outside their repayment to

their bank) and the second effect is absent when c2 = 0. Hence Lemma 2 indicates when there will be no

spillover effects from a bank’s failure.

         In sum, the function of the bank is to hold assets that are hard to sell, which forces it to finance

with demand deposits. Unfortunately, this means that when there is an anticipated aggregate shortage and

the bank is run, there is an unnecessary demand for immediate goods, which the bank can best meet by

producing liquidity inefficiently. Thus, simple delays in production can be magnified by banks into a

much more severe reduction in aggregate production. This “real” consequence of bank failure stems from

the illiquidity of bank assets, and would not be present if bank assets were more saleable. By forcing

excessive restructuring, bank failures can cause contagion: they subtract liquidity from the system, which

could trigger runs at other banks as well. These spillovers could lead to a unique meltdown equilibrium.13


2.7. Multiple Equilibria.


         Finally, let us consider equilibria other than the most optimistic one for a plausible shape for the
                                                     '              '
excess demand function. Let i ' be such that α i γ C + (1 − α i )c1 = d 0 . So banks with i ≥ i ' are self-

sufficient in liquidity and will never fail. They never need to raise new deposits and can survive arbitrarily

high real rates demanded by date 1 investors. Further, let r̂ be the inflexion point so that the excess

13
  Readers may wonder how important the capital requirement k is to our results. Clearly, if k=0, then outside
investors do not naturally “discount” late projects. Nevertheless, if there is an aggregate shortage of liquidity,
payoffs from late projects will be discounted at rate r, and banks with late projects will be worth less than early
projects. Banks with excessive late projects will be run, and contagion can occur. If, however, there is no aggregate
shortage of liquidity to begin with, we require late projects to have lower payoffs than early projects in order for
banks to fail. This is not an unreasonable assumption and would again give us contagion. A positive capital
requirement is, however, important in adding richness to the model by giving us a region where banks do not want
to restructure but the market prefers them to. As Diamond and Rajan (2000) indicate, the capital requirement can be
justified as the optimal capital structure issued by a bank faced with uncertainty. While we have not modeled that


                                                                                                                   24
demand for liquidity decreases monotonically for r < r̂ and the excess demand increases monotonically

with the interest rate for r> r̂ until the interest rate is r% where the marginal solvent bank is i ' (after this,

no more banks fail, and the excess demand for liquidity has to fall with increases in the interest rate).


Lemma 3: (i) If there is some r* ≤ r̂ such that one of (1.6), (1.7), (1.8), or (1.9) hold, then one

equilibrium interest rate is r*. If there is an excess supply of liquidity at r% , then r* is the unique

equilibrium interest rate. If there is an excess demand for liquidity at r̂ , then there are two more

equilibrium interest rates, one between r̂ and r% , and the other above r% .


(ii) If there is no equilibrium rate r* that is less than r̂ , then the unique equilibrium interest rate is above

r% , and all banks that are not self sufficient in liquidity fail. If there are no self-sufficient banks, the

banking system melts down completely.


Proof: Omitted.

         Because of contagion, the unique equilibrium may be a meltdown of all non-self-sufficient banks

in the system (as we saw in Proposition 2). For other parameter values, multiple equilibria are possible,

one of which again involves runs on all banks that are not self-sufficient. In this case, the meltdown is a

self-confirming flight to quality. All expect that only the self-sufficient banks will survive, and that the

date 2 portion of restructured assets will be highly discounted, offering very high rates of return to those

who use their spare goods to buy them. These high rates of return will be above those that non-self-

sufficient banks can offer. Since the self-sufficient banks do not need new deposits, only they will survive

given these beliefs, and the rate of return for surviving early entrepreneurs from buying during the fire

sale instead of depositing will indeed be very high. An equilibrium where expectations of high real

interest rates causes all banks to fail because none are self-sufficient is Pareto dominated by the most

optimistic equilibrium. Intervention here to select the lower rate will make everyone better off. Of

course, such an intervention will not work when the unique equilibrium is a meltdown.



uncertainty at date 1, the analysis in Diamond and Rajan suggests that the other effects of the uncertainty will be
orthogonal to the issues we explore in our model.

                                                                                                                      25
2.8. The Date-0 Decision: Lending vs Storage


        Thus far, we have ignored the storage decision. Since banks have the option of storing, and can

finance storage entirely with deposits (they do not have to hold capital against storage), would they

optimally store so as to avoid runs? It turns out that


Proposition 3: In equilibrium, banks will either store all the funds they raise or store nothing.


Proof: See Appendix.


        One might think that the bank might want to avoid a destructive run by storing an additional unit

of consumption good at date-0 instead of lending it, so that it is available if the bank’s α turns out to be

low. But an equivalent action is to reduce the level of outstanding deposits by one unit, and instead raise

the balance with capital. Given that the bank can use its capital structure to manage the risk of default, it

will choose its asset portfolio so as to maximize returns for a chosen capital structure. Since the expected

returns from storage or lending are linear for a given capital structure, the bank will prefer either lending

everything or storing everything, whichever generates more returns. 14


2.9. Example 2 continued:


        We have not examined how the level of deposits, d0, is optimally set ex ante. This problem is one

of constrained maximization that offers insights largely peripheral to the focus in this paper, which is on



14
  From the perspective of the banking system, storage by individuals factors out since individuals
consume all that they store. Also, it might seem strange that even anticipating an extremely high rate of
return from buying assets in a fire sale during a meltdown, banks do not store. This stems from the fact
that investors care only about date-1 consumption, and in the date-0 competition for funds, banks set
initial lending, storage, and capital structure decisions to pay out the maximum to date-0 investors.
Storage will indeed offer a high return, but that return will only be available at date 2. So long as the
expected returns to lending between date-0 and date-1 are higher, lending will dominate storage, no
matter what the interest rate between date-1 and date-2. This is clearly a special feature of the model, but
relaxing investor preferences will only smooth date-0 allocation between storage and investment and not
alter the results qualitatively. Similarly, with some scale effects in the returns to storage or lending, we
would get an interior solution. But what we can show is that even though bank runs make the returns to
lending non-linear in the realizations of α, the pledgeable value is not non-linear in the fraction lent,
which is all that is important for the date-0 decision.

                                                                                                               26
what happens if in the realized state the level of deposits exceeds available liquidity. Obviously any

situation that leads to a meltdown with the optimal level of deposits must have a low ex-ante probability.

We illustrate this with one of the many ex-ante distributions of states of nature that make the level of

deposits in Example 2 an ex-ante optimum.


        Suppose two states of nature are anticipated at date 0. In the good state all projects are early and

αi=1 for all banks. In the bad state the distribution of bank types is as in Example 2. Let the probability of

the good state be 0.974. In the bad state, all banks fail and investors consume c1=0.4. In the good state,

entrepreneurs repay banks γC=1.28 at date 1, so investors consume d0=1 from deposits plus ½(1.28 -1) =

0.14 from capital, a total of 1.14. The ex ante capital ratio is then 0.974*0.14/[0.974*1.14+0.026*0.4]

=0.12. The ex-ante expected repayment from investing in a bank is 0.974 12 [1.28 + 1] + 0.026 * 0.4 = 1.12 .


        The capital requirement will not permit a higher level of initial deposit issue than d0=1. A small

reduction in initial deposits issued would only reduce the amount received by investors, because banks

would still melt down in the bad state while investors would get less in the good state. But a significant

reduction in the level of deposits issued could allow at least the type H banks to survive in the bad state,

and an even further reduction would allow the L banks also to survive (at the cost of the banker absorbing

more rents). It is easily checked that the amounts the banking system will be able to pay out will be below

what it can pay with d0=1, so this is the constrained optimum. When the bad state is rather unlikely, the

tradeoff between a stronger commitment to pay in the good states by issuing deposits versus greater

stability in the bad states by issuing more capital is dominated by the commitment to pay.


        Finally, note we do not allow for deposits to be made contingent on the interest rate or the non-

verifiable state of nature. It is easy to construct a number of states in which the same interest rate prevails

but the optimal level of deposits is quite different. Given that there isn’t a one-to-one mapping between

the state and the interest rate, and given that banks compete to pay out the maximum possible, we can

provide examples where the ex ante equilibrium interest rate contingent deposit structure creates liquidity

problems or solvency problems for some banks in some states, and may even result in (low ex-ante


                                                                                                               27
probability) states in a complete meltdown of the banking system. We also do not allow contracts to be

directly contingent on the state, which we assume is observable but not verifiable. Our analysis is

positive—what happens when there is an ex-post solvencyproblem oran aggregate liquidity shortage

giventhe use of demand deposit contracts. Obviously, if there was no uncertainty about the ex-post state

of nature, or if there were complete markets, no such conditions would arise.

                                    III. Intervention at date 1

        The collective action problem inherent in demand deposits obviously leads to ex post

inefficiency. But in addition, failing banks do not internalize the adverse spillover effects they impose on

the system as they scramble for liquidity. And the interest rate does not reflect the true value of liquidity

since failing banks do not have purchasing power. As a result, solvent banks do not see the true value of

liquidity and fail to restructure late projects even while failing banks are restructuring early projects.

Because of these problems, a central authority may find it attractive to intervene.


        Since there are no spare resources held outside the system, any intervention will necessarily

require taxing some group and transferring to another. We will not allow the central authority to have any

special power of extraction. For example, the central authority can tax resources that are already invested

in the banking system, say by existing depositors, but cannot force entrepreneurs to produce or to abstain

from consumption. So once entrepreneurs have money left over after repaying loans, the central authority

has to make it worthwhile for them to redeposit it in the system.


        The central authority can increase the effective supply of date-1 liquidity by taxing claimants on

liquidity and lending this back to the system at an interest rate lower than the taxpayer would choose to

lend voluntarily. If such a loan is at the market rate of interest that prevails given the loan, we define the

tax and loan operation as a pure liquidity infusion. If instead the central authority uses its taxation power

to provide a particular bank a gift of future value, for example a claim on date 2 goods, we define the tax

and transfer operation as a pure recapitalization. All financial market interventions can be viewed as

some combination of pure liquidity infusions and recapitalizations. For example a gift of current goods to


                                                                                                             28
a bank is a liquidity infusion equal to the quantity of current goods, plus a recapitalization equal to the

date-2 value of those goods, evaluated at the market interest rate that prevails given the gift.


        It is best to think of interventions as unanticipated. Even if we ignore the effects of interventions

on the ex ante incentives of the banks and investors (or potential ex post bargaining between the bank and

the intervening authority), it is by no means clear that the right intervention is easily identified. The

proximate cause of a run is that a bank is deemed unable at current interest rates to raise enough to pay off

depositors – it is insolvent. But insolvency can both cause, and be caused by, liquidity problems. As a

result, the effects of interventions that attempt to address either the insolvency of particular banks or the

liquidity of the banking system need to be evaluated considering the full general equilibrium, otherwise

they may have surprising or unintended effects. This is what we show now.

3.1. Liquidity infusion.

        In principle, liquidity can be raised by taxing any date-1 holdings of consumption goods, but

since early entrepreneurs and goods-rich banks already infuse all their consumption goods into the system

(provided there is no solvency problem), the taxes have to fall on depositors or capital. Taxing the date-1

claimants after they withdraw consumption goods from the bank will ensure the proper tax is collected

without destroying bank incentives to pay depositors. The proceeds of this tax may then be re-deposited

in solvent banks at random or used to buy the date 2 portion of restructured loans sold by insolvent banks

(similar to methods used by the RTC to resolve the Savings and Loan problems of the 1980s in the United

States). If the root cause of the banking system’s problems is a liquidity shortage, the liquidity infusion

will reduce the excess demand for liquidity at date 1 and bring down the interest rate, which will make

banks that were insolvent at the prior equilibrium rate solvent again, and eliminate runs.

        A pure liquidity infusion does not require particular investors or banks to be targeted. But

clearly, relative to the equilibrium interest rate that would prevail if there had been no intervention, net

borrowers at date 1 benefit while net lenders are hurt. And, of course, the taxpayers who fund the infusion

lose out. Liquidity infusions do alter property rights.




                                                                                                                29
Interest rate guidance: Potential liquidity infusion

         When multiple equilibrium real interest rates are possible, the central authority could coordinate

expectations at the lowest equilibrium interest rate by being prepared to lend and borrow at that rate.15

This transaction is a promised pure liquidity infusion (evaluated at the low equilibrium rate), which need

never occur in equilibrium. While the central authority may potentially need significant taxation

authority to give it credibility that it will take sufficiently large positions, in equilibrium it will not need to

raise resources. Even though no resources are used, unless the alternative is a complete meltdown

intervention will again not make everyone better off. Early entrepreneurs in banks that do not fail, and

banks with excess liquidity, are made worse off (because intervention lowers the rate of return earned on

their excess date-1 consumption goods).

3.2. Recapitalization

         The government can recapitalize a bank at date 1 by giving it claims on date 2 consumption

goods. Recapitalizations have to be targeted since they assure the solvency of specific banks. An infusion

of capital into one part of the banking system will not spread through the system to help other banks

survive (in fact, as we will see, it can cause the reverse). 16

         The government can obtain the funds needed for a pure recapitalization by taxing date-2 wealth.
                                                                         i
For instance, it can tax banks that have a high realization of α by writing deposit claims against them,

and granting the deposit certificates to banks that have few borrowers with early projects (a low

realization of αi). Alternatively, it can offer bonds maturing at date 2 to insolvent banks, with the payment

on the bonds being funded by a tax on maturing claims at date 2.

         A recapitalization may save particular banks when a liquidity infusion will not. For example,


15
  If the excess demand is falling with interest rates at the first interest rate equilibrium, then it will be sufficient for
the central bank to lend at any rate below the next higher equilibrium interest rate.
16
  If the market value of the banking sector as a whole, when no late projects are restructured, exceeds the aggregate
value of deposits, then a transfer of value (such as a forced merger) can be enough to recapitalize the insolvent
banks. If that market value is insufficient, then value must be transferred from some other source, such as taxing
depositors or entrepreneurs, present or future.


                                                                                                                           30
suppose the interest rate is 1 at date 1, but banks fail because they are insolvent at that rate. If the

government wants to save them, a recapitalization will allow them survive and attract liquidity, but an

infusion of liquidity into the system will be no help. Since there is already enough liquidity and the

interest rate cannot go below 1, additional liquidity will just go waste.

Recapitalization in order to avoid a meltdown

         If the purpose of intervention is to prevent contagion, the systemic benefit from recapitalizing a

bank depends on its characteristics. Holding interest rates constant, if enough capital is provided so that a

bank with α i early borrowers can survive when it restructures a fraction µ i of its late borrowers, the

                                                 c                                          γC           c 
excess demand for liquidity will decrease by α i  2 + (1 − γ )C  − (1 − α i ) (1 − µ i )            + µ i 2  times
                                                     *




                                                 r                                       (1 + k ) r       r

the mass of banks of type αi. Saving banks with low values of αi does not decrease the excess demand

for liquidity, and at low interest rates may in fact increase it (because the banks will prefer to set µ i = 0

and not restructure late borrowers). For a sufficiently high αi, saving banks of type i will decrease the

excess demand for liquidity purely by avoiding the liquidity absorbing effects of a run that forces

restructuring of its early projects. This implies that recapitalizations are best targeted at banks that will be

intrinsically more liquid in the near term than at banks that will be illiquid.

         An additional benefit of recapitalization is that it allows high interest rates to prevail without

causing the failure of high αi banks. High interest rates, holding bank failure constant, force a solvent

bank to restructure late projects.17 A generalized recapitalization of all insolvent banks can allow high

interest rates to prevail without bank failures. Liquidity is then produced more efficiently, through the

restructuring of late projects rather than through the restructuring of early projects.

3.3. When do Interventions Work?

         In sum, when do liquidity infusions or recapitalizations prevent failure? We have

Proposition 4:




                                                                                                                    31
                   i                                          i                     i
     (i)           ∫
                   i
                                                             ∫i
                                                                                    ∫
                If [α iγ C + (1 − α i )c1 ] f (i )di + Min[ (1 − α i )c2 f (i )di, α i (1 − γ )Cf (i ) di ] ≥ d 0 , then all
                                                                                    i


                banks can be made solvent by an appropriate injection of capital.

     (ii)       A pure liquidity infusion will save all banks if and only if

                                       γC
                α iγ C + (1 − α i )              ≥ d0 ∀ i > i .
                                      (1 + k )

Proof: Omitted.

            Part (i) states that if there is enough liquidity that can be appropriated by the banking system to

pay off deposits, then there is some recapitalization scheme that can allow the liquidity to flow to the right

places, no matter what the realization of the αi’s.18 Part (ii) states that an infusion of liquidity is of no use

in saving banks when the problem is purely one of solvency (i.e., banks are insolvent even at an interest

rate of one). But if a liquidity shortage causes solvency problems, then a liquidity infusion can save all

banks.

3.4. Interventions in the Example


            Let us now go back to Example 2 to see what interventions can work. In the unique meltdown

equilibrium, all banks fail, depositors each consume 0.4, and bankers and entrepreneurs consume zero.

There are interventions that ex-post Pareto dominate this outcome.


            A small injection of liquidity can save the type H banks, by allowing the interest rate to drop

below r=2.77 (the level that makes type H banks insolvent), but it cannot prevent the run on type L banks,

because they are insolvent at any interest rate in excess of r=1.4. Aggregate liquidity supply is 0.688

(with H banks liquidating all late projects), demand is 0.748 (the value of claims on failed L banks and

solvent H banks), implying that a liquidity infusion of 0.06 will suffice to save the type H banks. The


17
   Another way to achieve this objective is to offer to buy loans to late projects on condition that they will be
restructured.
18
   Note that the goods left with early entrepreneurs after repaying loans are counted as part of the liquidity that can
be appropriated by the banking system only if there is enough date-2 value to pay it the storage rate of return.
Otherwise, the entrepreneur would store rather than invest in the banking system.

                                                                                                                               32
government should tax 0.06 from depositors after they withdraw, and lend it at date 1 to any bank that can

repay at an interest rate of r=2.77. The government should collect repayment at date 2, and possibly

distribute these as public goods. If there are no dead weight costs of the tax, expected after tax

consumption will be 0.688 at date 1, averaged across all depositors and capital holders.


         A large liquidity injection (of 0.251) can allow both types of banks to survive. This allows

expected after tax consumption of 0.768. However, some recapitalization is needed to increase date-1

consumption any further (more liquidity can be produced only by restructuring late projects, and that

requires interest rates to exceed 1.6 where L Banks are insolvent).


         Because deposits exceed the maximum available liquidity (at any interest rate), there can be no

pure recapitalization that prevents meltdown. However, capital injections can provide better outcomes

when combined with injections of liquidity. If a recapitalization is combined with a large liquidity

injection which allows the type L bank to survive at r=1.6 (where L banks will restructure late projects to

survive), then liquidity supply can be increased to 0.912. At r=1.6, liquidity demand is 1.011 (with both

types of bank solvent), so the liquidity infusion must be 1.011-0.912 = 0.099. In addition, the pledgeable

value of type L banks is 0.94, so to survive they must obtain additional value of 0.06 in date-1 goods (or

0.06*1.6 at date 2). Since fraction 0.6 of banks are type L, the required recapitalization is 0.06*0.6=0.036.

The total cost in date 1 goods is then 0.135 (0.099 in liquidity and 0.036 in capital). This is lower than

the cost in date-1 goods of 0.251 for a large liquidity injection, and yields higher after tax consumption of

0.912.

         Alternatively, a larger capital infusion combined with less liquidity allows type L banks to

survive even if the interest rate rises to R = 1.95 , when type H banks will supply liquidity by

restructuring all late projects. The total cost of this intervention in terms of date 1 goods is 0.087 (0.03 in

liquidity and 0.057 in recapitalization) and it will increase after tax consumption to 0.976.

         We have not compared the costs of intervention, both in terms of whom they impact, how much

deadweight cost they entail, and what the ex ante incentive effects are. Quantifying such costs is a task for


                                                                                                             33
future work. The point to note is that as Proposition 4 indicates, there may be no feasible capital infusion

that will save the system if the problem is a fundamental liquidity shortage, and vice versa. Furthermore, a

mix of the two interventions may be more effective than either alone.

3.5. Can Intervention be Harmful?

        This suggests the central authority should worry about the form of intervention it chooses so as to

minimize costs. But more worrisome for the central authority is that intervention can make matters worse.

        For example, suppose liquidity is tight so that gross interest rates are greater than 1 but less than

R and that low α banks fail in the absence of intervention. Suppose now that the central authority bails

out the low α banks by recapitalizing them to the point that they do not fail (e.g., by guaranteeing deposits

and exercising forbearance). We showed that saving low α banks that do not restructure late projects

(because r<R) will increase the excess demand for liquidity—they would release liquidity if they failed.

Enabling these banks to pay higher interest rates on deposits will increase market interest rates. Now

banks with moderate α may fail. But these banks are more likely to subtract liquidity from the system

when they fail, and their failure will kill more borrowers with early projects. Thus recapitalization of

illiquid failed banks may destroy many healthier banks. The failure of the latter may lead to a contagion

of failures (see Diamond and Rajan (2002) for an example).

        Put differently, a small recapitalization of the worst banks may soon trigger the need for a

massive recapitalization. If on embarking on this process of potentially cascading recapitalizations, the

central authority does not have the political clout to carry it out to the end, it may violate perhaps what

should be the most important rule governing interventions: First do no harm!

        Moreover, the central authority may just not be able to identify the problem. For example, it

cannot simply use the real interest rate to tell apart a solvency problem from a liquidity problem. It may

well be that the root cause of a high real interest rate is a failing bank which is subtracting liquidity from

the system. Conversely, it may be that the root cause is too little liquidity to start with.

        If one were to adopt the principle “First, do no harm!” it would seem from our model that a

liquidity infusion is the most benign in terms of its spillover effects. A liquidity infusion cannot trigger

                                                                                                               34
off a cascade of bank failures, and it may well arrest one. And a liquidity infusion will, at least, save the

most solvent banks, without the central authority having to pick and choose. But as we argue, there are

situations when a liquidity infusion may be ineffective. If the central authority can sequence interventions,

a recapitalization may then be called for. If it is to be undertaken, our model suggests a recapitalization of

the most illiquid banks can be a mistake, even if these are the ones that are closest to solvency, because

the liquidity shortage can be exacerbated. Instead, capital should be provided to the most liquid of the

failing banks. Finally, the central authority should recognize that an initial recapitalization will typically

involve further commitments, and should stand ready to provide it.19

                                                IV. Conclusion.

         We have examined how liquidity shortages and solvency problems in banks interact, and how

each can cause the other. Interestingly, the possibility of a contagion of banking failures arises precisely

because of the very structure of banks – to deal with a commitment problem they finance illiquid assets

with demandable claims. But if deposits cannot be made perfectly state contingent, this structure can

cause or exacerbate a liquidity shortage. When depositor losses are unavoidable, each depositor demands

payment. This can force banks to foreclose on loans that otherwise would soon produce real liquidity.

         The model suggests that contagious bank failures need not occur only because of panics unrelated

to fundamentals of the economy (though we have the possibility of panics in our model). Because bank

failures themselves can cause liquidity problems, our analysis suggests that evidence that bank failures

can be predicted with economy wide business conditions is not sufficient to indicate that such failures are

benign (see, for example, Calomiris and Gorton (1991)). Just because they are not sunspots does not mean

that bank runs are in the collective interest of depositors in run banks or that they do not have large

external effects. In addition, spillovers could work through local deposits and firms. This suggests the

19
   Suspension of convertibility is both an injection of liquidity and of capital, financed by the date-0 investors in a
bank. The direct effect of suspension is to eliminate a bank’s need to pay out immediately. This will stop runs if
suspension continues until all entrepreneurs can repay their loans. Even if suspension continues only until early
entrepreneurs generate goods, it will prevent the destruction of liquidity, and possible contagion. Deposit insurance
is akin to a potentially large infusion of capital, where the actual amount of capital provided depends on the interest
rate offered by banks. However, when there is excess aggregate demand for liquidity at all interest rates, the



                                                                                                                     35
possibility of local contagion as well as the possibility of national contagion. Finally, if runs are not

instantaneous (for example, if the state of nature is learned sequentially by different depositors), then the

real effects of a bank calling loans (forcing the restructuring of projects) to avoid runs will influence

economic conditions that cause subsequent runs on itself or on other banks. Economic conditions before

banking crises, although predetermined, are probably not exogenous to the real effects of bank failure.

         Our model is a “real” model, with real rather than nominal contracts. We view this as a strength

of the model. It helps us focus on the real budget constraint that an economy has to face. To the extent

that financial assets derive their liquidity ultimately from liquid real assets, our model is at the appropriate

level of abstraction. Countries like Argentina, whose banking system issued dollar denominated deposits,

or countries during the Gold Standard when exchange rates did not adjust as a matter of course,

essentially look like the real model we have described. Nevertheless, modern banking systems issue

deposits denominated in local currency and not goods. In Diamond and Rajan (2003), we show that while

introducing such financial assets into the framework of this paper adds new insights on the relationship

between money, prices, and real activity, it does not alter the basic implication of this paper that banking

crises can be caused and propagated by real liquidity shortages.

         Finally, we can weaken a number of assumptions without altering this fundamental result. For

example, initial investors, some of whom can consume early and other late, or who can substitute between

consumption at different dates, can be easily accommodated. More interesting would be to endogenize the

propensity to demand liquidity: an economy will be particularly fragile if depositors have a tendency to

demand liquidity when projects are predominantly late. The converse would be true if liquidity demand

were particularly attenuated when projects were delayed. Exploring this is an important extension best left

for future work.




banking system will fail immediately if the insurance is finite. Without an injection of liquidity, interest rates will
spike upwards, but any finite injection of capital will not allow the market to clear.

                                                                                                                          36
                                                   References

Allen, Franklin, and Gale, Douglas. “Financial Contagion.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (2000): 1-33.

Bagehot, W. Lombard Street, New York: NY Scribner Press, 1873.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto, and Gale, Douglas. "Preference Shocks, Liquidity and Central Bank Policy." In

        New Approaches to Monetary Economics, edited by W. Barnett and Kenneth Singleton.

        Cambridge, Mass: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Caballero, R, and Krishnamurthy, A. “Emerging Market Crises: An Assets Market Perspective.” MIT

        Working Paper, 1999.

Caballero, R, and Krishnamurthy, A. “International Liquidity Management: Sterilization Policy in Illiquid

        Financial Markets.” MIT Working Paper, 2000.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Gorton, Gary. "The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts, and Bank

        Regulation." In Financial Markets and Financial Crises, edited by R. Glenn Hubbard. Chicago,

        University of Chicago Press (1991): 109-173.

Diamond , Douglas W. “Liquidity, Banks, and Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 105 (October

        1997): 928-956.

Diamond, Douglas W. “Should Japanese Banks Be Recapitalized?” Monetary and Economic Studies

        (Bank of Japan) 19, No. 2 (May 2001): 1-19. Revised and reprinted as “Should Banks Be

        Recapitalized?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 87, No. 4 (Fall 2001):

        71-96.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Dybvig, Phillip H. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity.” Journal

        of Political Economy 91 (1983): 401-419.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Rajan, Raghuram G. “A Theory of Bank Capital.” Journal of Finance 55

        (December 2000): 2431-2465.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Rajan, Raghuram G. “Liquidity Risk Liquidity Creation and Financial

        Fragility: A Theory of Banking.” Journal of Political Economy 109 (April 2001): 287-327.

Diamond Douglas W., and Rajan, Raghuram G. “Bank Bailouts and Aggregate Liquidity.” American

        Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2002 (2002): 38-41.

                                                                                                       37
Diamond Douglas W., and Rajan, Raghuram G. (2003), “Money in a Theory of Banking.” University of

        Chicago Working Paper (September).

Donaldson, Glen. "Costly Liquidation, Interbank Trade, Bank Runs and Panics." Journal of Financial

        Intermediation 2, 1 (1992): 59-82.

Friedman, Milton, and Schwartz, A. A Monetary History of the United States 1867-1960. Princeton: NJ,

        Princeton University Press, 1963.

Goodfriend, Marvin, and King, Robert G. “Financial Deregulation, Monetary Policy, and Central

        Banking.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review 74 (May/June 1988): 3–22.

Hart, Oliver, and Moore, John. “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital.”

        Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 4 (November 1994): 841-879.

Holmström, Bengt, and Tirole, Jean. “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real Sector.”

        Quarterly Journal of Economics 52 (August 1997): 663-692.

Holmström, Bengt, and Tirole, Jean. “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity.” Journal of Political

        Economy 106 (February 1998): 1-40.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and Moore, John. “Inside Money and Liquidity.” LSE Working Paper, 2000.

Rajan, Raghuram R. “Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm's Length Debt.”

        Journal of Finance 47 (1992): 1367-1400.

Smith, B. “Bank Panics, Suspensions, and Geography: Some Notes on the "Contagion of Fear" in

        Banking.” Economic Inquiry 29 (1991): 230-248.

Thornton, Henry. An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain (1802).

        Together with His Speeches on the Bullion Report, May 1811. F. A. von Hayek, ed. London:

        George Allen & Unwin, 1939.

Wallace, N. “Another Attempt to Explain an Illiquid Banking System: The Diamond and Dybvig

        Model with Sequential Service Taken Seriously.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

        Quarterly Review (Fall 1988): 3-16.




                                                                                                       38
Appendix: Proof of Proposition 3:
        At date 0, the bank will choose the fraction invested in storage, s0, as well as the quantity of
deposits issued, d0, per unit of resources raised. The bank will have to pledge out the maximum to
investors in order to be able to raise money in the competitive market for funds. Start first by assuming
the bank invests all resources in lending. Also, assume there is only one aggregate state at date 1. The
extension to when there are multiple aggregate states is straightforward.
         For every deposit level d0, there will be a date-1equilibrium interest rate (if there are multiple
equilibrium rates, we will assume the lowest one prevails), a marginally solvent bank, i* (d 0 ) , and
equilibrium decisions by solvent banks on how many of their late projects they will restructure, µ i (d 0 ) . It
is straightforward to integrate across bank types to obtain the amount that will be paid out at date 1 to
date-0 investors at that level of deposits, d0. Let this be v1(d0).
                                            *
           *                               d0       1
Let      d 0 = Arg max v1 (d 0 ) s.t.            <      . This is the value of deposits that maximizes payout
                                        v1 (d 0 ) 1 + k
                                               *
                   d0

subject to the bank’s capital meeting the capital constraint. If v1(d0*) > 1, then the maximum payout with
the banks lending everything exceeds the maximum payout when the banks store everything.


Now it is easy to show that it is optimal for an individual bank to lend everything and to choose a deposit
level of d0* when all other banks do so. Assume not. Let the bank store 1>s0>0. Let the bank issue ds of
deposits against the stored assets. Let it issue dL of deposits against the amount lent. Since the return from
storage is certain, the spillover effect of storage, after it pays out on deposits issued against it, is as if the
bank issued (dL –(s - ds )) of deposits against its loans (because the certain returns from storage can be
fully offset against outstanding deposits, leaving net deposits as all that matters). But we know that the
pledgeable amount from lending is maximized when the deposits issued against (1- s0) units of loans is
(1- s0) d0*. Therefore, it must be that

                                                                              *
                                          d L − ( s0 − d s ) = (1 − s0 )d 0
                                                                                  *
                                          => d s + d L = s0 + (1 − s0 )d 0


But the last equality implies that one can treat the value from storage as going completely to service the
deposits issued against storage, and the value from the amount lent as going completely to service
deposits and capital issued against the amount lent. Therefore, the pledgeable amount if the bank stores is
                                                               *              *
                                          s0 + (1 − s0 )v1 (d 0 ) < v1 (d 0 )
                                                *
where the last inequality is because v1 ( d 0 ) > 1. Thus the bank can pledge less at date 1 than other banks
if it stores, and will not attract funds because only those who wish to consume at date 1 have goods at date
                                                                                                         *
0. It will therefore not store. A similar line of argument explains why the bank will not lend if v1 (d 0 ) < 1.
Q.E.D.




                                                                                                                39
  Figure 1: Project Outcomes
  B= Bank
  E=Entrepreneur

  Date 0                  Date ½                         Date 1                                      Date 2

                      State known             Date-0 investors consume.               Banker and entrepreneurs consume




                                                         If project matures early            If project late and not restructured earlier

Investment made    If project restructured           E operates => C produced
                   pays c1 immediately plus          B replaces E => γC produced               E operates => C produced
                   c2 at date 2.                     Outsider replaces E => nothing            B replaces E => γC produced
                   B or E can restructure,           produced.                                 Outsider replaces E => nothing
                   the project, then anyone                                                    produced.
                   can collect.
Figure 2: Sequence of Events
B= Bank
E=Entrepreneur

Date 0                      Date ½                                 Date 1                                      Date 2

                        State known                   Date-0 investors consume.                 Banker and entrepreneurs consume




Banks raise             If a bank is expected to             Early entrepreneurs pay bank                Late entrepreneurs pay bank γC.
resources               be insolvent at date 1, its          γC. They invest (1-γ)C in                   Bank pays date-1 depositors and
competitively by        depositors will run. All             solvent banks or store. Solvent             capital (the early entrepreneur or
issuing deposits and    projects are restructured.           bank i restructures µi late                 other banks).
capital to investors.                                        projects and continues the rest.
Resources are lent to                                        Date-0 depositors and capital
entrepreneurs who                                            are paid. Banker invests any
invest.                                                      excess resources in other
                                                             banks




                                                                                                                                              1
                                    Figure 3: Example 2 -- Liquidity supply and demand as functions of real rate, r
                          1.2


                          1.1


                           1


                          0.9
Date-1 Consumption Good




                          0.8
                                                                                                             Aggregate Liquidity Supply
                                                                                                             Aggregate Liquidity Demand
                          0.7


                          0.6


                          0.5


                          0.4


                          0.3
                                1     1.2    1.4    1.6    1.8        2          2.2   2.4   2.6   2.8   3
                                                                 Interest Rate




                                                                                                                                          2
