NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACQUIRING KNOWLEDGE WITHIN AND ACROSS FIRM BOUNDARIES:
EVIDENCE FROM CLINICAL DEVELOPMENT
Pierre Azoulay
Working Paper 10083
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10083
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003

Send all correspondence to pa2009@columbia.edu. This paper is a revised version of the second chapter of
my MIT dissertation. I thank my committee — Rebecca Henderson, Robert Gibbons, and Scott Stern — for
their guidance, as well as two anonymous referees, Nick Argyres, David Autor, Ernie Berndt, Matthew
Bidwell, Ray Fisman, Jeff Furman, Luis Garicano, Tom Hubbard, Casey Ichniowski, Josh Lerner, Chiaki
Moriguchi, Ariel Pakes, Brian Silverman, Manuel Trajtenberg, Birger Wernerfelt and Sid Winter for valuable
comments and suggestions. Financial support from the Program of the Pharmaceutical Industry, the Industrial
Performance Center, and the Center for Innovation and Product Development at MIT is gratefully
acknowledged. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Pierre Azoulay. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Acquiring Knowledge Within and Across Firm Boundaries:
Evidence from Clinical Development
Pierre Azoulay
NBER Working Paper No. 10083
November 2003
JEL No. J410, L220, L650, O320
ABSTRACT
Considerable evidence suggests that information is acquired more easily within than across firm
boundaries. I explore why this is observed in the setting of clinical development. Since the mid1980s, pharmaceutical firms have partly contracted out the operational aspects of clinical trials to
Contract Research Organizations (CROs). Using detailed project-level data for 53 firms, I document
that even after controlling for a number of alternative explanations, knowledge-intensive projects
are more likely to be assigned to internal teams, while data-intensive projects are more likely to be
outsourced. The statistical exercise is complemented by in-depth interviews with six pharmaceutical
and biotechnology firms. The qualitative evidence confirms that incentives for knowledge and data
production are more easily kept in balance in the firm's own internal labor market than in that of its
suppliers. Moreover, firms use relational contracts to ensure that their employees' incentives are both
balanced and relatively high-powered.
Pierre Azoulay
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, 704 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
pa2009@columbia.edu

1

Introduction
Although Hayek (1945) hailed the price system’s ability to channel local information

to dispersed economic participants, considerable evidence supports the proposition that information is acquired more easily within than across firm boundaries — particularly if this
information is complex or idiosyncratic. With the notable exception of Coase’s (1937) seminal contribution, this alleged superiority led early research to view a reduction in asymmetric
information as the defining feature of hierarchies. For instance, Arrow (1974) viewed one
of the advantages of organizations as the ability to economize in communication through
a common code; and Riordan (1990) defined vertical integration as cost-plus contracting
together with the buyers’ ability to monitor upstream input costs.
These approaches were criticized because they failed to explain how bringing a transaction
from the market into the firm by itself would alleviate asymmetric information problems. The
lack of a satisfactory answer probably explains why subsequent research on the boundaries
of the firm focused more on the hold-up problem and less on information asymmetries (Klein
et al., 1978; Williamson, 1985; Hart, 1995).
This paper shares with the earlier stream of research a focus on how firm boundaries
alter the nature and quality of information acquired within and across firm boundaries. But
in keeping with the contributions of more recent research (Holmström and Milgrom, 1994),
rather than assuming that managers “know more” about the activities of their own employees
than they do about those of their subcontractors, I study how employees’ incentives change
with the integration decision, and how these incentives in turn influence the acquisition of
different types of information.
I focus on the outsourcing of a particular information-intensive activity: the coordination of clinical trials sponsored by pharmaceutical companies. This setting provides an ideal
testing ground. While empirical studies of the “make or buy” decision have provided substantial evidence pertaining to the costs of competitive contracting in technology-intensive
industries, past research has focused mostly on capital-intensive sectors (Monteverde and

1

Teece, 1982) and R&D outsourcing (Pisano, 1990). This paper extends this literature to
settings where the key output is information.
Since the mid-1980s, pharmaceutical firms have partly contracted out the operational
aspects of clinical trials to Contract Research Organizations (CROs). I argue that variation in
project characteristics leads to variation in the relative importance of employees’ effort on two
tasks that compete for their attention: data production — the routine manipulation, storage,
and transfer of symbolic information within established categories; and knowledge production
— the establishment of novel conceptual categories, hypotheses, and causal associations
(Osberg, Wolff, and Baumol, 1989). Firms respond to this variation by choosing to outsource
or insource the project. Each option entails a different allocation for a key decision right that
defines the ways in which firms affect the employee’s choice of effort and its allocation across
different tasks. Since it is harder to measure performance in knowledge production than to
measure performance in data production, the firm chooses to assign its own employees to
projects for which the former are relatively more important than the latter. In so doing,
it ensures that incentives for both tasks are kept in balance. Conversely, data-intensive
projects are more likely to be outsourced, as distorting the allocation of effort is less costly
for these projects. This argument implies that heterogeneity in project characteristics will
be systematically related to the integration decision.
Using detailed data on 6,826 clinical trials sponsored by 53 firms between 1995 and 1999,
I document that even after controlling for a number of alternative explanations, knowledgeintensive projects are more likely to be assigned to internal teams, while data-intensive
projects are more likely to be outsourced. The credibility of this finding hinges critically
on the ability to distinguish empirically between these two types of projects. Variation in
the location of research activity provides a rich source of heterogeneity at the project-level,
as clinical trials typically involve a variety of different research sites: academic medical
centers, private practices, community hospitals, or even dedicated, for-profit research centers. Because of the peculiar career-based incentives in academic medicine, I argue that the
proportion of academic investigators in a clinical study captures the relative importance of
knowledge-production activities relative to data-production activities. Although this variable
2

provides the most robust findings, several other project characteristics yield similar conclusions. These results fit with Holmström’s (1999) subeconomy view of the firm, according to
which balanced yet “sluggish” incentives constitute hierarchies’ mixed blessing.
The statistical exercise is complemented by in-depth interviews with personnel of six
pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms, as well as employees of CROs — at multiple levels
of decision-making responsibility and functional expertise. The qualitative evidence enables
me to reconcile the subeconomy view with practitioners’ intuition that low-powered explicit
incentives need not be inconsistent with creativity and initiative inside firms. These characteristics figure prominently in accounts of life inside hierarchies (Monteverde, 1995) and
firms’ superior ability to create and transfer knowledge are often ascribed to them. I find
that firms use relational contracts (Simon, 1951; Levin, 2003) to ensure that employees’
incentives are both balanced and relatively high-powered. The choice is not between market
and hierarchy, but between the hierarchy of the firm — in which subjective performance
evaluations are combined with flat explicit incentives — and the hierarchy of its subcontractor — whose virtue stems precisely from the ability to provide high-powered incentives on a
narrow set of monitorable tasks.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional setting
and the informational constraints on contracting in clinical development. Drawing on the
qualitative evidence, Section 3 develops specific hypotheses relating project heterogeneity
to the integration decision. Section 4 presents the data, descriptive statistics, and main
econometric results. Concluding remarks are offered in Section 5.

2

Tapered Integration in Clinical Development
In order to gain regulatory approval for market introduction, the Food and Drug Ad-

ministration (FDA) requires that a pharmaceutical company provide substantial evidence of
a drug’s effectiveness, through adequate and well-controlled clinical investigations. Although
the precise details of these requirements have evolved over the years, proof of effectiveness
must be provided by the results of randomized controlled trials.
3

In contrast to early-stage discovery research, pharmaceutical firms contract out the conduct of experimental human studies to independent physicians called clinical investigators,
and rely on clinical monitors to recruit, coordinate, and supervise the large number of investigators required to conduct experimental human studies. Clinical monitoring is an important
elements of “Good Clinical Practices” (DHHS, 1997), a set of rules mandated and enforced
by regulatory authorities around the world. Since this paper studies the outsourcing of this
activity, it is worth understanding precisely its characteristics as a distinct occupation.

2.1

Clinical Development as an Information-intensive Activity
Clinical monitors are prototypical information workers. They do not produce useful

goods or enjoyable services; rather, they typically spend their time creating and altering
symbols written on pieces of paper or on magnetic disks. Moreover, their output can be
condensed into the package insert that comes bundled with the prescription drug sold to
final consumers. The information produced in clinical development is of two types: data —
information that can be transmitted without loss of integrity once the syntactical rules required for deciphering it are known; and knowledge — the establishment of novel conceptual
categories, hypotheses, and causal associations.
According to their narrow job description, clinical monitors ensure that the information
that originates from the doctors participating in a clinical study is accurate (in the sense
that the case report forms submitted to the regulatory authorities reflect exactly the source
documents, i.e., the original patient records and charts) and is structured in accordance
with standards laid out by the regulatory agency and the particular firm sponsoring the
trial. These unglamorous tasks are critical to the extent that skimping on data quality can
jeopardize the scientific credibility of a new drug application and damage the reputation of
the firm with regulators. As such, clinical monitoring involves the routine manipulation,
storage, and transfer of symbolic information within established categories (Osberg et al.,
1989). Data consists of codifiable information, i.e., information structured into a set of

4

identifiable rules that can be easily communicated. In particular, it is alienable from the
individual or firm who wrote the code (Kogut and Zander, 1992).
Clinical monitors also produce knowledge — search rules or heuristics that identify problems and the elements consisting of their solution. Much of it often remains tacit, in that
the formal expression of the solution is unlikely to capture fully the procedures that led
to it (Polanyi, 1966). The process of knowledge production consists of interactive tasks —
such as mediating disputes or gaining the trust of third parties and subordinates — that
are very difficult to reduce to a sequence of “if-then-do” steps. According to this broader
job definition, clinical monitoring cannot be reduced to the mass-production of clinical data
geared towards regulatory approval.
The significance of knowledge production in clinical development is probably best understood through example. The following anecdote was reported by the Vice President for
Clinical Affairs at a biotechnology company. To perform a clinical trial for a drug used to
treat pulmonary hypertension (a life-threatening condition), this company recruited investigators from academic medical centers and private clinics. Puzzled by a very slow patient
enrollment into the study, the clinical team leader asked the monitors to investigate and identify the root-cause of the problem. The monitors noticed a pattern in the patient enrollment
statistics: the for-profit centers were lagging far behind the academic centers. Upon further
investigation, the monitors determined that the delays were caused by the requirement that
patients undergo a lung biopsy to determine their eligibility. In academic centers, this test
could be performed and the results provided to patients on the same day, while in the private
clinics, confirmation of eligibility was postponed for several days because of the need to ship
biopsy samples to an outside laboratory for analysis. With this information, the study team
amended the protocol to substitute a type of specialized X-ray for the biopsy requirement.
The ability to perform the screening of patients in a single day resulted in a much improved
enrollment process.
This anecdote is illustrative of the importance of knowledge production in clinical development. A particularly important challenge is to acquire, synthesize, and assimilate

5

information generated locally by clinical investigators, either through direct interaction with
patients or by purposeful analysis. Since they are in contact with the complete set of investigators participating in a clinical study, monitors can bring information and problem-solving
capabilities together at a single locus (von Hippel, 1998), sometimes resulting in the production of idiosyncratic knowledge about experimental compounds and the diseases they are
intended to treat.1
The distinction between data and knowledge production is essential, as monitors need
to allocate effort across both tasks, and these activities differ in the extent to which inputs
can be monitored, and performance measured and contracted upon. The problem of balancing incentives across tasks is brought under sharper focus by the outsourcing practices
of pharmaceutical firms.

2.2

Stylized Facts of Clinical Development Outsourcing
Since the mid-1980s, monitoring and data management (along with other ancillary op-

erational tasks) have been increasingly outsourced to specialized subcontractors called Contract Research Organizations (CROs). Over time, these suppliers have extended the range of
services they provide to include protocol design, biostatistical analysis, and report writing.
The contract research industry until recently grew at the brisk pace of 20% per year, and
it is estimated that up to one fifth of overall clinical development budgets are captured by
these independent firms, representing slightly less than $7 billion in 2001 (Parexel, 2003).2
Clinical development outsourcing differs from other arm’s length contractual settings in that
1
In the extreme, clinical monitors may become conduits for serendipitous medical findings. Gelijns et al.
(1998) provide numerous instances of unexpected benefits from medical research, of which the most recent
example is probably the case of viagra and heart disease (Kling, 1998).
2
Although fully explaining the emergence of the contract research industry is beyond the scope of this
paper, a variety of factors appear to have contributed to the diffusion of outsourcing practices. These
include the increased codification of the operational and routine aspects of clinical studies in the 1980s;
the rise of the biotechnology industry and its attendant cohort of firms with discovery but no clinical
development capabilities; and the initial estimate by established pharmaceutical firms that outsourcing
would cut development costs at a time when the industry was under significant pressure to reduce drug price
inflation (Ellison and Wolfram, 2000).

6

the boundaries of the firm can shift on a project-by-project basis.3 CRO teams are generally
in charge of key operational aspects of the study, with little or no input into knowledge production. Moreover, for a given study, sponsors may choose to retain some functions in-house
while contracting out others to a single or multiple CROs. Other characteristics of vertical
relationships in clinical development deserve mention.4
Most importantly, clinical development provides an instance of tapered integration, whereby
a firm produces some of its requirements using its own labor, while contracting for the rest
on the market (Carlton, 1979). Using data that will be described in more detail below, I
compute the fraction of activity that is outsourced in a given year as the proportion of clinical
sites in the firm’s portfolio corresponding to projects coordinated by CROs. The distribution
of the resulting variable, %CRO, is displayed in Figure 2. It is relatively uniform, but with
a mass point at 0: a sizable number of firms outsource none of their trials in a given year.
Figure 3, which graphs the distribution of the mean outsourcing propensity for the period
1995-1999, makes clear that this mass point is not an artifact of firm effects. Only five firms
refrain from using CROs during the whole period, while only two contract out all of their
trials. Most firms seem to use CROs moderately: the mean outsourcing propensity is 29%,
the median 20%.
It is important to clarify that three issues that are often the focus in studies of firm
boundaries — liability protection, asset ownership, and appropriability — are minor considerations in pharmaceutical firms’ outsourcing decision. First, CROs do not shield pharmaceutical firms from responsibility for the integrity of the studies they sponsor (DHHS, 1997).
In this regard, these suppliers are very different from accounting firms, who can be held
3

Throughout the paper, the words study, trial, and project are synonymous. Similarly, the words drug,
compound, and molecule are used interchangeably.
4
Figure 1 provides a summary schema of the clinical trials process. It depicts a pharmaceutical firm (whose
boundary is drawn using the thick solid line) concurrently developing three drugs, using three distinct crossfunctional product teams (whose boundaries are drawn using the thin dotted line). The box corresponding to
team #1 has been blown up, revealing the different functions necessary to the successful development of drug
#1. For each drug, there is a portfolio of trials (three in the case of drug #1, two of which — trial #2 and
trial #3 — are outsourced to two different CROs). The clinical monitors (both inside the pharmaceutical
firm and the CROs) oversee the gathering of clinical data that takes place in a variety of clinical sites
(hospitals, private clinics, Academic Medical Centers) under the stewardship of clinical investigators.

7

liable for the accuracy of their audits.5 Second, the physical assets used in production (such
as computers) are non-specific, and asset ownership does not appear relevant for incentives.
This is important insofar as the recent literature on firm boundaries identifies integration
with residual rights of control over physical assets (Hart, 1995; Baker and Hubbard, 2003).
Finally, appropriability concerns do not loom large in the outsourcing decision. Clinical
development outsourcing contracts, unlike licensing deals between established pharmaceutical firms and biotechnology startups, involve no sharing of intellectual property rights.
Moreover, CROs are not viable competitors on the product market.
The assertion that outsourcing in clinical development is not defined by asset ownership,
the right to determine output of pricing decisions, or certification makes it all the more
imperative to state precisely what distinguishes a subcontractor from an internal division.
This is discussed in the next section.

3

Outsourcing, Incentives, and Project Heterogeneity
Field research revealed that employee assignment was a significant bone of contention

between buyers and suppliers. Outsourcing clinical development involves relinquishing a key
decision right to suppliers: the ability to match particular employees to specific projects. In
fact, it is useful to take the transfer of this decision right from the buyer to the supplier as
the definition of outsourcing in clinical development. Interviews indicate that the identity,
skill-level, and job design of CRO employees cannot be easily contracted upon. In the words
of an outsourcing manager: “CROs keep giving us bad people to choose from, and there is
nothing I can do about it.” Others highlighted instances where a team of seasoned veterans
had been promised by a CRO, but “rookies” had been substituted for the “A-team” at the
last minute. This bait-and-switch tactic appeared to be relatively common. Formal contracts
5

In a phone conversation with Dr. Murray Lumpkin, Deputy Director of FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation Research, it was apparent that regulators do not perceive situations where sponsors monitor their own
studies as raising conflict-of-interest issues. For vertical disintegration as a device to shield the firm from
liability, see Ringleb and Wiggins (1990).

8

do not solve the issue because buyers — or a court of law — cannot distinguish voluntary
turnover from opportunistic reassignment to another client.
Focusing on employee assignment is also useful because it brings into focus how employees’ incentives change with the integration decision. The data-production process can be
partitioned into a set of simple, monitorable tasks whose output can be contracted upon
(albeit in a distortionary fashion). Knowledge production, on the other hand, is heavily
influenced by employees’ ability to learn from the previous stages of a project and to apply this knowledge creatively during subsequent stages. Moreover, project-specific learning
is deeply embedded in the particular routines, structures, and processes used by the firm
to integrate knowledge into collective action. This means that measuring performance is
arduous, let alone inferring effort devoted to knowledge production from observable signals
of performance. In this respect, clinical development can be analyzed through the lens of
a multitask agency problem (Holmström and Milgrom, 1991): when two substitute tasks
compete for the attention of an agent, and these tasks vary in the extent to which effort is
observable, it may be optimal to provide low-powered incentives for both tasks, since highpowered rewards may skew the agent’s allocation of effort away from the costly-to-monitor
task. In the limit, with complete unobservability of effort on one task, it may be justified to
provide no contingent rewards for any of the tasks. While performance on the monitorable
task suffers, no effort distortion is induced by the incentive scheme.
Holmström and Milgrom (1994) elaborate on this framework and argue that principal
ownership of assets, flat performance incentives, and exclusion from alternative tasks are
complementary instruments that jointly characterize the employment relationship. They
show that such a system of incentives will be used when balancing incentives is valuable, i.e.,
when it is hard or costly to measure performance on important tasks. Slight modifications
are required to adapt these insights to the setting of drug development. I argue that formal
contracts can specify which party gets to make skill-project matches, but not how these
matches get made as the project unfolds. As pointed out by Maskin and Tirole (1999),
a decision right with this characteristic can play a role akin to that of asset ownership in

9

Holmström and Milgrom (1994) and Hart (1995). Similarly, limiting the agent’s attention
to a single project is equivalent to excluding alternative tasks.
Could pharmaceutical firms deal with multitask incentive problems within their boundaries, for example by providing high-powered incentives to employees in their “data” division,
and lower-powered — but balanced — incentives to employees in their “knowledge” division?
I surmise that such firms would find it difficult to credibly commit to irrevocably allocate
decision rights regarding employee assignment to their “data” division. Moreover, equity
norms in internal labor markets likely constrain firms’ ability to maintain such two-tiered
incentive systems.

3.1

Qualitative Evidence at the Firm Level
Over a two-months period, I visited six pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies

and interviewed representatives of seven suppliers over the phone or in industry conferences.
The interview data provide rich (sometimes vivid) firm-level evidence regarding the relationship between job design and incentives in clinical development. It is less convincing as a
source of project-level evidence, but is helpful in suggesting hypotheses that can be fruitfully
tested using project-level data.
The managers making staff deployment decisions inside the pharmaceutical firm and their
counterparts inside the CRO did not share the same objectives. Inside the firm, managers
strived to produce all the information required to reach the correct “go/no-go” decision for
a particular drug, subject to a budget constraint which includes “time costs” (i.e., foregone
sales opportunities because the drug, whose patent clock is ticking, lingers in development).
Inside the CRO, managers maximized time-to-project completion, subject to two constraints:
data quality had to exceed some minimum standard, and billable hours for the firm as a
whole had to reach some target. This second constraint arose from the fact that CROs aggregate their clients’ peak demand for clinical development services. This could be profitably
achieved only to the extent that monitors were drawn from a common pool and assigned on

10

a “first-come first-serve” basis to projects.6 In contrast, in-house monitors specialized therapeutically, and assignment decisions took idiosyncratic expertise into account. For example,
if a monitor had worked on previous studies for a drug, he/she was very likely to be assigned
to the follow-on study as well.
Through its effect on the ability to match individual skills with specific projects, outsourcing skewed clinical monitors’ attention and effort away from knowledge production
towards data-processing tasks. A manager overseeing suppliers at a large pharmaceutical
firm described the unbalanced incentives of CRO employees in these terms:
“...We have a line-by-line definition of the CRO’s responsibilities. That means that the CRO
is less likely to notice stuff that might be going on at the sites. There are no incentives for
the individuals at CROs for capturing ‘soft data’, unlike here, where you get rewarded at every
level. At a CRO, you might work for two or three sponsors at the same time. So it’s all about
hard deliverables. Anything beyond the contract you do not get.”

CRO employees confirmed the importance of individual, explicit incentives. The dataproduction process generates a large number of observable performance measures. For example, it is possible to monitor the number of case report forms checked by a clinical monitor
in a given amount of time; data inconsistencies give rise to queries that reflect directly on
the thoroughness of source-document verification; and query resolution times measure the
efficiency of the troubleshooting process when data inconsistencies arise. While pay was not
directly contingent on these metrics, I found that bonuses and advancement in the CROs’
internal labor markets were heavily dependent on them. Indeed, in interviews with former
CRO employees, suppliers were characterized as “data sweatshops,” and their employees as
“data mules” or “CRF Collection Machines.”
Buyers often included penalties into contracts for on-time delivery of the data, along
with stipulations regarding acceptable data quality. These incentives trickled down to the
supplier’s individual employees. Rewarding speed in clinical development could be counterproductive: a slowly-performed clinical trial justifying FDA approval contributes much more
6

This discussion assumes that in-house managers do not worry about keeping staff busy. To a large extent,
this reflects the fact that CROs act as buffers against pipeline shocks. While a more complete exploration
of this idea lies outside the scope of this paper, it is studied in depth elsewhere (Azoulay, 2003a).

11

to firm value than a rapidly-performed trial leading to rejection of the new drug application by the regulator. Pharmaceutical sponsors appeared aware of the fact that “paying for
speed” may have unintended consequences, and therefore used rules of thumb to determine
which studies were good outsourcing candidates — studies for which effort distortions would
not be too costly.
In contrast to CROs, pharmaceutical firms relied on subjective performance evaluations
as a source of employee incentives. Since knowledge production was difficult for employees
and pharmaceutical firms to contract upon, it tended to be rewarded through the use of
implicit incentives such as subjective bonuses and promotions. The ability to provide such
implicit rewards appeared inherently tied to the ability to match individual skills with specific
projects.
Moreover, job design differed across buyers and suppliers along one critical dimension.
While employees of pharmaceutical firms dedicated their time fully to a single project (or at
least to a single drug), CROs assigned employees to multiple projects at a time, and shifted
them laterally from project to project as the need arose. By increasing the informativeness of
commonly used performance measures, multi-project assignment kept down the cost of monitoring data-production activities. What is known in the industry as the data management
process provides a good illustration of this phenomenon. After the data has been collected,
but before the study database is “locked,” a number of cross-checks are applied to verify
the data’s integrity. Whenever an inconsistency arises, a query is generated, and the source
document (the original patient chart) is checked for accuracy. This is a very time-consuming
and costly process. Queries can be traced back to particular monitors and reflect on the
thoroughness of their work, but are a noisy measure of individual performance: The number of queries is also influenced by the quality of the coordinating staff at the clinical sites,
whether patients had unusual complications, etc. However, CRO managers can potentially
meter queries originating from multiple sites monitored by the same employee over the same
time period. For data-production activities, extracting signal from noise is therefore easier
inside the CRO than inside the pharmaceutical firm, where monitors are assigned to a single
project at a time.
12

In summary, the qualitative evidence is consistent with the view that flat performance
incentives, subjective performance evaluations, and single-project assignments characterize
the employment relationship inside pharmaceutical firms. In contrast, CRO hierarchies are
characterized by steep individual incentives for speed and data quality, and simultaneous
assignment to multiple projects for multiple clients. This analytic framework parallels that
used in Baker and Hubbard (2003). In the context of the trucking industry, these authors
argue that outsourcing provides strong incentives with respect to utilizing trucks intensively,
and this interferes with job designs that give drivers non-driving responsibilities. Here, I
argue that outsourcing provides CROs strong incentives that interfere with job designs that
give clinical monitors knowledge-production responsibilities.
Complex clinical development outsourcing contracts can mimic formal aspects of hierarchy, but cannot ensure the close coordination between scientific and operational decisionmaking enabled by balanced incentives. Nor can they secure consummate — as opposed to
perfunctory — cooperation from employees that is the defining characteristic of relational
employment (Stinchcombe, 1986; Williamson, 1975). As a result, spot-market outsourcing
in clinical development potentially carries a number of contractual hazards.
One might wonder why relational contracts between pharmaceutical firms and their suppliers cannot govern the assignment of workers to projects. In practice, there is overwhelming
evidence that buyers use a large number of different suppliers, often replace current suppliers
with new ones, and more generally seize the opportunities provided by intense competition
upstream. Clients may find it to their advantage to segregate their project portfolio between
insiders and CRO employees precisely because outsourcing distorts the allocation of effort
across tasks. CROs may be “data sweatshops,” but sweatshops have their uses: the provision
of high-powered incentives on a set of narrow, monitorable tasks. Moreover, outsourcing to
CROs differs from many settings analyzed previously in that the “buy” option involves not
self-employed individuals, but a separate hierarchy. Relational governance between firms
would entail not one but two implicit contracts: a relational outsourcing contract between
the two firms, and a relational employment contract within the supplier. Establishing and
maintaining such a cascade of implicit agreements is challenging. While some pharmaceuti13

cal firms have attempted to engineer relational contracts with CROs (“partnerships” in the
industry lingo), these efforts have ended in failure (Azoulay, 2003b).

3.2

Project-level Hypotheses
In order to analyze outsourcing patterns at the transaction level of analysis, I argue that

variation in project characteristics leads to variation in the relative importance of employees’
effort on data-production and knowledge-production activities. It also leads to variation in
the extent to which effort on each of these activities is observable. Since it is harder to
measure performance in knowledge production than in data production, the firm chooses
to assign its own employees to projects for which the marginal return to the former is
higher than the marginal return to the latter. In so doing, it ensures that incentives for
both tasks are kept in balance for these knowledge-intensive projects. Conversely, dataintensive projects — those studies for which the marginal return to data-production effort
is particularly high — are more likely to be outsourced, as distorting the allocation of effort
is less costly and may even be beneficial because of the high-powered incentives faced by
CRO employees. Similarly, project-level variation in the observability of effort influences the
integration decision. Holding the marginal returns to effort constant, less costly monitoring
of data production (knowledge production) should lead to a higher (lower) propensity to
outsource a project. This leads to the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1: The higher the marginal return on data-production effort relative to knowledgeproduction effort, the more likely is the project to be outsourced, ceteris paribus.
Hypothesis 2a: The propensity to outsource is increasing in the project-level costs of monitoring data production, ceteris paribus.
Hypothesis 2b: The propensity to outsource is decreasing in the project-level costs of monitoring knowledge production, ceteris paribus.

In the next section these hypotheses are tested using detailed project-level data for a
large sample of firms.

14

4

Empirical Model and Results
The foregoing discussion suggests that the integration decision will be a function of

project and firm characteristics. I address these predictions by estimating a binary choice
model. Because the estimation strategy is affected by data availability, this section begins
with a description of the data. Results from the econometric specification are then presented.

4.1

Data and Sample Characteristics
The data used in this essay come from a dataset of clinical investigator contracts made

available by FastTrack Systems, Inc. Since 1991, clinical trial information has been gathered
from subscribing pharmaceutical companies in order to help them better plan and negotiate
investigator grants. Moreover, since 1995, FastTrack has recorded whether a CRO was
involved in each trial. The breadth of the data’s longitudinal and cross-sectional coverage is
impressive, with 137,000 clinical investigator contracts corresponding to 17,000 clinical trials
for the period 1991-1999. While the sample of firms is unbalanced (coverage improved as
the service gained popularity), it comprises 90 subscribing units. Although no company can
be identified by name under our confidentiality agreement, the sample includes nearly all
large pharmaceutical companies (US- and foreign-based), as well as most large biotechnology
firms. Given the propensity of biotechnology start-ups to rely on established firms’ clinical
capabilities, the sample is highly representative of the industry as a whole.7
Since information about outsourcing is only available for the last five years of data,
aggregating observations to the clinical trial level results in 6,826 clinical studies, sponsored
by 53 firms, for the development of 1,039 experimental compounds. For each project, the
dataset records a number of study characteristics, the name of the molecule, an identifier
7
I thank Mark Hovde, Anca Serban, and Mariann Best for explaining the subtleties of the data. Differences
between “subscribers” and “firms” stem from the fact that certain firms have several subscriptions (e.g.,
ABC Pharma-UK and ABC Pharma-US). Firms resulting from a merger are assigned a distinct subscription
identifier, a convention the usefulness of which cannot be stressed enough in the context of the pharmaceutical
industry. The sample comprises data from 9 companies out of the Top 10 firms, 26 out of the top 30 firms, and
33 out of the Top 50 firms, where the rankings reflect R&D spending listed in annual reports to shareholders
in the year 2000. Companies in the sample spent a total of $41,434 millions in R&D that year. This
correspond to 82% of the aggregate amount reported by the Top 45 heaviest spenders.

15

for the firm sponsoring the study, and a dummy variable that denotes the involvement of a
CRO. I complement these data with information from company annual reports.
The strengths of the data lie in their broad industry coverage and fine-grained level of
detail, but they are not without limitations. The information on outsourcing is summarized by a dummy variable, which does not capture all the richness and heterogeneity of
outsourcing practices at the project level (e.g., no information is available to describe the
substance of the duties performed by the CRO during the project). Moreover, the clinical
trials included in the dataset do not constitute the universe of studies sponsored by these
firms. Excluded from the data are any trials for which investigator contracts are negotiated
directly by the CRO. In other words, the statistical exercise can only reveal information on
a specific contracting margin: the decision to outsource, conditional on having retained the
selection of clinical investigators in-house.8

4.2

Descriptive Statistics
For the industry as a whole, Figure 4 shows that the proportion of clinical studies

outsourced tripled during the sample period, from 7.70% in 1995 to 22.90% in 1999. This
dramatic increase provides a useful reminder that outsourcing practices in drug development
are relatively new and still evolving.
Tables 1A and 1B present descriptive statistics. Table 1A contains information on firmlevel variables such as outsourcing intensity, pipeline shocks, and overall clinical research
experience. Table 1B displays variables measured at the project level, such as whether or
not the trial was outsourced, the phase of the trial, the proportion of investigators involved
who are academics, and other observable project characteristics.
Since traditional measures of firm size (such as sales or assets) do not seem appropriate,
I use the number of clinical sites as the basic unit of activity in clinical development. Trials
8

According to practitioners, fully-outsourced studies are more likely to be performed post-approval and/or
to examine the consequences of long-term maintenance treatment. One would expect these trials to be more
data-intensive on average than the trials composing the sample analyzed here. If this is the case, excluding
these studies makes it harder to detect an effect of knowledge considerations on the propensity to outsource.

16

differ extensively in size (between 1 and 275 sites in this sample), and practitioners often use
rules of thumb that assign a given number of sites to clinical monitors. Therefore, I measure
firm size as the log of the total number of clinical sites in the firm’s portfolio, averaged
over the last three years; pipeline shocks are computed as the deviation between the total
number of sites in the firm’s portfolio from the past three years moving average; and firmlevel experience in drug development is measured by the cumulative stock of clinical sites
for the firm.
A cursory analysis of Table 1B reveals a number of empirical regularities. Outsourced
studies tend to be larger and shorter in duration than studies coordinated by in-house staff.
They involve a lower proportion of academic sites and are more procedure-intensive.
Table 2 displays the distribution of outsourcing intensity by trial phase. Drug development is a sequential process beginning with Phase I safety trials, continuing with Phase II
“proof of principle” trials, and ending with larger-scale, efficacy Phase III trials designed to
validate Phase II results in an environment as similar as possible to that of regular medical
practice. Phase IV studies are performed post-approval, often in an effort to ensure acceptance of the new drug by prescribing physicians. Uncertainty regarding the compound’s
toxicity, side effects, and other idiosyncrasies is being resolved upon completion of each stage,
so that one would expect knowledge-production activities to assume decreasing prominence
(relative to data-production activities) as development unfolds.
The raw data broadly supports this intuition, but with some important caveats. While
outsourcing is most frequent in Phase IV studies, there does not seem to be a difference in
the level of outsourcing between Phase II and Phase III trials. One explanation for this lack
of difference is that Phase III trials are more likely than Phase II trials to be outsourced
on a “turnkey” basis, so that the difference observed in the sample understates the true
difference.9 Phase I trials are outsourced more often than either Phase II or Phase III trials,
but this is expected. Phase I trials correspond to projects whose degree of complexity vary
widely, from the most sophisticated (such as “first-in-man” pharmacokinetic and pharmaco9
Another explanation pertains to a relatively recent trend in clinical development that has lead some
firms to blur the definitions of Phase II and Phase III trials, and conduct so called “Phase II/III” studies.

17

dynamic studies) to the most routine and codified (such as bioavailability and bioequivalence
studies which can take place at any time along the path to regulatory submission). Unfortunately, the data at hand makes it difficult to disentangle the “routine” from the “complex”
Phase I studies. Phase I oncology studies constitute an exception. Because of their harmful side-effects, nearly all cancer drugs are first tested in patients — as opposed to healthy
volunteers — so that one can be fairly sure that these studies correspond to “first-in-man”
experimentations. Only 9.5% of these studies are outsourced.
Table 3 reports the distribution of outsourcing across 14 broad therapeutic areas. While
this is a crude classification (for instance, the anti-infective class covers a wide spectrum of
medical indications, from HIV to run-of-the-mill bacterial infections), outsourcing is most
frequent in the pain and cardiovascular areas, which are characterized by large average
trial sizes and relatively well-understood technologies. Conversely, it is very infrequent in
oncology, a therapeutic class for which clinical protocols are scientifically involved and the
data collection requirements extremely complex. Similar patterns emerge at the therapeutic
indication level of analysis. The projects analyzed here pertain to 361 indications, and only
for a small number of those are there enough observations in the sample for a meaningful
descriptive look. As an illustration, 34% of 59 ulcer studies are outsourced, but only 11% of
229 transplantation studies.
Although the tabulations above do not allow to draw firm conclusions, they point to
sources of variation that need to be controlled for in multivariate analyses.

4.3

Variation in the Composition of Investigator Teams
The clinical trials process is managed through a three-tiered hierarchy: the product

team inside the pharmaceutical firm (who must integrate the result of each study into the
overall development plan for the experimental drug); the clinical monitors who oversee the
quality of the data and attend to the smooth unfolding of the trial from an operational standpoint; and the set of clinical investigators who enroll patients into the study and treat them
according to an agreed-upon experimental protocol. Below, I infer the relative importance of

18

knowledge-production and data-production activities for clinical monitors (the middle rung
of the hierarchy) from project-level variation in the composition of the investigator team (the
lower rung of the hierarchy). The empirical validity of this approach hinges on a detailed
understanding of the investigator-selection process by pharmaceutical firms.
Variation in the location of research activity provides a rich source of heterogeneity
at the project-level, as clinical trials typically involve a variety of different research sites:
academic medical centers, private practices, community hospitals, or even dedicated, forprofit research centers. The distinction between academic and non-academic testing sites
is important. Over the past 15 years, academic medical centers have gradually ceased to
be the preferred locus of industry-sponsored drug development activities.10 The academic
and non-academic sectors differ in the relative emphasis put on knowledge production (as
opposed to data production) by clinical investigators. In addition to industry-supported
clinical trials, academic investigators also carry out “basic” clinical investigations, which are
rewarded by publications, NIH grants, academic prestige, and promotion. Career concerns
may induce academic physicians to shift their attention away from careful record-keeping
and other activities directed at ensuring the quality and integrity of the data. In contrast, in
commercial sites, investigators’ allocation of effort is not skewed away from data production
by competing incentives.
This diversity provides pharmaceutical firms with the opportunity to carefully match the
composition of the investigator team with the type of problems most likely to arise during
the clinical study. For example, when the focus of the study is on confirmation of a scientific
hypothesis, the objectives of investigators in the commercial sector will be more aligned with
sponsors’ interests. In contrast, when hypothesis generation is more valuable or when the
product team “is ignorant about what it is ignorant about,” then encouraging investigators
to follow their scientific intuition might become comparatively more valuable.
10

The data used in this paper show that the proportion of academic clinical sites at the industry level
decreased steadily from 66% in 1993 to 57% in 1999. FDA records show that the number of US investigative
sites tripled between 1990 and 1995 — from 6,159 sites in 1990 to 18,557 sites in 1995, with nearly all of this
growth taking place in the for-profit sector (Hovde and Seskin, 1997).

19

I argue that the same unobserved project characteristics lead pharmaceutical firms to
select a team of investigators dominated by academics (respectively by non-academics) and
to value relatively more knowledge-production effort (respectively data-production effort) by
clinical monitors. As a result, a higher proportion of academic investigators should decrease
the probability that a given trial will be outsourced.
Investigator selection is, like outsourcing, a decision variable of the firm. One might
worry that particular types of investigators (e.g., “for-profit”) are matched with particular
types of clinical monitors (e.g., CRO employees) because of some other unobserved factor.
Such endogenous matching (Ackerberg and Botticini, 2002) threatens the validity of the
interpretation above.
Although the data do not provide a credible source of exogenous variation for the choice
of investigators, a number of alternative explanations can be ruled out using econometric
methods, as explained below. As a complement, I have also pursued the strategy of examining qualitatively the investigator selection process at each of the six companies visited for
this study. Interviews with personnel in charge of investigator recruitment provided strong
evidence that the outsourcing decision and investigator choice are not jointly determined.
While these firms carefully chose the mix of academic and non-academic investigators participating in the studies they sponsored, they did so in response to opportunities to learn
about the disease and the experimental molecule, not as a function of the integration decision. Another consideration appeared to play a role in the investigator selection process:
“Credentializing” the drug in the eyes of regulatory authorities and potential prescribing
physicians. Whereas the first rationale has implications for the outsourcing of clinical monitoring, the second rationale does not. This observation forms the basis for an additional
check on the validity of the paper’s empirical strategy: If investigator mix is a valid proxy for
knowledge, the outsourcing/investigator mix relationship should hold less strongly when one
has independent reasons to believe that “credentializing” the drug looms larger as a concern
than knowledge acquisition.11
11

Other factors mentioned by my respondents as determinants of the investigator mix include the type
of clinical venues favored by the target patient population, and the social connections of senior staff. In

20

4.4

Econometric Considerations
Estimating the effect of project and firm characteristics on the integration decision

requires a procedure that accommodates its discrete nature. A standard approach to this
type of problem is to model a latent variable, CRO∗ , the relative inefficiency of outsourcing
compared with integration as:
0

0

∗
= β Xijt + γ Zjt + εijt
CROijt

where i indexes projects, j indexes firms, t denotes calendar time, and X (respectively Z) is
a vector of observable project-level (respectively firm-level) characteristics. In reality, rather
than observing CRO∗ , I observe the integration decision itself:
½
0
0
1 if εijt > −β Xijt − γ Zjt
CROijt =
0
otherwise
I assume that the ε’s are drawn from a logistic distribution; this choice is motivated by the
need to accommodate more sophisticated error structures, as explained below. The next few
paragraphs detail the construction of the variables included in X and Z.12
The clinical development process is plagued by uncertainty. The compound’s potency, its
associated toxicities, adverse interactions, and side effects are revealed gradually as development unfolds. Ex ante, firms can form priors as to the difficulty of “letting the compound
show its true value.” This prior will be based on characteristics of the study, some of which
are observable, such as project phase (exploratory vs. confirmatory), compound novelty
(“first-in-class” vs. “me-too”), complexity of the target indication, etc. The applied researcher’s challenge is to find high-quality, project-level proxies that act as shifter of (1)
the marginal returns to knowledge- and data-production activities; and (2) the difficulty of
observing knowledge- and data-production effort.
Marginal return to data- and knowledge production effort. I construct the variable
%AMC, the proportion of investigators in the trial affiliated with academic medical centers.
these data, the pharmaceutical firm is handling the selection of investigators whether or not the project is
outsourced. Therefore, social networks between pharmaceutical team members and academic physicians are
unlikely to drive the association between outsourcing and reliance on academic medicine.
12
Because the residuals corresponding to projects belonging to the same firm in a given year cannot be
considered independent, standard errors are estimated allowing for clustering by firm-year (Moulton, 1990).

21

A higher proportion of academic investigators should make it less likely that a given trial will
be outsourced, since CROs and their employees are not rewarded, explicitly or implicitly, for
the acquisition of knowledge from the clinical sites.
I employ the set of trial phase dummies discussed earlier (the Phase IV category is
omitted). Phase I oncology trials should be less likely to be outsourced than Phase II trials,
which in turn should be less likely to be outsourced than Phase III trials. All trials on the
critical path to regulatory approval should be less likely to be outsourced than Phase IV
trials (which take place after a drug has been approved).
Clinical studies taking place in hospital settings are likely to require more careful monitoring of serious adverse events — a knowledge-intensive task — than outpatient studies. As
a result, inpatient studies should be less likely to be outsourced, ceteris paribus. I include
the INPATIENT dummy to capture this effect.
The more balanced incentives faced by internal monitors should also influence the team’s
ability to adapt to changes in circumstances surrounding clinical projects as they unfold. I
use the protocol length of a clinical study (DURATION) as a proxy for the probability of
change orders. I expect shorter studies to lend themselves more easily to outsourcing.
Finally, I include two variables expected to shift downwards the marginal return to
knowledge-production effort relative to data-production effort. The number of distinct medical procedures in the study (]PROCEDURES ) proxy for the data-processing burden associated with the clinical trial. A similar argument can be made regarding project size (]SITES ).
Knowledge-production activities tend to be underemphasized in larger trials where logistical
issues take center stage. High values for both variables should increase the likelihood of
outsourcing.
Observability of data- and knowledge production effort. Clinical studies for which
data-production activities are less costly to monitor are likely to be good candidates for
outsourcing. I argue that data-production monitoring costs are a decreasing function of the
concentration of patients across clinical sites. Regardless of whether a study is outsourced,
pharmaceutical firms audit the quality of their clinical data by selecting a sample of sites
22

in the study (generally those with the largest patient enrollment) and replicating sourcedocument verification. A higher Herfindahl index of patient concentration, HERF, should
translate into more accurate estimates of data quality and lower auditing costs.
Unfortunately, the data does not provide good proxies for the costs of monitoring knowledge production. One would expect that keeping track and assimilating idiosyncratic knowledge generated at clinical sites would become harder in trials involving a large number of
clinical investigators. On this ground, larger trials should be less likely to be outsourced.
Since study size also shifts the relative marginal return to data- and knowledge-production
effort, its predicted effect on the likelihood of integration is ultimately ambiguous.13
While project-level variation generates nuanced hypotheses regarding the effect of multitasking incentives on the integration decision, Figures 1 and 2 suggest that there are differences in firms’ average propensity to outsource. These firm-level patterns can be explained
by invoking other rationales for outsourcing.
Adjustment costs. Practitioners often justify outsourcing to CROs by referring to the
“peaks and valleys problem” — the ability to start large trials quickly, and more importantly
the flexibility afforded by the ability to cancel a service contract in the eventuality of a
pipeline “dry spell.” Drugs enter and exit the pipeline frequently, creating wide variation in
the number of employees needed to staff clinical-study teams. Confronted with large sunk
costs of hiring and firing employees, partial vertical disintegration enables pharmaceutical
firms to cope with sudden and lumpy shifts in the level of demand for clinical trial services.
This is the case because technology shocks tend to be uncorrelated across firms, creating a
role for a free-standing upstream supplier to pool labor demands more efficiently (Carlton,
1979; Abraham and Taylor, 1996). Similarly, larger firms or firms that are developing drugs
in multiple therapeutic areas may be better able to redeploy employees from terminated
projects to new ones. The specification includes firm-level variables meant to capture the
influence of pipeline fluctuations on the project-level outsourcing decision: SHOCK, SIZE
13

To a large extent, HERF and ]SITES reflect exogenous factors related to disease prevalence and geography. Moreover, regulatory authorities provide guidelines in statistical design that severely constrain firms’
latitude in deciding upon the level of these variables. In what follows, they will be treated as exogenous.

23

and SCOPE. These variables may have less explanatory power when analyzing the projectlevel outsourcing decision than when investigating the extent of outsourcing at the firm
level. Nonetheless, it seems important to account for their effect at this finer-grained level
of analysis.
Heterogeneous firm capabilities. Firms that have developed extensive internal capabilities in clinical development may face higher relative costs of outsourcing than less experienced
firms. To capture the importance of overall development expertise, I compute EXPERIENCE, the cumulative count of clinical sites involved in the firm’s portfolio of projects up
to year t. I also include BIOTECH (whether the firm was present on the product market
as of 1995) and US PRESENCE (whether the firm was US-based or, in the case of foreign
firms, whether it owned a US subsidiary with clinical development facilities as of 1995).
In recent years, there has been a marked trend in favor of multinational clinical trials.
This evolution results from a greater regulatory harmonization that enables pharmaceutical
companies to seek simultaneous approval in a larger number of countries. Many large CROs
claim to provide “global reach” in their marketing brochures, and specialized suppliers may
be in a better position than their upstream clients to amortize the sunk infrastructure costs
required to manage multinational studies. The likelihood of outsourcing is expected to
increase in the project’s geographic span, ]COUNTRIES.

4.5

Results
Table 4A reports estimates from the specification above. I begin by examining the

hypotheses pertaining to incentives, adjustment costs, and heterogeneous firm capabilities
separately (columns 1, 2 and 3), before proceeding to specifications that investigate these
arguments concurrently (columns 4 and 5). All these models include year, therapeutic class,
and region fixed effects. Fixed effects at the regional and therapeutic class level control for
the array of cross-class and cross-region differences in history, technological opportunities
and state of knowledge that have been constant over the sample period, while year effects
control for the secular increase in the prevalence of outsourcing at the industry level.

24

Model (1) yields coefficient estimates generally in line with Hypotheses 1 and 2b. %AMC
is strongly negatively correlated with outsourcing, as expected. Projects in pre-approval
stages of development are less likely to be outsourced than Phase IV, post-approval projects
(the omitted phase dummy in the specification). Shorter and more procedure-incentive studies are also more likely to be outsourced, as expected. The coefficients before INPATIENT
is not statistically significant. I find strong support for Hypothesis 2b: patient concentration
across study sites is a strong predictor of outsourcing. As noted above, the interpretation
of the effect of ]SITES is ambiguous. The finding that the likelihood of non-integration is
increasing in study size is consistent with Hypothesis 1, but inconsistent with Hypothesis 2a.
Model (2) investigates the effect of adjustment costs. Surprises in the level of activity
(SHOCK ) increase the likelihood of outsourcing. Moreover, this effect is less pronounced
for large firms, as evidenced by the effect of the interaction term between SHOCK and
Ln(SIZE). Finally, the propensity to outsource is increasing in the firm’s therapeutic scope
(but not in the firm’s size).
Model (3) focuses on the role of heterogeneous firm capabilities. The likelihood of outsourcing any given project decreases with the firm’s overall experience in clinical development. Biotechnology firms and firms without a US presence are more likely to outsource.
Geographic span does not appear to have any effect.
Of course, if multiple rationales for outsourcing exist, statistical tests that account only for
one class of explanations will be mis-specified. In column 4, I check whether the results above
are robust to the simultaneous inclusion of all predictor variables. Quite remarkably, I find
that this is the case. Some results are even strengthened compared to columns 1 through 3.
For example, the coefficients estimates for the PHASE variables are ordered monotonically.
While this result has intuitive appeal and is very robust across specifications, an inequality
test cannot reject the null hypothesis that they are in fact equal. On the other hand, the
magnitudes and statistical significance of the coefficient estimates for the variables meant to
capture the influence of adjustment costs are weakened.

25

The interpretation of the statistical estimates in column 4 is subject to caution, since it
does not account for the effect of unobserved firm practices related to both observable study
characteristics and the integration decision. For example, pharmaceutical firms have been
shown to exhibit heterogeneity in their “taste for science” in the setting of drug discovery
(Cockburn et al., 2000). If pharmaceutical firms with a strong scientific culture are both
more closely tied to academia and take a more negative view of CROs because of their lack
of scientific credentials, then %AMC and outsourcing will covary in the data, but this need
not reflect the influence of monitors’ incentives.
Since I observe a number of projects that differ widely along observable characteristics
(such as %AMC ) but are sponsored by the same firm, a number of alternative interpretations
can be ruled out. In column 5, I add a full set of firm fixed effects to the specification, in
effect eliminating all the between-firm variation in the data.14 Accounting for unobserved
firm heterogeneity has a dramatic effect on the results: the effect of variables pertaining
to adjustment costs and capabilities disappears, while the hypotheses pertaining to the
multitask agency problem still find strong support in the data. The differences between
columns 4 and 5 illustrate the perils involved in interpreting the results of purely crosssectional tests.
I choose Model (5) as a benchmark specification and compute the magnitudes for a
number of variables. One of the most interesting results is the statistically and economically
significant of the proportion of academic investigators in the trial. At the mean of the data,
increasing %AMC by half a standard deviation (about 20%) decreases the probability of
outsourcing from 17.3% to 15%; increasing HERF by half a standard deviation (about 20%)
increases the probability of outsourcing from 17.3% to 22.5%; while a Phase IV study would
be 8% more likely to be outsourced than a Phase III study.
14

Fixed-effects estimators applied to non-linear models are biased because of the incidental parameter
problem. An important issue is to determine whether the number of observations per firm in the dataset
is large enough for this estimation strategy to be applied with confidence. Using Monte Carlo simulations
for the fixed effect probit model, Heckman (1981) shows that above a critical panel length of eight periods,
the bias is negligible, although this critical length depends on the frequency of the event being studied.
Fortunately, the number of observations available to identify the firm effects is well above this number here.

26

Table 4B displays models that probe the robustness of specification (5) to more elaborate
forms of unobserved heterogeneity. Model (6) adds firm-specific time trends to the specification, thus addressing the concern that firm-level outsourcing fads might contaminate the
results. Established firms are often organized into “therapeutic silos” enjoying a large degree of autonomy. If some therapeutic divisions within a firm exhibit more of a “taste for
science” than others, then fixed effects at the firm level will not properly account for such
heterogeneity. Model (7) re-estimates the model with a full set of firm-class interaction fixed
effects. The results obtained in column 5 of Table 4A still hold under these more restrictive
decompositions of the error term.
Another class of alternative interpretations rely on the importance of unobserved disease
or drug characteristics. For some diseases, the supply of clinical investigators is limited
to academic medical centers. In such cases, a small number of academic physicians act as
essential gatekeepers to the patient community, and pharmaceutical firms might prefer to
monitor such studies with their own employees as a way to nurture these relationships. To
rule this out, Model (8) replaces broad therapeutic class controls by a set of narrow therapeutic indication fixed effects. For instance, whereas cystic fibrosis and diabetes trials were
part of the same endocrine disease group in Model (5), Model (8) assigns to both set of
studies its own fixed effect. The structure of the data can even be exploited to account
for unobserved heterogeneity at the molecule level. There is an average of 7 studies per
molecule, with a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 132 studies. Accordingly, Model (9) adds
molecule fixed effects to the regression, sweeping out any idiosyncratic variation in outsourcing propensity related to experimental compounds. In these specifications, the multitasking
interpretation of the results is subjected to a very stringent test, as only within-indication or
within-drug information is used to identify the effect of covariates on the likelihood of outsourcing. Estimation is performed by conditional maximum likelihood, using Chamberlain’s
(1984) fixed-effect logit model. Although some coefficients are estimated less precisely, the
results confirm the earlier estimates.
As a final check on the plausibility of interpreting the effect of investigator mix in terms
of the multitasking framework, I interact %AMC with two dummy variables corresponding
27

to studies for which the selection of academics is more likely to reflect a desire to build up the
drug’s credentials rather than knowledge acquisition concerns. The first subsample comprises
547 Phase IV trials. I single out Phase IV trials since they are performed post-approval,
often in an effort to ensure acceptance of the drug by prescribing physicians. Using medical
opinion leaders in academia is a way to shape prescribers’ perception of the new treatment
as legitimate (“seeding the market” in the industry lingo). The second subsample comprises
786 trials corresponding to drugs intended for the 10 most well-treated diseases.15 For
such diseases, more is presumably known about best practices in protocol design, potential
enrollment bottlenecks, acceptable surrogate markers, etc. A firm might still want to include
prominent academics in these studies, so as to ensure a more expedited review by regulatory
authorities.
If the knowledge vs. data interpretation of the CRO/%AMC relationship is legitimate,
this association should therefore be less likely to hold for Phase IV studies and for trials
corresponding to well-treated diseases. This is indeed the case as can be seen in Table 4C,
which reports the results of regressions that take Model (5) of Table 4A and Model (9) of
Table 4B as baselines, and add the interaction terms %AMC × PHASE IV (Model 10 and
11) and %AMC × WELL-TREATED (Model 12 and 13) to these baseline specifications.
While the main effect of %AMC remains significant and similar in magnitude to the results
reported in Table 4B, the interaction terms are not significant. While this test does not rule
out all possible endogenous matching mechanisms, it greatly narrows the scope of plausible
alternative interpretations.

4.6

Discussion
Extant theoretical perspectives on outsourcing take contract incompleteness and oppor-

tunistic behavior as their starting point. Yet, they tend to fall into two distinct categories.
The first approach views the problem of drawing firm boundaries as one of facilitating ex15

These are: Otitis Media, Insomnia, Pneumonia, Bronchitis, Asthma, Rheumatoid Arthritis, Pain, Urinary Tract Infections, Skin And Soft Tissue Infections, and Hypertension. To select these diseases, I drew
from a list of icd9 codes and associated drugs provided to me by Frank Lichtenberg. These 10 diseases have
the largest number of already approved treatments.

28

post adaptation to changing circumstances (Williamson, 1985; Tadelis, 2002). The second
approach focuses on the provision of appropriate ex-ante incentives for specific investments
(Hart, 1995) or the allocation of effort across tasks (Holmström and Milgrom, 1994; Shepard,
1993). In the first approach, the dissipation of quasi-rents through haggling is purely wasteful. In the second, investment/effort choices are set below their first-best level but parties
bargain their way to efficiency conditional on these initial choices.16
This paper analyzes the problem of outsourcing in clinical development through the
lens of the latter perspective. This is a simplification, as issues of ex-post adaptation do
arise between CROs and their clients. The contract negotiations are often protracted, with
suppliers attempting to limit buyer’s ability to introduce modifications during the execution
stage. Of course, the unpredictability of ongoing development projects makes renegotiation
a likely occurrence, and conflicts over “change orders” often ensue.
Unfortunately, the data used here are not well suited to test arguments relating bargaining
difficulties over post-contractual amendments to the choice of organizational form. One
exception may be provided by the influence of DURATION, the length of time patients are
enrolled in the study. If the probability of change orders increases with protocol length,
then we would expect shorter studies to be monitored by employees if bargaining costs are
lower inside the firm (Wernerfelt, 1997; Simester and Knez, 2002). Although the relationship
between the likelihood of outsourcing and DURATION goes in the expected direction, the
statistical significance of this effect is not robust across specifications.
Finally, the multitask agency approach provides too simplified and static a view of insiders’ incentives. Taken literally, this perspective implies that they would face no incentives
to provide either type of effort if one of the task — knowledge-production — was infinitely
costly to monitor. Yet, the qualitative evidence reveals that pharmaceutical firms bear little
in common with government agencies or other bureaucracies plagued by lack of employee ini16
The clinical monitors studied here perform ongoing services for the pharmaceutical firms, and it is hard
to identify large discrete investments of the sort that might take place at the beginning of a relationship
(Levin, 2003). As a result, I have found it easier to couch the paper’s argument in agency terms, rather
than through the lens of the hold-up problem and specific investments, but this distinction may be mostly
semantic.

29

tiative. Internal monitors are highly motivated, but this stems primarily from career-based
rewards such as subjective bonuses and promotion. By combining the absence of piece rates
with subjective evaluations, pharmaceutical firms ensure that employees’ incentives are both
balanced and relatively high-powered.

5

Conclusion
This paper performs an empirical analysis of outsourcing in clinical development. I argue

that variation in project characteristics leads to variation in the importance of employees’
effort on two tasks: knowledge production and data production. Since it is harder to measure
performance in knowledge production than to measure performance in data production,
pharmaceutical firms choose to assign their own employees to projects for which the former
are relatively more important than the latter. In so doing, they ensure that incentives for
both tasks are kept in balance. Conversely, data-intensive projects are more likely to be
outsourced, as distorting the allocation of effort is less costly for these projects.
Consistent with this argument, I document that even after controlling for a number of
alternative explanations, knowledge-intensive projects are more likely to be assigned to internal teams, while data-intensive projects are more likely to be outsourced. These results
fit with Holmström’s (1999) subeconomy view of the firm, whereby organizations design incentive systems in a manner that internalizes some of the contractual externalities present in
markets due to asymmetric information. Focusing on the costs of communicating knowledge
— as opposed to the incentives to acquire it — would lead to an alternative perspective
on the optimal size and scope of hierarchies; Garicano (2000) provides an interesting model
along these lines. How communication costs and incentive problems interact to shape firm
boundaries is an important topic for future research.

30

References
Abraham, Katharine G. and Taylor, Susan K. “Firm’s Use of Outside Contractors: Theory
and Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics, 14(3), pp. 394-424, 1996.
Ackerberg, Daniel A. and Botticini, Maristella. “Endogenous Matching and the Empirical Determinants of Contract Form.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(3), pp. 564-591, 1997.
Arrow, Kenneth J. The Limits of Organization. New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1974.
Azoulay, Pierre. “A Portfolio Approach to Transaction Costs Economics: Evidence from Clinical Development.” Working Paper, Columbia University, 2003a.
————————. “Agents of Embeddedness.” Working Paper, Columbia University, 2003b.
Baker, George P. and Hubbard, Thomas N. “Make Versus Buy in Trucking: Asset Ownership, Job Design, and Information.” American Economic Review, 93(3), pp. 551-572, 2003.
Carlton, Dennis W. “Vertical Integration in Competitive Markets under Uncertainty.” Journal
of Industrial Economics, 27(3), pp. 189-209, 1979.
Chamberlain, Gary. “Panel Data,” in Zvi Griliches and Michael D. Intriligator, eds., Handbook
of Econometrics. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2, pp. 1248-1318, 1984.
Coase, Ronald. “The Nature of the Firm.” Economica, 4(16), pp. 386-405, 1937.
Cockburn, Iain M., Henderson, Rebecca M. and Stern, Scott. “Untangling the Origins
of Competitive Advantage.” Strategic Management Journal, 21(10-11), pp. 1123-1145, 2000.
Department of Health and Human Services. “Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guideline.” Federal Register, 62(90), pp. 25692-25709, 1997.
Ellison, Sara and Wolfram, Catherine. “Pharmaceutical Prices and Political Activity.”
NBER Working Paper #8482, 2001.
Garicano, Luis. “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production.” Journal of
Political Economy, 108(8), pp. 874-904, 2000.
Gelijns, Annetine, Rosenberg, Nathan and Moskowitz, Alan J. “Capturing the Unexpected Benefits of Medical Research.” New England Journal of Medicine, 339, pp. 693-698, 1998.
Hart, Oliver. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. New York: Oxford University Press,
1995.

31

Hayek, Friedrich A. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” American Economic Review, 35(4),
pp. 519-530, 1945.
Heckman, James J. “The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial Conditions
in Estimating a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process,” in Charles F. Manski and Daniel
McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press, pp. 179-195, 1981.
Holmström, Bengt. “The Firm as a Subeconomy.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organizations, 15(1), pp. 74-102, 1999.
Holmström, Bengt and Milgrom, Paul. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
7(1), pp. 24-52, 1991.
——————————————————–. “The Firm as an Incentive System.” American
Economic Review, 84(4), pp. 972-991, 1994.
Hovde, Mark and Seskin, Robert. “Selecting U.S. Clinical Investigators.” Applied Clinical
Trials, 6(2), pp. 34-42, 1997.
Klein, Benjamin, Crawford, Robert G. and Alchian, Armen A. “Vertical Integration,
Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process.” Journal of Law and Economics,
21(2), pp. 297-326, 1978.
Kling, James. “From Hypertension to Angina to Viagra.” Modern Drug Discovery, 1(2), pp.
31-38, 1998.
Kogut, Bruce and Zander, Udo. “Knowledge of the Firm, Combinative Capabilities, and the
Replication of Technology.” Organization Science, 3(3), pp. 383-397, 1992.
Levin, Jonathan. “Relational Incentive Contracts.” American Economic Review, 93(3), pp.
835-857, 2003.
Maskin, Eric and Tirole, Jean. “Two Remarks on the Property-Rights Literature.” Review
of Economic Studies, 66(1), pp. 139-149, 1999.
Monteverde, Kirk and Teece, David J. “Supplier Switching Costs and Vertical Integration
in the Automobile Industry.” Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1), pp. 206-213, 1982.
Monteverde, Kirk. “Technical Dialog as an Incentive for Vertical Integration in the Semiconductor Industry.” Management Science, 41(10), pp. 1624-1638, 1995.
Moulton, Brent R. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables
on Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(2), pp. 334-338, 1990.

32

Osberg, Lars, Wolff, Edward N. and Baumol, William J. The Information Economy: The
Implications of Unbalanced Growth. Halifax, Nova Scotia: The Institute for Research on Public
Policy, 1989.
Parexel. Pharmaceutical R&D Statistical Sourcebook. Waltham, MA: Parexel International
Corp., 2003.
Pisano, Gary P. “The R&D Boundaries of the Firm: An Empirical Analysis.” Administrative
Science Quarterly, 35(1), pp. 153-176, 1990.
Polanyi, Michael. The Tacit Dimension. New York: Anchor Daily Books, 1966.
Ringleb, Al H. and Wiggins, Steven N. “Liability and Large-scale, Long-term Hazards.”
Journal of Political Economy, 98(3), pp. 574-595, 1990.
Riordan, Michael H. “What is Vertical Integration?” in Masahiko Aoki, Bo Gustavsson and
Oliver E. Williamson, eds., The Firm as a Nexus of Treaties. London: Sage Publications, pp.
94-111, 1990.
Shepard, Andrea. “Contractual Form, Retail Price, and Asset Characteristics in Gasoline Retailing.” RAND Journal of Economics, 24(1), pp. 58-77, 1993.
Simester, Duncan and Knez, Marc. “Direct and Indirect Bargaining Costs and the Scope of
the Firm.” Journal of Business, 75(2), pp. 283-304, 2002.
Simon, Herbert A. “A Formal Theory of the Employment Relationship.” Econometrica, 19(3),
pp. 293-305, 1951.
Stinchcombe, Arthur. Information and Organizations. Berkeley, CA: University of California
University Press, 1988.
Tadelis, Steven. “Complexity, Flexibility, and the Make-or-Buy Decision.” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 92(2), pp. 433-437, 2002.
von Hippel, Eric. “Economics of Product Development by Users: The Impact of ‘Sticky’ Local
Information.” Management Science, 44(5), pp. 629-644, 1998.
Wernerfelt, Birger. “On the Nature and Scope of the firm: An Adjustment-Cost Theory.”
Journal of Business, 70(4), pp. 489-514, 1997.
Williamson, Oliver E. Markets and Hierarchies. New York: The Free Press, 1975.
——————————. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: The Free Press,
1985.

33

Tables and Figures

Figure 1: Organization of the Clinical Trials Process
Drug #2 Project Team
Data
Management

Logistics

Drug #3 Project Team
Statistical
Analysis

Manufacturing

Clinical Operations
Trial #1

Clin.
Invest.
#2

Clin.
Invest.
#3

Medical
Affairs

Clin.
Invest.
#n

Clin.
Invest.
#1

Clin.
Invest.
#2

Drug #1
Project Team

Regulatory
Affairs

CRO #1

Clinical Monitors

Clin.
Invest.
#1

Drug #4 Project Team

CRO #2

Trial #2

Trial #3

Clinical Monitors

Clinical Monitors

Clin.
Invest.
#m

Clin.
Invest.
#3

Clin.
Invest.
#1

Clin.
Invest.
#2

Clin.
Invest.
#3

Clin.
Invest.
#4

Clin.
Invest.
#k

Figure 2: Proportion of Clinical Sites in Outsourced Trials, 1995-1999

Number of Firm-year Observations

75

50

25

0%

25%

50%

34

75%

100%

Figure 3: Mean Firm-level Outsourcing Propensity, 1995-1999
5

Number of Firms

4

3

2

1

0%

25%

50%

75%

100%

Figure 4: Proportion of Clinical Studies Outsourced, 1995-1999
25%
22.90%
20%
19.70%
17.30%
15%

10%
8.50%
7.70%
5%

0%
1995

1996

1997

35

1998

1999

Table 1A
Descriptive Statistics
Firm-level Variables [53 firms, 211 firm-year observations]
153 clinical studies per firm on average, min.=1, max.=929

Obs.

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Min.

Max.

Firm Mean
(n=53)

%CRO

Proportion of clinical sites in outsourced trials for firm j in year t

211

0.242

0.318

0

1

0.290

BIOTECH

Firm present on the product market as of 1995

211

0.052

0.223

0

1

0.113

US PRESENCE

US subsidiary as of 1995

211

0.843

0.364

0

1

0.849

SCOPE

Therapeutic Scope of firm j in year t

211

3.134

1.571

1

7.571

2.911

SITES

Number of clinical sites for firm j in year t (×100)

211

3.354

3.739

0.010

23.420

3.191

SIZE

Size of firm j in year t, three-year site moving average (×100)

211

3.301

3.224

0.057

19.863

3.061

SHOCK

Deviation of SITES from past three-years moving average (×100)

211

– 0.110

2.702

– 9.900

12.211

0.012

EXPERIENCE

Cumulative number of clinical sites for firm j up to year t (×100)

211

18.290

16.390

0

61.74

16.110

36

Table 1B
Descriptive Statistics — Project-level Variables [6,826 obs.]
Overall
Mean

Mean
Insourced
Projects
(n=5,642)

Mean
Outsourced
Projects
(n=1,184)

Min.

Max.

0

1

CRO

Was the study outsourced?

0.173
(.379)

%AMC

Proportion of academic clinical sites in the study

0.619
(.423)

0.653
(.411)

0.454
(.439)

0

1

PHASE I

Phase I study

0.244
(.429)

0.224
(.417)

0.340
(.474)

0

1

PHASE II

Phase II study

0.234
(.423)

0.243
(.429)

0.187
(.390)

0

1

PHASE III

Phase III study

0.437
(.496)

0.451
(.498)

0.374
(.484)

0

1

PHASE IV

Phase IV study

0.086
(.280)

0.083
(.275)

0.101
(.300)

0

1

WELL-TREATED

Top 10 best-treated diseases

0.115
(.319)

0.106
(.308)

0.157
(.364)

0

1

INPATIENT

Inpatient study

0.346
(.476)

0.331
(.471)

0.418
(.493)

0

1

#PROCEDURES

Number of distinct medical procedures

15.869
(9.320)

15.615
(9.128)

17.079
(10.106)

0

57

#SITES

Number of clinical sites

7.861
(15.270)

7.386
(14.102)

10.121
(19.768)

1

275

HERF

Herfindahl index of patient concentration across sites

0.514
(.400)

0.505
(.393)

0.556
(.429)

0.004

1

#COUNTRIES

Number of countries in which testing takes place

1.190
(1.002)

1.164
(.918)

1.312
(1.323)

1

23

DURATION

Study duration in weeks (as per clinical protocol)

30.054
(48.121)

31.885
(49.940)

21.329
(37.082)

0.143

520

37

Table 2
Distribution of Outsourcing Across Trial Phase
Mean
Outsourcing
Level

Std.
Dev.

Freq.

PHASE I – Overall

0.242

0.428

1,663

PHASE I – Oncology

0.094

0.292

213

PHASE I – Other Therapeutic Areas

0.263

0.441

1,450

PHASE II

0.139

0.346

1,594

PHASE III

0.148

0.356

2,985

PHASE IV

0.204

0.404

584

Table 3
Distribution of Outsourcing Across Broad Therapeutic Areas
Mean
Outsourcing
Level

Std.
Dev.

Freq.

Cardiovascular

0.225

0.418

725

Gastrointestinal

0.195

0.397

297

CNS

0.169

0.375

1,143

Anti-Infective

0.174

0.379

586

Oncology

0.103

0.304

1,004

Immuno-Modulation

0.156

0.363

563

Dermatology

0.163

0.371

208

Endocrinology

0.137

0.344

641

Hematology

0.185

0.390

146

Ophthalmology

0.099

0.300

121

Genitourinary System

0.217

0.412

466

Respiratory System

0.205

0.404

611

Pain/Anesthesia/Musculoskeletal

0.329

0.461

213

38

Table 4A
Logit Models of the Outsourcing Decision
(1)
%AMC
PHASE I × OTHERS
PHASE I × ONCOL.
PHASE II
PHASE III
INPATIENT
#PROCEDURES
Ln(DURATION)
Ln(#SITES)
HERF

(2)

(3)

-0.613**
[0.118]
0.079
[0.270]
†
-0.514
[0.294]
-0.366*
[0.164]
-0.340*
[0.159]
-0.154
[0.111]
0.018**
[0.006]
-0.104*
[0.041]
0.589**
[0.090]
1.553**
[0.285]

SCOPE
SHOCK
Ln(SIZE) × SHOCK

**

-3.164**
[0.452]

-1.027**
[0.365]

-0.015
[0.003]
0.957*
[0.398]
-1.089**
[0.235]
0.011
[0.046]
-1.124**
[0.379]

No
–2,832.47
6,689

No
–2,821.48
6,689

No
–2,825.47
6,689

EXPERTISE
BIOTECH
US PRESENCE
#COUNTRY
Constant
Firm Fixed Effects
Log Likelihood
Nb. of Observations

(5)

-0.689**
[0.137]
-0.217
[0.269]
*
-0.692
[0.304]
-0.481**
[0.180]
-0.378*
[0.160]
-0.111
[0.122]
0.017**
[0.006]
-0.068
[0.043]

-0.772**
[0.145]
-0.259
[0.300]
-0.759**
[0.289]
-0.495**
[0.185]
-0.504**
[0.171]
-0.181
[0.124]
0.019**
[0.006]
-0.071
[0.050]
0.779**
[0.155]
1.778**
[0.389]
0.175
[0.197]
-0.028
[0.064]
-0.032
[0.068]
0.031
[0.030]
0.014**
[0.005]

†

-0.160
[0.113]
**
-0.225
[0.061]
**
0.295
[0.071]
**
-0.108
[0.032]

Ln(SIZE)

(4)

0.287
[0.164]
0.799*
[0.392]
-0.020
[0.139]
-0.166**
[0.063]
0.207**
[0.074]
-0.078*
[0.030]
-0.004
[0.006]
†
0.883
[0.491]
-0.672*
[0.290]
-0.001
[0.047]
-1.769**
[0.601]

No
–2,692.23
6,689

All Models include year, therapeutic class, and region fixed effects. Phase IV is the omitted Phase dummy.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by firm-year cells.
†
Significant at the 10% level
*
Significant at the 5% level
**
Significant at the 1% level

39

0.013
[0.045]
-4.286**
[0.727]

Yes
–2,481.63
6,689

Table 4B
Logit Models of the Outsourcing Decision (robustness checks)
(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

%AMC

-0.823**
[0.149]

-0.735**
[0.111]

-0.813**
[0.113]

-0.740**
[0.126]

PHASE I × OTHERS

-0.368
[0.307]

-0.219
[0.186]

-0.022
[0.234]

-0.126
[0.222]

PHASE I × ONCOL.

-0.887**
[0.295]

-1.027**
[0.344]

-0.545
[0.346]

-1.204**
[0.447]

PHASE II

-0.557**
[0.186]

-0.522**
[0.165]

-0.366*
[0.169]

-0.502*
[0.200]

PHASE III

-0.544**
[0.169]

-0.404**
[0.144]

-0.413**
[0.150]

-0.395*
[0.172]

-0.111
[0.124]

†

INPATIENT

-0.219
[0.113]

-0.257*
[0.125]

-0.290*
[0.137]

#PROCEDURES

0.019**
[0.007]

0.019**
[0.005]

0.020**
[0.005]

0.023**
[0.006]

Ln(DURATION)

-0.099*
[0.049]

-0.122**
[0.040]

-0.040
[0.041]

-0.059
[0.048]

Ln(#SITES)

0.848**
[0.173]

0.848**
[0.147]

0.775**
[0.143]

0.721**
[0.152]

HERF

1.894**
[0.426]

1.923**
[0.362]

1.733**
[0.354]

1.566**
[0.384]

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm-specific time
trends

Firm-class
interaction fixed
effects (CML)

Indication
fixed effects
(CML)

Molecule
fixed effects
(CML)

– 2,377.88

– 1,910.56

– 2,091.92

– 1,487.55

6,689

5,861

6,192

4,734

Firm Fixed Effects
Other Controls
Log Likelihood
*

Nb. of Observations

All Models include year, therapeutic class, and region fixed effects; Ln(SIZE), SCOPE, Ln(SIZE)×SHOCK (the
“adjustment costs” variables); EXPERTISE and #COUNTRY (the “firm capabilities” variables). Phase IV is the
omitted Phase dummy. Standard errors (in parentheses) are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by firm-year
cells.
†
Significant at the 10% level
*
Significant at the 5% level
**
Significant at the 1% level

*

In fixed effects non-linear models, units for which there is no within-variation in the dependent variable drop out of the
estimation sample. To make sure that these particular sub-samples are not driving the results, Models (1) through (6)
were re-estimated using the subset of the data used to estimate Model (9). The results were qualitatively unchanged.

40

Table 4C
Logit Models of the Outsourcing Decision (interaction effects)
(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

-0.803**
[0.152]

-0.731**
[0.132]

-0.725**
[0.144]

-0.702**
[0.134]

——

——

0.252
[0.191]

0.505*
[0.254]

0.294
[0.345]

0.029
[0.356]

——

——

——

——

-0.249
[0.253]

-0.097
[0.254]

Other Controls

Firm
fixed
effects

Molecule
fixed effects
(CML)

Firm
fixed
effects

Molecule
fixed effects
(CML)

Log Likelihood

– 2,480.48

– 1,483.74

– 2,479.82

– 1,481.20

6,689

4,734

6,689

4,734

%AMC
WELL-TREATED
%AMC × PHASE IV
%AMC × WELL-TREATED

Nb. of Observations

Column (10) and (12) take the specification of column (5), Table 4A as baseline. Column (11) and (13) take the
specification of column (9), Table 4B as baseline. All Models include year, therapeutic class, and region fixed effects;
Standard errors (in parentheses) are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by firm-year cells.
†
Significant at the 10% level
*
Significant at the 5% level
**
Significant at the 1% level

41

